                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS

                                          Pol Antràs
                                          Davin Chor

                                      Working Paper 28549
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28549


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




An abridged version of this paper is to be published as a chapter in the 5th Edition of the
Handbook of International Economics. All errors are our own. We thank Emily Blanchard,
Alessandro Borin, Lorenzo Caliendo, Rob Feenstra, and Michele Mancini for enlightening email
exchanges. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Pol Antràs and Davin Chor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Global Value Chains
Pol Antràs and Davin Chor
NBER Working Paper No. 28549
March 2021
JEL No. F1,F2,F4,F6

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper surveys the recent body of work in economics on the importance of global value
chains (GVCs) in shaping international trade flows and multinational activity. On the empirical
front, we begin reviewing several variants of the "macro approach" to measuring the relevance of
global production sharing in the world economy, and we also offer a critical evaluation of the
country- and industry-level datasets (or World Input Output Tables) that have been used to date.
We next discuss the advantages and disadvantages of a burgeoning alternative "micro approach"
that has instead employed firm-level datasets to document the ways in which firms have sliced up
their value chains across countries. On the theoretical front, we propose an analogous dissection
of the literature. First, we review a vast body of work developing country- and industry-level
quantitative frameworks that are easily calibrated with World Input Output Tables, and that open
the door for counterfactual exercises with minimal demands on estimation. Second, we overview
micro-level frameworks that have treated firms rather than countries or industries as the relevant
unit of analysis, and that have unveiled a number of distinctive mechanisms by which GVCs
shape the determinants and consequences of international trade flows in ways distinct from
traditional models of international trade. We close this survey with a discussion of a still infant
literature on the desirability and effects of trade policy in a world of GVCs.


Pol Antràs
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge Street
Littauer Center 207
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
pantras@fas.harvard.edu

Davin Chor
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Mall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
davin.chor@dartmouth.edu
Contents

1 Introduction                                                                                         1

2 Empirical Work: "Macro" Measurement                                                                  3
  2.1   Accounting for Value Added . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     4
        2.1.1   Value Added In Final Goods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       7
        2.1.2   Value Added In Gross Exports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8
        2.1.3   "Macro" Trends in GVC Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
  2.2   Data Sources, Limitations and Directions for Improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
  2.3   Measures of Positioning in GVCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

3 Empirical Work: Micro                                                                               25
  3.1   Selection into GVC Participation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
  3.2   Evidence on Buyer-Supplier Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
  3.3   Evidence on the Relational Nature of GVC Links . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

4 Modeling GVCs: Macro Approaches                                                                     36
  4.1   Roundabout Models: The Caliendo-Parro Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
        4.1.1   Theoretical Framework     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
        4.1.2   Mapping the Model to Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
        4.1.3   Counterfactual Analysis: The Hat-Algebra Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
        4.1.4   Applications and Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
        4.1.5   Critical Assessment    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
  4.2   Multi-Stage Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
        4.2.1   Two-Stage Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
        4.2.2   Equilibrium with Multiple Stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
        4.2.3   Gains from Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
        4.2.4   Extensions and Mapping to Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
        4.2.5   Critical Assessment    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55

5 Modeling GVCs: Micro Approaches                                                                     56
  5.1   GVC Participation: Decentralized Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
        5.1.1   Selection into Forward GVC Participation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
        5.1.2   Selection into Backward GVC Participation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
        5.1.3   Two-Sided Matching Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
  5.2   Designing GVCs: The Lead-Firm Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
        5.2.1   Multi-Stage Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
        5.2.2   Horizontal and Export-Platform FDI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
        5.2.3   Taking Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77


                                                  2
  5.3   Organizing Relational GVCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
        5.3.1   Contractual Frictions and Firm Boundaries in Spiders . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
        5.3.2   Contractual Frictions and Firm Boundaries in Snakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
        5.3.3   Search Frictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
        5.3.4   Relational Contracting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85

6 Trade Policy in the Age of GVCs                                                                     86
  6.1   Effective Rate of Protection and Tariff Escalation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
  6.2   Baseline: A Simple Roundabout Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
  6.3   Tariffs on Final Goods and on Inputs in Competitive Economies . . . . . . . . . . . 92
  6.4   Political Economy, Lobbying Competition and Tariff Escalation . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
  6.5   Value-Added Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
  6.6   Product Differentiation and General Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
  6.7   Imperfect Competition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
  6.8   Trade Policy and Relational GVCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101

7 Conclusion and Future Directions                                                                  104
1    Introduction
Since the early 1980s, the world economy has witnessed a significant transformation in the structure
of international trade flows, giving rise to what some have called ­ in a somewhat Hobsbawm-
like manner ­ the "Age of Global Value Chains" (Amador and Di Mauro, 2015; World Bank,
2020). This transformation was fueled by the combination of the information and communication
technology (ICT) revolution, an acceleration in the rate of reduction in man-made trade barriers
(via dozens of preferential trade agreements and China's accession to the WTO in 2001), and by
political developments that brought about a remarkable increase in the share of world population
participating in the capitalist system (Antràs, 2016). These forces worked in tandem to increase the
extent to which firms used foreign parts and components in their production processes, as well the
extent to which intermediate input producers sold their output internationally rather than to only
domestic end users. In fact, it has been estimated that trade in intermediate inputs constitutes as
much as two-thirds of world trade (Johnson and Noguera, 2012). As a result, the typical "Made in"
labels in consumer goods no longer do justice to the amalgam of nationalities that are represented
in the value added embodied in these products.
    This chapter will provide an overview of how the rise of global value chains (GVCs) has shaped
and may continue to shape research in the field of international trade. To be clear, some aspects of
this new wave of globalization are not particularly novel. For instance, trade in intermediate inputs,
an important building block of GVCs, has been studied for several decades. In fact, a few previous
chapters in the Handbook of International Economics have devoted specific subsections to trade in
intermediate inputs. Nevertheless, with one notable exception to be discussed below, the focus in
those Handbook chapters was to briefly study the robustness of standard results to the inclusion
of tradeable intermediate inputs, rather than to elaborate on the distinctive predictions that arise
when traded intermediate inputs are modelled.1
    Our aim is instead to focus our attention on conceptual environments in which GVCs and
intermediate input flows are salient, and overview measurement techniques, empirical approaches,
and theoretical frameworks specifically tailored to these environments. Our starting point will be a
broad definition of GVCs that associates a global value chain with "a series of stages involved in
producing a product or service that is sold to consumers, with each stage adding value, and with at
least two stages being produced in different countries" (see Antràs, 2020). According to this broad
definition, a firm participates in a GVC if it produces at least one stage in a GVC.
    This broad definition is agnostic about the specific form in which foreign value added is embodied
in production ­ e.g., raw materials, semi-processed inputs or `tasks' ­ and is also consistent with
various configurations of GVCs, including simple `spider-like' structures ­ in which multiple parts
    1
      Section 3.1 of Jones and Neary (1984) discusses the complexities that arise in neoclassical trade theory when
the commodity space is expanded to include intermediate inputs. That section also discusses the pioneering work of
Sanyal and Jones (1982) and Dixit and Grossman (1982). Section 1.4 of Krugman (1995) studies the implications of
traded and nontraded intermediate inputs for factor price equalization in models with increasing returns to scale.
More recently, Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014) provide a quantitative evaluation of the real income gains from
trade in the presence of tradeable intermediate inputs in Section 3.4 of their survey.


                                                        1
and components converge to an assembly plant that exports ­ and `snake-like' structures ­ in
which value is created sequentially in a series of stages, and in which production processes cross
borders multiple times often involving more than two countries (see Baldwin and Venables, 2013).
Similarly, when adopting a "micro" or firm-level perspective, this broad approach does not take
a stance on whether trade transactions are initiated (via sunk investments) by exporters (as in
Melitz, 2003), by importers, or by both. It is also consistent with complex GVCs designed and
controlled by large `lead firms' and with more decentralized GVCs in which actors do not make
production decisions pertaining to stages other than those in which they directly participate. Finally,
this broad approach also encompasses a narrower definition of GVCs that emphasizes additional
distinctive characteristics of the rise of GVCs, namely that GVCs often entail the exchange of highly
customized inputs on a repeated basis, with the contracts governing these relationships being highly
incomplete and hard to enforce, features which often lead to non-trivial firm-boundary decisions
(see World Bank, 2020; Antràs, 2020).
   A recurring theme of this chapter will be to study the extent to which the different potential
formalizations of the emergence of GVCs are material for the determination and consequences of
international trade flows. We will structure the chapter into five core sections. Sections 2 and 3 will
review empirical work, Sections 4 and 5 will discuss theoretical contributions, and Section 6 will
overview recent work on trade policy in a world of GVCs. Within both the empirical and theoretical
blocks of the chapter, we will distinguish between "macro" approaches and "micro" approaches. In
what we refer to as "macro" approaches, the unit of analysis is a country or a country-industry,
and the emphasis is on understanding the quantitative importance of GVCs both in determining
international trade flows, but also in shaping the implications of trade policy shocks for aggregate
income and for other macroeconomic variables. On the empirical front, this "macro" approach will
be associated with the construction and manipulation of World Input-Output Tables to shed light
on value-added trade flows across countries and the implied degree to which production process have
become globalized. On the theoretical front, this "macro" approach will focus on the development of
structural interpretations of these World-Input Output Tables, with the ultimate goal of constructing
more reliable tools for counterfactual analysis than those that ignore the relevance of GVCs in
world trade. In what we refer to as "micro" approaches, the unit of analysis will instead be the
firm. Empirically, we will review a body of work that has studied GVC participation at the firm
level, and that more broadly, has pushed the view that world trade flows are best understood as the
aggregation of a large number of firm-level decisions related to the destinations to which firms export
their products, but also the source countries from which they procure intermediate inputs, or the
`platform' countries from which they assemble goods for distant destination countries. Theoretically,
the "micro" approach is largely concerned with developing tools to solve the complex problems that
firms face when designing their optimal global production decisions.
   We close this Introduction with a brief note on the scope of this chapter. First and foremost, this
is a survey written by academic economists for academic economists. This is of special relevance
for a chapter on GVCs because this has been a subject of study in many social science disciplines


                                                  2
and because there is a burgeoning policy literature on practical aspects of the governance of GVCs.
Readers eager to get an interdisciplinary overview of academic work on GVCs can consult the
recent Handbook of Global Value Chains (Gereffi et al., 2019), while we refer readers interested
in the practical policy aspects of GVCs to the recent World Development Report on Trading for
Development in the Age of Global Value Chains (World Bank, 2020). A particularly engaging
and accessible account of the rise of GVCs is provided in Baldwin (2016). Even within academic
economics research, this chapter is almost exclusively focused on the implications of GVCs for
the structure of international trade flows, and their real income implications. In doing so, we
will not do justice to a growing literature studying the implications of GVCs for a broader set of
macroeconomic phenomena related to shock propagation, synchronization of inflation, dampening
of effects of exchange rate depreciation, or trade and current account imbalances (see Chapter 4
of World Bank, 2020). We also note that our survey complements and extends previous valuable
overviews of theoretical and empirical work on GVCs, which include Feenstra (1998), Johnson
(2018), Chor (2019), and Antràs (2020), among others.
    Finally, and although we have noted above that the phenomenon of the rise of GVCs has been
largely ignored in previous chapters of the Handbook of International Economics ­ the term `global
value chain(s)' is in fact not mentioned in any of the chapters in previous volumes ­ there is certainly
some overlap between this chapter and Chapter 2 of the 4th volume of this Handbook (Antràs and
Yeaple, 2014), which provided an overview of work on multinational activity. Indeed, Sections 5 and
7 of Antràs and Yeaple (2014) covered various aspects of the vertical expansion of multinational
companies, which is an important manifestation of the rise of GVCs. To avoid duplication, we will
refer readers to that chapter when quickly reviewing some work that could easily have been covered
more extensively here under the umbrella of `global value chains'.


2    Empirical Work: "Macro" Measurement
We start by surveying the growing literature that has enabled researchers to gain an empirical
handle on the importance of GVCs in world trade flows. We refer to this as a line of work on
"macro" measurement, since it concerns variables at the aggregate country or country-industry
level. This "macro" measurement has improved because of developments on two fronts. On the
conceptual front, key contributions have been made that have clarified and expanded on concepts
in value added accounting. This has facilitated decompositions of the gross output and trade
flows traditionally observed in the data into components that reflect input flows in GVCs. On the
data front, economists have benefited from the yeoman's work that has improved, harmonized and
merged national accounts statistics across ever larger sets of countries. This has made available
what is variously termed inter-country or multi-region or world input-output tables, that record
cross-country, cross-industry linkages in input use.




                                                   3
2.1      Accounting for Value Added
Consider the problem of a researcher interested in decomposing the ultimate sources of value added
embodied in a good ­ either a finished good or a semi-finished good-in-process ­ whose production
has traversed multiple country borders (i.e., a GVC). When this good is observed in transit, one
would typically only have information on its direct country source, but not the full set of countries
and industries that went into constituting the good. In the absence of direct details about the
specifics of the production process, the researcher might reasonably infer this from information
about input sourcing patterns observed at a more aggregate level. This is precisely the nature
of the information contained in world input-output tables (WIOTs) that make it a key object of
analysis for the "macro" measurement of GVCs. Multi-region or world input-output tables ­ that
extend domestic tables to incorporate multiple geographic units ­ are familiar objects for scholars
of input-output analysis (see Miller and Blair, 2009, Chapter 3.3), and have more recently become a
tool of necessity for economists studying GVCs.
   We describe several leading methods for performing such value added decompositions. Following
Johnson (2018), we distinguish between decompositions of the value embodied in: (i) final goods
(observed at their ultimate point of absorption into final use); and (ii) gross exports (which comprise
flows of both final and semi-finished goods). Our purpose is not to present a comprehensive set of
accounting identities, but rather to focus on key conceptual issues, with an eye towards a discussion
of some limitations to current "macro" measurement approaches where we envision future avenues
for improvement.
   We conduct this discussion around the WIOT as a core empirical building block. We establish a
set of notation and index conventions here in describing the structure of a WIOT, which will carry
through the rest of this chapter.
   Consider an economic environment in which there are J > 1 countries and S > 1 industries.
The subscripts i and j index countries (1  i, j  J ); whenever a pair of subscripts is used (e.g., to
describe a trade flow variable), the left subscript will refer to the source country, while the right
subscript will refer to the destination country (so ij denotes a flow from i to j ). The super scripts r
and s index industries (1  r, s  S ); once again, whenever a pair of superscripts is used, the left
superscript will refer to the source (or selling) industry, and the right superscript to the destination
(or buying) industry.
   Figure 1 illustrates the structure of a WIOT. At the center of the WIOT is a JS × JS square
                                rs is the value of inputs from industry r in country i (arrayed in the
matrix, Z, whose typical entry Zij
rows of the WIOT) that is purchased by industry s in country j (arrayed in the columns).2 Moving
forward, we will (somewhat inelegantly) refer to the unit of observation in either a row or column of
 rs as a "country-industry". (We use bold characters to denote vector or matrix variables, while
Zij
using un-bolded characters for scalars.)
   Apart from being used as an input by other country-industries, the output of industry r in
country i can also be absorbed in final-use (i.e., in consumption or investment). This information is
   2                   rs
       To be precise, Zij is the entry in the ((i - 1) × J + r)-th row and ((j - 1) × J + s)-th column of the matrix Z.


                                                           4
                                Figure 1: The Structure of World Input-Output Tables
                                                                 Input use & value added                                  Final use           Total use
                                                       Country 1                           Country J              Country 1       Country J
                                             Industry 1        Industry S        Industry 1         Industry S
                                                  11                1S                11                 1S          1                1
                              Industry 1        Z11               Z11               Z1 J               Z1 J         F11              F1J         Y11
                                                           rs                                  rs
  Intermediate    Country 1                              Z11                                 Z1 J
                                                  S1                SS                S1                 SS          S                S
                              Industry S        Z11               Z11               Z1 J               Z1 J         F11              F1J         Y1S
                                                                             rs                                                 s
     inputs                                                                Zij                                                 Fij               Yjs
                                                  11                1S                11                 1S          1                1            1
                              Industry 1        ZJ 1              ZJ 1              ZJJ                ZJJ          FJ 1             FJJ         YJ
                                                           rs                                  rs
    supplied      Country J                              ZJ 1                                ZJJ
                                                  S1                SS                S1                 SS          S                S            S
                              Industry S        ZJ 1              ZJ 1              ZJJ                ZJJ          FJ 1             FJJ         YJ
               Value added                      V A11             V AS1    V Asj    V A 1
                                                                                        J              V A S
                                                                                                           J
               Gross output                      Y11               Y1S      Yjs      YJ1
                                                                                                        YJS




reported in the set of final-use columns to the right of the Z matrix. We define Fj to be the JS × 1
                                       r of output from industry r in country i that is absorbed in
column vector that stacks the values Fij
country j for final-use.3 It will be convenient to further define F =                                       j    Fj to be the final-use vector
after summing over all destination countries. For the purposes of the accounting decompositions
described below, the entries of Z and F are data objects taken as given from a WIOT. Moving
beyond accounting though, it should be stressed that the input and final use values reported in
a WIOT should more properly be viewed as endogenous variables, as these are the outcomes of
firm-level decisions over how to optimally structure input sourcing and production processes. The
line of work on "macro" models of GVCs we discuss in Section 4 will emphasize this perspective.
    The starting point of most value added decompositions is a basic gross output accounting
identity. The gross output, Yir , of a given country-industry can be expressed as the sum of the
value that is: (i) absorbed in final-use; and (ii) purchased for use as an input (across all possible
country-industries):

              Yir =             r
                              Fij +            rs
                                              Zij =                 r
                                                                  Fij +           ars
                                                                                   ij Yj
                                                                                        s

                         j             j,s                    j             j,s
                                                                    r
                                                       =          Fij   +         ars
                                                                                   ij
                                                                                             s
                                                                                            Fjk +                ars  st
                                                                                                                  ij ajk
                                                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                                Fkl + ....             (1)
                                                   1          j             j,s         k           j,s k,t                l

                                        rs has been rewritten as ars Y s , where ars = Z rs /Y s is
In the second equality above, the term Zij                        ij j            ij    ij    j
the direct requirements coefficient, this being the value of the input in question (from industry r in
country i) that is used in the production of $1 of output (for industry s in country j ). The final line in
(1) then iteratively substitutes for Yjs , using the expression for gross output in each country-industry
implied by the initial accounting identity. Note that the n-th term in the infinite sum in (1) is the
gross output from industry r in country i that is ultimately absorbed in final-uses after exactly n
production stages, under the convention that each input- or final-use transaction corresponds to
a single stage. In matrix form, the above identity can be stacked across country-industries and
    3                                                                                         r
        More precisely, Fj is the column vector whose ((i - 1) × J + r)-th entry is equal to Fij .




                                                                             5
expressed as:
                                            Y = F + AF + A2 F + . . . ,                                               (2)

where Y is the JS × 1 vector of gross output values Yir , and A is the JS × JS matrix of direct
requirement coefficients.4 From (2), one can see that An F (where n > 0) is precisely the vector of
gross output values that is absorbed in final use after traversing exactly (n + 1) stages.
    Although the preceding derivation may appear to be nothing more than the application of
a familiar accounting identity, it is worth recognizing and emphasizing that these steps are not
free of modeling assumptions about the nature of the underlying production technologies in this
input-output system. In particular, there is a running assumption that for any given industry s
in country j , the same set of direct requirements coefficients in the ((j - 1) × J + s)-th column of
A describes the production technology that is applied, both when that output is purchased as an
intermediate input and when it is purchased for final-use. The same technology is used moreover
regardless of the destination country to which that output is being sold. This latter assumption has
been called into question by de Gortari (2019), a criticism that we will return to later in Section 2.2.
    It is useful to introduce a complementary accounting approach that builds off an alternative
gross output identity. The approach in (1) adopts a demand-driven perspective, as it is based on the
sources of demand (whether as an input or for final-use) for the output of a given country-industry.
An alternative approach would be to instead view gross output as the sum total of value added
(i.e., payments to primary factors of production) and the intermediate inputs used in its production.
Note from Figure 1 that the value added Vjs that enters directly into the production of gross output
in industry s in country j is recorded in the WIOT entries below the input-use matrix Z. Under
this supply-driven perspective (see for example Miller and Blair, 2009, Chapter 12), gross output in
industry s in country j is the sum of the value of: (i) its direct payments to primary factors Vjs ;
and (ii) inputs it purchases from all other country-industries:

                    Yjs = Vjs +             rs
                                           Zij = Vjs +              brs
                                                                     ij Yi
                                                                          r

                                     i,r                      i,r

                                               =    Vjs   +         brs   r
                                                                     ij Vi +             bqr  rs q
                                                                                          hi bij Vh + . . . .         (3)
                                                              i,r              i,r h,q


The brs                                                                rs    rs    r
     ij 's that appear after the second equality sign are defined by: bij = Zij /Yi ; this is the share
of output in industry r in country i (i.e., the source country-industry) that is purchased for use
as an intermediate input by industry s in country j , otherwise known as the allocation coefficient.
(This is not to be confused with the direct requirements coefficient, which instead expresses the
input value as a share of the gross output of the destination country-industry.) The second line in
(3) then performs an analogous iterative substitution in order to express gross output as an infinite
   4
     To be more precise, the ((i - 1) × J + r)-th entry of Y is equal to Yir , while the entry in the ((i - 1) × J + r)-th
row and ((j - 1) × J + s)-th column of A is arsij .




                                                              6
sum of value added terms. This can be written more compactly as:

                                          Y = V + BV + B2 V + . . . ,                                        (4)

where V is the JS × 1 vector that is the transpose of the row vector of Vjs 's, and B is the matrix
of allocation coefficients. Note now that the term Bn V (n > 0) in (4) is the value of gross output
accrued from primary sources of value added that enter into production exactly (n + 1) stages prior.
   An immediate implication of (2) is that the gross output vector can be solved for as: Y =
[I - A]-1 F, where I is the JS × JS identity matrix. This is the familiar property that the gross
output generated to yield the vector F for final-use can be computed by pre-multiplying F with the
Leontief inverse matrix (Leontief, 1986). Somewhat less familiar is the fact that one can also obtain
gross output in this input-output system via (4), as: Y = [I - B]-1 V. The matrix [I - B]-1 is also
known as the Ghosh inverse, and is the analogue of the Leontief inverse constructed instead with
the matrix of allocation coefficients (Ghosh, 1958).

2.1.1      Value Added In Final Goods

When a final good from industry s is observed in the country j where it is absorbed, it embodies
value added that could have originated in any (or even all) of the JS country-industries in this
world economy. Drawing on tools from input-output analysis, Johnson and Noguera (2012) develop
an approach for decomposing the ultimate sources from which this value added originated. To
implement this, one would: (i) take the vector Fj of final-goods absorbed in country j ; (ii) use the
Leontief inverse [I - A]-1 to back out the gross output needed to generate this final-use vector;
                                                                               ^Y
and (iii) pre-multiply this by a vector of value-added shares in gross output, V ^ -1 , where the `hat'
notation is used to denote a diagonal matrix that has the entries of the corresponding column vector
along its main diagonal.5 By computing:

                                                 ^Y
                                                 V ^ -1 [I - A]-1 Fj ,                                       (5)

this yields a vector whose ((i - 1) × J + r)-th entry is the value added that originates from country
i, industry r that is eventually absorbed in final-use in country j . Summing across all industries r
and all destinations j = i, the empirical researcher can then obtain a measure of country i's value
added exports, V AXi , this being value added that originates from the country that is ultimately
absorbed in the rest of the world. Johnson and Noguera (2012) propose examining how V AXi
compares against the country's gross exports (GXi ): Intuitively, this V AXi -to-GXi ratio reflects
how involved the country is in direct exporting versus indirect exporting (i.e., through GVCs),
providing an (inverse) measure of a country's engagement in these cross-border production chains.
   Two remarks are in order. First, one can further disaggregate the value added share of gross
                                               ^Y
output V s /Y s (i.e., the diagonal entries of V ^ -1 ) into payments that accrue to distinct factors of
            j    j
production. This connects value added accounting to a vast preceding literature on factor content of
   5
       This is not to be confused with our `hat' notation related to counterfactual analyses in Section 4.


                                                            7
trade accounting. On this front, Trefler and Zhu (2010) demonstrate how to implement an empirical
test of the Vanek (1968) equations, suitably modified to a world with trade in intermediates, when
the empirical researcher is armed with data from a WIOT.6 More recently, Reshef and Santoni
(2019) implement an accounting decomposition of factor payments in a WIOT, to explore how much
of the observed fall in the labor share of GDP can be explained by the rise of GVCs.
    Second, the above approach traces the value added embodied in gross output through its forward
linkages to final uses. One could envision taking a different approach that seeks instead to keep
track of sources of value added that are built into an observed amount of gross output. Toward this
end, one can show that:

                             ^Y
                             V ^ -1 [I - A]-1 Fj = V         ^ ]-1 Fj
                                                   ^ [(I - A)Y
                                                               ^ -1 AY
                                                        ^ [I - Y
                                                      = V            ^ ]-1 Y-1 Fj
                                                        ^ [I - B]-1 Y
                                                      = V           ^ -1 Fj ,                                      (6)

where we make use of the fact that the direct requirements and allocation matrices for a given
input-output system are related by: B = Y^ -1 AY^ . In other words, value added exports can be
computed by taking the share of gross output that is absorbed by final demand in country j , Y ^ -1 Fj ,
                                                                                  ^ [I - B]-1 . What
and tracing its backward linkages to sources of value added by pre-multiplying by V
the above matrix algebra steps show is that the forward and backward linkage approaches yield
equivalent expressions for value added exports.

2.1.2    Value Added In Gross Exports

A closely-related task an empirical researcher could be interested in is to unpack the sources of
value added that are embodied in readily available trade data (observed "as-is"), such as a country's
gross exports. This is in fact the task that the early literature on the measurement of GVC
activity embarked on: Hummels et al. (1998) and Hummels et al. (2001) posed this as a question of
determining how much (as a share) of the dollar value of a country's gross exports can be attributed
to imported intermediate inputs. This well-known measure of "vertical specialization" (VS) ­ or the
import content in exports ­ was arguably one of the first measures of GVC participation, in the
manner in which it captures the importance of trade flows that are involved in at least two border
crossings.
    Compared to the preceding exposition on the Johnson-Noguera V AX measure, efforts to
decompose gross exports are by necessity more involved. This is because gross exports (GX )
comprise not just shipments of final goods, but also shipments of intermediate inputs that need
to be carefully tracked in the accounting. There is now an extensive line of work on gross export
decompositions that can at times be quite intricate. The purpose of this subsection is not to provide
   6
      Earlier studies on the factor content of trade, such as Davis and Weinstein (2001), acknowledged that "some
error surely arises from the fact that we have assumed that intermediates used in the production of exportables are all
of national origin" (p.1444), but did not tackle this issue head-on due to data limitations. See Reimer (2006) for an
effort at factor content accounting with trade in intermediates in a low-dimensional setting.


                                                          8
an exhaustive taxonomy of these accounting identities and formulae; the interested reader is referred
in particular to Koopman et al. (2014) and Borin and Mancini (2019). The discussion below instead
seeks to draw out key insights from this work that a researcher would need to be alert to, in order
to inform his/her choices over which measure of trade in value added or GVC participation would
be most appropriate for the research question or application at hand.
    Suppose that one is presented with the S × 1 vector of country i's gross exports, GXi .7 The
schematic in Figure 2 below, adapted from Koopman et al. (2014), provides a useful organizing
framework for decomposing sources of value added in these gross exports. At a high level, the dollar
value recorded in GXi is composed of content that is either of domestic or foreign origin. A first
conceptual issue to pay attention to is that the domestic (respectively, foreign) content of exports is
not equivalent to the domestic (respectively, foreign) value added embodied in gross exports. In
an age of active trade of goods-in-process within GVCs, the value added that is contained in a
particular input would get recorded in country i's gross exports multiple times ("double-counting")
if it is shipped out of that country more than once over the course of production. For example,
suppose that iron ore mined in Canada is exported to the US for fabrication into a car chassis;
that chassis is then shipped back to Canada for final assembly, before the finished car is ultimately
purchased by a household in the US. The Canadian value added that was part of the original iron
ore will be counted twice in Canada's gross exports (the second time as part of the value of the
finished car). Intuitively then, how much value added gets double-counted will depend on the extent
to which the country is a hub for GVCs, with goods-in-process routed through it multiple times.8
This breakdown of domestic (respectively, foreign) content into a pure value added component and
a double-counting piece is illustrated in the second level of the schematic.
    It is instructive to dive into some details of how the domestic value added (or DV A) embodied
in a country's exports can be computed (less the double-counting term), by drawing on the forward
linkage approach laid out in Section 2.1.1. Define DVAi to be the S × 1 vector whose r-th entry
is the value added in country-i, industry-r exports that originates from domestic (i.e., country i)
sources. DVAi can then be computed as:

                                               ^ -1 [I - Aii ]-1 GXi .
                                            ^ iY
                                            V                                                                    (7)
                                                 i


Here, Aii is the S × S matrix block of direct requirements coefficients (along the main diagonal block
    7
     From a WIOT, the r-th entry of GXi can be computed as            j =i
                                                                            Z rs + j =i Fij
                                                                           s ij
                                                                                           r
                                                                                             .
    8
     Although double-counting could be a significant phenomenon in some specific cross-border production chains, it
turns out to be relatively small in practice at the country level. In the World Input-Output Database (2013 release),
when aggregating across the years 1995-2011, domestic double-counting never constitutes more than 2% of the domestic
content of exports for each country; the largest shares are seen for the rest of the world aggregate (1.8%), Germany
(1.5%), and China (0.9%). Similarly, the countries with the highest foreign double-counting shares in the foreign
content of their exports are: Germany (1.7%), the rest of the world (1.7%), and China (1.2%). Based on authors' own
calculations from the dataset made available with Chapter 1 of the World Development Report (World Bank, 2020).
In Figure 3, we moreover find the share of GVC trade in gross exports, (GX - DAV AX )/GX , and the share of GVC
trade in domestic value added, (DV A - DAV AX )/DV A, to be very similar, suggesting that double-counting terms
that are present in GX but that are entirely removed in DV A have a relatively small effect on the level of these GVC
measures, at least when computed at the world level.



                                                         9
                 Figure 2: Decomposing Sources of Value Added in Gross Exports

                                                        Gross Exports (GX)



                                   Domestic Content                           Foreign Content 



                            Domestic             Domestic               Foreign             Foreign 
                        Value Added (DVA)     DoubleCounted        Value Added (FVA)     DoubleCounted



             Value Added              Reflected
             Exports (VAX)           Value Added

           Directly Absorbed    NonDirectly Absorbed 
              Value Added        Value Added Exports
            Exports (DAVAX)




of A) that corresponds to purely domestic input-output transactions (i.e., that are confined within
country i's borders). The expression in (7) is reminiscent of (5): One uses the Leontief inverse of
Aii to compute the sum total of purely domestic sources of gross output ­ that has not crossed
borders at any stage of production ­ that go into generating the gross export vector GXi . The
domestic value added DVAi can then be extracted from [I - Aii ]-1 GXi by pre-multiplying it by
   ^ -1 , the diagonal matrix of value-added shares in each industry in country i. For the country as
^ iY
V   i
a whole, domestic value added in exports (DV Ai ) is simply the column sum of DVAi . The foreign
value added vector (FVAi ) is in turn given by the residual: GXi - V   ^ -1 [I - Aii ]-1 GXi .
                                                                    ^ iY
                                                                                        i
   Two properties of domestic value added in exports make it a concept of particular interest. First,
the non-domestic value added share of gross exports, (GXi - DV Ai )/GXi , is precisely equal to the
vertical specialization measure ­ the import content in gross exports ­ formulated by Hummels
et al. (2001). See in particular Johnson (2018) for this result in a two-country case, and Borin and
Mancini (2019) for a more general proof. Second, Los et al. (2016) show that DV Ai is equal to the
decrease in country i GDP that would be implied by the input-output system if exports of country
i to the rest of the world ­ both of intermediate inputs and final goods ­ are shut down, holding
all other entries of the WIOT constant. Such a counterfactual shift is not easy to rationalize in
a fully-specified model with general equilibrium adjustments. But this "hypothetical extraction"
approach nevertheless provides an intuitive interpretation for DV Ai , as well as a convenient method
for calculating it that sidesteps the need to work with accounting decompositions.
   Is domestic value added (DV A) in exports then also equivalent to value added exports (V AX )
from Johnson and Noguera (2012)? The answer is no, as pointed out by Koopman et al. (2014).
This is because DV A in general contains domestic value added that eventually gets "reflected"
back and absorbed in final uses in the home country, as shown in the third layer of the schematic


                                                         10
in Figure 2. (Using the stylized car GVC example from above, US value added embodied in its
chassis exports to Canada would be reflected back in the assembled car that is purchased by the US
household.) Naturally, the gap between DV A and V AX is likely to be larger for countries that are
engaged in GVCs with a lot of to-and-fro trade across borders in parts and components, such as in
the model of Yi (2010), and that also absorb a significant amount of the finished goods back within
their domestic economies.9
    We illustrate in Figure 2 a final layer that breaks down V AX into two components. As shown
by Borin and Mancini (2019), one can explicitly keep track of the part of V AX that crosses exactly
one country border (DAV AX , or "directly absorbed" V AX ): this comprises value added that is
immediately absorbed in final use in its first destination country, or that is used as an input in
production processes that are contained entirely in that destination country. The difference between
gross exports and DAV AX is value which makes at least two border crossings, and can therefore
be regarded as trade flows involved in GVCs. Building on this, Borin and Mancini (2019) proposed
examining (GX - DAV AX )/GX as a measure of the share of "GVC trade" in gross exports. This
in turn can be written as the sum of two pieces: a first that captures forward production linkages,
given by (DV A - DAV AX )/GX , this being domestic value added in exports that is used abroad
and then re-exported (hence, crossing two borders); and a residual term (GX - DV A)/GX , which
can be interpreted as capturing imported content in backward production linkages.10
    Before turning to the patterns in the data, we highlight a subtle accounting issue that becomes
relevant if one is seeking to decompose not gross country exports, but rather exports observed at
other levels of disaggregation (such as bilateral or industry or country-by-industry trade flows).11
One might imagine that this amounts to taking the decomposition of gross country exports just
described, breaking it down into finer terms, and then assigning these accordingly to each destination
country or industry bin. As it turns out, a consequence of double-counting is that there is not a
unique way to perform this assignment. A modified version of the car GVC example will help to
clarify this: Suppose that the iron ore from Canada is first exported to Mexico (rather than the
US) to produce the chassis; this is then exported back to Canada for assembly, after which the car
is finally sold in the US. One could either label the value added in the initial iron ore exports to
Mexico as DV A, with that same content in Canada's exports of the finished car to the US then
being labeled as double-counting, or vice versa. This distinction clearly does not matter if we are
decomposing Canada's gross exports as a whole. However, when the object of interest is bilateral,
industry or country-industry exports, the value added in question would be classified as DV A in
mining exports to Mexico and as double-counting in motor vehicle exports to the US under the
    9
      This is broadly consistent with what we see in the data: the reflected share of domestic value added is 8.6% for
the US, 5.5% for the rest of the world, and 3.0% for Germany, these being the three countries with the largest reflection
shares over 1995-2011 in the World Input-Output Database (2013 release). Based on authors' own calculations from
the dataset made available with Chapter 1 of the World Development Report (World Bank, 2020).
   10
      The latter "backward linkage" term is closely-related, though not strictly equivalent, to the Hummels et al. (2001)
vertical specialization measure; see Borin and Mancini (2019) for a detailed discussion.
   11
      See for example Wang et al. (2013). Los and Timmers (2018) take a different approach to this question by
focusing on value added exports at the bilateral level.



                                                          11
former convention; under the latter approach, it would instead be treated as double-counting in
mining exports to Mexico and as DV A in motor vehicle exports to the US. The upshot is that
decompositions of export flows at these more detailed levels ­ if consistently performed ­ require
that one specify an accounting convention. There are two natural choices here: a source-based
approach, where the value added is labeled as DV A the first time it exits the domestic country
(and is treated as double-counting thereafter); or a sink-based approach, where the value added is
instead classified as DV A the final time it exits the country's borders (Nagengast and Stehrer, 2016;
Borin and Mancini, 2019).

2.1.3    "Macro" Trends in GVC Activity

We next illustrate several broad trends in GVC activity in recent decades, with measures computed
from the underlying dataset in Chapter 1 of the World Development Report (World Bank, 2020).
This dataset reports gross export decompositions that have been performed on several commonly-
used WIOT databases, following closely the approach summarized in Figure 2.12 We work specifically
with the decompositions for the 2013 release of the World Input-Output Database (WIOD), which
provides annual observations for 35 industries and 41 countries (including a rest-of-the-world
aggregate) from 1995-2011; this allows us to uncover GVC trends that were already in motion in
the 1990s, that would not be reflected in the later 2016 release of the WIOD (which runs from
2000-2014). (See Section 2.2 below for a discussion of the merits and limitations of different WIOT
data sources.)
    We examine four measures of the prevalence of GVC activity in international trade flows.
These are: (i) the vertical specialization measure V S of Hummels et al. (2001), computed as
(GX - DV A)/GX ; (ii) the ratio of value added to gross exports, V AX/GX , as proposed by
Johnson and Noguera (2012); (iii) the share of GVC trade ­ that involved in more than one border
crossing ­ in gross exports, (GX - DAV AX )/GX , from Borin and Mancini (2019); and (iv) the
share of GVC trade in domestic value added in exports, (DV A - DAV AX )/DV A. Note that at the
country level, V S is exactly equal to one minus the ratio of domestic value added in gross exports,
where the latter (DV A/GX ) is a measure of GVC participation that Koopman et al. (2014) have
spotlighted in their work.
    Measures (i), (iii) and (iv) seek in the construction of their respective numerators to capture
trade flows that are involved in multiple border crossings; these three measures are thus increasing
in the extent to which production is conducted within GVCs. The measure in (iv) is one we suggest,
as a close counterpart to (iii), where we take the Borin-Mancini measure and remove the foreign
content and domestic double-counting terms from gross exports, before assessing the importance of
value added that crosses more than one border. On the other hand, the Johnson-Noguera V AX/GX
ratio in (ii) is an inverse measure of GVC activity, since gross exports exceed V AX by a greater
   12
      The data are available at: http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/834031570559525797/Chapter-1.zip. These have
been computed at the country-by-industry-by-year level using a source-based accounting approach for double-counting
terms.



                                                        12
extent when there is more indirect trade involving intermediate inputs; in the illustration below, we
therefore subtract V AX/GX from 1, which then correlates positively with the other GVC trade
measures.
    Figure 3 displays the trends in these measures of GVC activity when computed for the world as a
whole.13 There are naturally differences across these measures in their average levels, given that they
capture distinct aspects of GVC flows; for example, the V S measure focuses on flows involved in
backward linkages, while (GX - DAV AX )/GX encompasses both backward and forward linkages.
What is remarkable though is the tight correlation (>0.99) across any pair of the measures, at least
at this broad level of aggregation. This paints a uniform message about trends over time, regardless
of one's preferred measure of GVC participation: Cross-border GVC activity rose steadily from the
mid-1990s until the late 2000s. Looking across the measures, we see that the import content in
exports V S increased from 0.20 in 1995 to 0.27 in 2008. Although there is a small gap between
1 - (V AX/GX ) and V S = 1 - (DV A/GX ) due to the exclusion of reflected trade from V AX , this
does not detract from the fact that both these measures display an essentially identical time trend.
Similarly, the share of gross exports associated with GVC trade, (GX - DAV AX )/GX , rose from
0.35 in 1995 to a peak of 0.47 in 2008 (right vertical axis). When this is computed instead as the
share of domestic value added that crossed multiple borders, (DV A - DAV AX )/DV A as in (iv),
the time pattern is preserved while the average share falls to a level comparable to the preceding
V S and 1 - (V AX/GX ) measures (left vertical axis).
    The above corroborates the findings of Johnson and Noguera (2017). Their estimates of the
V AX/GX ratio, constructed off of input-output tables from earlier decades, indicate that this trend
of rising engagement in GVCs commenced as early as the 1970s, with a sharp acceleration from
1990-2008. The global financial crisis appears to have marked a halt and even a slight reversal to this
rise in GVC activity, as evident too from Figure 3, coinciding with the onset of a widely-documented
slowdown in the growth of world trade as a share of GDP (see for example, the World Economic
Outlook, IMF, 2016).
    The measures at the global level mask substantial heterogeneity in the extent of participation
of different countries and industries in GVC trade. We illustrate this variation with the (GX -
DAV AX )/GX measure.14 When re-computed at the country level (after summing the relevant
decomposition terms across all years in the sample), this Borin-Mancini measure of participation in
GVC trade ranges from a low of 0.32 (Japan) to a high of Luxembourg (0.70). Not surprisingly,
the observations with the highest shares of GVC trade in gross exports are small open economies
deeply embedded in key regional or global supply chains: after Luxembourg, these are in descending
order Slovakia (0.61), Hungary (0.60), Czech Republic (0.59), and Taiwan (0.58). On the other end
of the spectrum, the countries with the lowest values of (GX - DAV AX )/GX are all economies
with relatively large domestic market sizes: in ascending order after Japan, these are Brazil (0.33),
   13
      We first sum up GX , DV A, V AX , and DAV AX respectively to the world level across all country-industries in
a given year, and then compute the measures as defined in (i)-(iv).
   14
      A similar set of takeaway messages emerges with the V S , 1 - (V AX/GX ) and (DV A - DAV AX )/DV A measures
(available on request).



                                                        13
                                                              Figure 3: GVC Trade over Time




                                                 .3




                                                                                                                         .5
          VS = 1 - (DVA / GX); 1 - (VAX / GX);




                                                                                                                         .45
               GVC trade in DVA / DVA

                                                 .25




                                                                                                                               GVC trade in GX / GX
                                                                                                                         .4
                                                 .2




                                                                                                                         .35
                                                                                                VS; 1 - (DVA / GX)
                                                                                                1 - (VAX / GX)
                                                                                                GVC trade in GX / GX
                                                                                                GVC trade in DVA / DVA
                                                 .15




                                                                                                                         .3
                                                       1995     2000                     2005                    2010
                                                                              Year



India (0.35), the US (0.35), and Canada (0.36).15 Looking across industries instead (over the entire
1995-2011 period), the highest values of (GX - DAV AX )/GX are associated with manufacturing
and mining industries, namely: Basic metals and fabricated metal (0.59), Coke, refined petroleum
and nuclear fuel (0.57), and Electrical and optical equipment (0.51). On the other hand, the
industries least engaged in GVCs are all services: Private households with employed persons (0.17),
Social Work (0.19), Education (0.19).
    Despite this rich cross-sectional variation, the pattern illustrated in Figure 3 ­ of rising GVC
activity until 2008, and a slight turnaround thereafter ­ is one that pervades the time variation even
at a more detailed level. In panel regressions that use the GVC participation measures constructed
at the country-industry level as dependent variables, in which we include a full set of year and
country-industry fixed effects, we uniformly find that the estimated year coefficients increase in
magnitude up until 2008, before receding slightly; this is true for each of the measures (i)-(iv).16
   15
      Interestingly, there is a fair amount of stability over time in how countries rank according to the measures of
GVC participation. The country-level measures of (GX - DAV AX )/GX constructed separately for 1995-1997 and
2009-2011 have a Spearman rank correlation of 0.75.
   16
      To be more specific, we estimated regressions of the form:
                                                                               2011
                                                                   r                        r     t
                                                               GV Cit = 0 +            t + Di +   i,
                                                                              t=1996

              r                                                                                        r
where GV Cit    is in turn one of the GVC measures (i)-(iv) for country i, industry r, in year t; the Di are country-industry
fixed effects, while the t 's are the year dummies of interest. With the Borin-Mancini measure of (GX - DAV AX )/GX


                                                                              14
Why GVC activity appears to have ebbed is a question that warrants more study, particularly as
newer years of WIOT data become available. An interesting question will be whether there are
common underlying drivers, such as a weak recovery in global demand or rising trade frictions, that
simultaneously explain both the slowdown in trade as a share of world GDP and in GVC trade as a
share of exports.
    We conclude this subsection by discussing several empirical applications of measures of trade
in value added and GVC participation. At a basic level, this has allowed researchers and policy
practitioners alike to better characterize the manner of countries' engagement in GVCs. A common
distinction drawn here ­ which will be relevant in our discussion of models of GVCs in Section 5 ­
is that between backward GVC participation (i.e., the extent to which a country's exports embody
value added imported from abroad) and forward GVC participation (i.e., the extent to which a
country's exports are not directly absorbed in the immediate destination country, but are embodied
in that country's subsequent exports). Borin and Mancini (2019) propose a particular decomposition
of their GVC trade measure (GX - DAV AX )/GX into terms that separately reflect these two
directions of GVC participation. The World Development Report vividly illustrates the variation
across countries in the extent of their backward participation in GVCs (see Map 1.1 in World Bank,
2020), while discussing how the balance between backward and forward GVC participation is a
reflection of the underlying set of industries ­ in terms of the mix between commodities, basic
manufacturing, advanced manufacturing, and innovation ­ that a country is currently engaged in.
    Fernandes et al. (2020) undertake a wide-ranging exploration of the forces that drive this GVC
participation in the data. Their findings highlight how traditional determinants of trade flows ­
factor endowments, institutions, geography, trade policy ­ correlate with backward and forward
GVC participation, often over and above their role in explaining gross exports. While the patterns
uncovered are informative, the extent to which one can attribute a causal interpretation is limited
by the familiar challenge of identifying good instrumental variables in cross-country settings. More
reassuring from the standpoint of identification, exploiting cross-country, cross-industry variation
as in Romalis (2004), Fernandes et al. (2020) find that interaction terms between country factor
endowments and industry factor intensities explain patterns of forward and backward participation in
GVCs. This builds on earlier work by Ito et al. (2017), who point to the relevance of Heckscher-Ohlin
forces for explaining the pattern of value added exports.
    The 2020 World Development Report also highlights how GVC participation is associated with
positive country developmental outcomes (see Chapter 3, World Bank, 2020). This includes higher
growth in GDP per capita and labor productivity, gains in poverty reduction, the transfer of skills
and knowhow, as well as employment creation that often benefits the female workforce. This body
of evidence is admittedly more policy-oriented; while the correlations here are striking, more work
remains to be done by way of investigating causal mechanisms. Altomonte et al. (2018) provides one
such effort at bridging this causality gap, by proposing the use of an instrumental variable based
for example, we obtain: 1996 = 0.003 (standard error: 0.001), 2008 = 0.087 (0.005), and 2011 = 0.066 (0.005), with
N = 23, 887.



                                                       15
on the availability of locations suitable for deep water ports that can accommodate large modern
container ships; this is shown to predict well a country's DVA in exports, which in turn is positively
linked with growth in income per capita.
    Notably, measures of trade in value added have prompted reappraisals of several macro phe-
nomenon. The magnitude of prominent trade imbalances, such as the U.S.' trade deficit vis-à-vis the
rest of the world, and more specifically with China, is considerably smaller when assessed in value
added rather than gross terms (Johnson and Noguera, 2012; Koopman et al., 2014). On a related
note, efforts to understand how exchange rate movements would affect the competitiveness of a
country's exports need to take into account the use of imported inputs in a GVC world. Toward this
end, several authors have advocated alternative constructions of countries' real effective exchange
rates (REER), that incorporate information on value added exports when weighting across individual
trade partners' exchange rates (Bems and Johnson, 2017; Patel et al., 2019). Chapter 4 of World
Bank (2020) provides a neat overview of this macro literature on the implications of GVCs.

2.2    Data Sources, Limitations and Directions for Improvement
The quality of the "macro" measures of GVC participation just described hinges on the reliability of
the information contained in the underlying WIOT. Researchers have thus benefited from concerted
efforts over the past decades to improve on the construction of WIOTs; see for example the
symposium in the 2013 issue of Economic Systems Research. We briefly overview the methodological
progress on this front, and use this as a springboard for discussing ongoing limitations and promising
directions for improving on the measurement and quantification of GVC activity.
    At the expense of stating the obvious, the construction of WIOTs ­ by such initiatives as the
GTAP, OECD-ICIO, Eora, and WIOD ­ is an extensive undertaking. This requires at the onset
bringing together domestic input-output tables across a large enough set of countries. Several prac-
tical difficulties emerge immediately. The need to harmonize across different countries' classification
systems inherently limits how detailed a set of industries one can work with. Most available WIOTs
thus have industries at a level of disaggregation akin to three-digit NAICS codes (in the order of
about 50 industries). Moreover, national input-output tables or supply-use tables are available only
with a lag, often at benchmark five-year intervals. Datasets such as the GTAP thus focus on tables
in selected reference years.17 To construct annual time series, other datasets such as the WIOD and
Eora use procedures to estimate domestic flows in non-benchmark years, while respecting adding-up
constraints imposed by information on industry-level aggregates ­ such as gross output, value added,
imports, and exports ­ that is available from standard statistical sources at a yearly frequency.
Relative to the WIOD, the Eora has made much more extensive use of computational algorithms
to generate a series of tables that covers 187 countries starting in 1990, though users should note
that this is accompanied by a set of reliability statistics and a documentation of instances where
   17
      This was true too of early versions of the OECD-ICIO, although the most recent 2018 version contains annual
tables for 2005-2015. Based on these inter-country input-output tables, the OECD also makes available a large set of
trade in value added indicators in their TiVA dataset, including terms from the gross export decomposition illustrated
in Figure 2.


                                                         16
conflicting constraint requirements were encountered in its construction (see Lenzen et al., 2013).
        The more substantive challenge in constructing a WIOT is the task of populating its off-diagonal
block entries, which relay the crucial information on cross-country flows broken down by their uses
                                                                          rs and F r entries for
in the destination country. More specifically, how does one pin down the Zij      ij
i = j , when these are not directly observed? For imports by end-uses, what is instead available is
information aggregated across source countries, namely the value of country j 's imports of products
that map to industry r that is respectively: (i) used as an input by a given purchasing industry s,
i.e.,            rs ; and (ii) absorbed in final use, i.e.,
                Zij                                                        r . The standard approach is to adopt a set
                                                                         Fij
          i=j                                                      i=j
of proportionality assumptions of the form:

                                    ~ij
                                    Z rs   r
                                         = ij           rs
                                                       Zij , and         ~ij
                                                                         F r   r
                                                                             = ij           r
                                                                                          Fij ,                       (8)
                                                i= j                                i=j

          r 's are weights that reflect the importance of country i as a source of these imports.
where the ij
                                            r equal to the share of imports from i in country
For example, Johnson and Noguera (2012) set ij
j 's total industry-r imports, while Trefler and Zhu (2010) express these imports as a share of j 's
absorption (output less net exports) in industry r.18
        An inherent assumption in (8) is that the breakdown of flows by country of origin is identical
regardless of the intended end-uses of the imports in question. In practice though, the composition
of products in say the automobile industry that are imported as an input (e.g., car parts) could well
differ from that which is imported for final use (e.g., assembled cars). More recent WIOT initiatives
have taken steps to relax this feature of the proportionality assumptions, by bringing in the UN
Broad Economic Categories (BEC) classification system to distinguish between products by end-use
categories, namely as intermediate inputs versus final (consumption or investment) goods. One can
                                                                    r weights for each of these two
then construct from the product-level import data a separate set of ij
broad end-use categories, to apportion observed flows of imported intermediates and final goods
respectively.19 This approach has been adopted in the construction of the WIOD (Dietzenbacher
et al., 2013), the OECD-ICIO (Koopman et al., 2014), as well as in the most recent versions of
the GTAP (Carrico et al., 2020).20 While clearly a useful step in the right direction, note though
   18
      In the context of the factor content of trade literature, Puzzello (2012) finds that such proportionality assumptions
do not appear to generate a large bias if the purpose is to decompose the content of net trade. This is done by
comparing the accounting results when using the Asian International Input-Output Tables (AIIO), which incorporates
information from firm surveys on imported input purchases to help pin down the off-diagonal block entries, against
that obtained when applying the standard proportionality assumptions.
   19
      Direct information on the composition of imports of services by end-uses is even more challenging to obtain.
The WIOD 2013 release uses the Eurostat import tables, computes for each service industry a simple average across
countries of the share of imports by broad end-use categories, and applies this set of benchmark weights to the entire
sample of countries in the WIOD. See Dietzenbacher et al. (2013) for further caveats on the quality of the WIOD data
on services trade flows.
   20
      This modification to the proportionality assumptions appears to result in some meaningful adjustments to
measures of GVC participation. See for example Figure 2 in Timmer et al. (2015), which compares country-level
V AX/GX ratios computed from different leading sources of WIOT data. While the V AX/GX measure is highly
correlated across the different WIOT sources, slightly larger gaps emerge between the measures calculated from
the WIOD and those from Johnson and Noguera (2012), where the latter is based on an underlying set of tables
constructed using common weights across end-use categories. The gaps are more noticeable among countries with low



                                                              17
                     r weights continues to be applied to imports of inputs across all purchasing
that a common set of ij
industries in country j ; in other words, the source-country shares of automobile industry products
imported by say the Automobile manufacturing industry would be identical to that imported by
the Transportation services industry.
    Building on the above observations on the state-of-play on the WIOT data front, we highlight
three potential directions for improvement in measurement. First, we anticipate and welcome more
efforts to bring to bear more detailed micro data, to directly inform and refine the construction of
the proportionality weights. The IDE-JETRO's Asian International Input-Output (AIIO) Tables
is an example of work along these lines (Meng et al., 2013): Using proprietary firm-level surveys
run in several Asian countries, the AIIO uses the information gathered on the composition of firm
                                                                                         rs weights
imports to construct weights that vary by the identity of the purchasing industry (i.e., ij
that vary across destination industry s). Such work is likely to benefit as empirical researchers gain
more access to administrative data on firm operations that can be merged with customs data on the
international trade patterns of these firms. For example, efforts at value added accounting at the
firm level have been executed by Kee and Tang (2016) for China and for Bems and Kikkawa (2021)
for Belgium. Using a combination of Chinese customs and manufacturing survey data, Kee and Tang
(2016) document a noticeable increase in the domestic value added content of firm-level exports
during 2000-2007, a period of rapid trade liberalization for the country. Bems and Kikkawa (2021)
work with a very rich data environment that allows them to observe not only firms' cross-border
input purchases, but also domestic purchases in value added tax records. Their findings suggest
that the use of sectoral aggregates in WIOTs to perform value added accounting results in an
over-statement of trade in value added, as this overlooks heterogeneity in input sourcing patterns
across large versus small firms.21 Given the high demands on data, existing studies that incorporate
firm-level data to improve value added accounting are either focused on individual countries, or
limited in geographic coverage (in the case of the AIIO, to just ten Asia-Pacific economies). There
remain significant hurdles to linking such micro datasets across countries ­ not least of which is how
to preserve the confidentiality of firm identities when merging data across countries ­ though this
may eventually become feasible in economically-integrated regions such as the EU where there is a
history of collaboration among national statistical agencies.
    A second distinct data challenge is raised by the presence of multi-product firms (Bernard et al.,
2010, 2011). Large and more productive firms that tend to select into importing and exporting ­
and thus be a GVC participant ­ are also more likely to be active in manufacturing and exporting
multiple products. Even if one were armed with detailed data on such firms' imported intermediates,
one would still require information on how these inputs are apportioned across the manufacturing
processes for different products in order to perform an accurate accounting of value added flows. Such
V AX/GX ratios, that are thus in principle most engaged in GVCs.
   21
      A related strand of work has sought to disaggregate country input-output tables by using computational algorithms
(subject to adding-up constraints), in order to distinguish between the input sourcing patterns of key subsets of firms.
In the context of China, Koopman et al. (2012) use this approach to explore differences across trade regimes (in
particular, processing versus ordinary trade), while Tang et al. (2020) have examined variation by firm ownership type
(in particular, state- versus private-owned enterprises).


                                                          18
information is as of now not routinely collected in firm surveys or manufacturing censuses. While one
might hypothesize that this concern could be alleviated with access to even finer establishment-level
microdata ­ as establishments could be more specialized in their product scope ­ it has been well
documented that multiproduct firms often feature multiproduct establishments (see for example
Boehm et al., 2018, in the context of India).22
    A third measurement issue is raised by de Gortari (2019), who documents how observed patterns
of input sourcing can differ systematically across firms even within the same industry, depending on
the identity of the export markets that the firms' output is destined for. Using Mexican customs
data, de Gortari (2019) shows for example that motor vehicle firms in Mexico whose main export
market is the US (respectively, Germany) tend to bring in a disproportionate share of their imported
inputs from the US (respectively, Germany). The methodologies described thus far fail to take
this phenomenon into account: When we impose a uniform set of input-output coefficients for the
entire Mexican motor vehicle industry, this does not pick up differences in the sources of value
added embodied in cars that are assembled for export to the US versus Germany. As a practical
consequence, this would understate the extent of GVC trade between the US and Mexico in this
industry, and imply lower welfare costs should a US-Mexico tariff war disrupt cross-border value
chains. Addressing this shortcoming requires improvements in measurement, specifically firm-level
data that would allow the researcher to construct input sourcing patterns that differ by GVCs when
these are (at a minimum) distinguished by the immediate destination of firms' exports. At a deeper
level though, this criticism extends beyond concerns about measurement. Conceptually, de Gortari
(2019) draws attention to a key embedded assumption in standard accounting approaches, that the
roundabout structure of global production can be summarized by a single technology, with a single
matrix of input-output coefficients.23 Put otherwise, value added accounting is ultimately not free
of modeling assumptions about the structure of production within GVCs.

2.3    Measures of Positioning in GVCs
Apart from quantifying the size and share of GVC-related trade flows, researchers have taken a further
interest in understanding the positioning of countries and/or industries within GVCs. We discuss
here a class of such production staging measures ­ of "upstreamness" and "downstreamness" ­ that
can be constructed from input-output tables. These measures provide at a descriptive level a formal
basis for statements about whether a given country is specialized in relatively upstream activities,
or whether its positioning is more proximate to final demand. Such notions of production staging
moreover feature prominently in economic models of GVCs (see Sections 4 and 5): The positioning
of countries within GVCs can be shaped by fundamentals such as productivity differences (Costinot
   22
      Such complications related to multiproduct establishments are the reason why Boehm and Oberfield (2020) focus
on single-product establishments in their study of input sourcing patterns in India.
   23
      In the framework that de Gortari (2019) formulates, this translates into an assumption that the production
process in GVCs is represented as a first-order Markov chain, when this should instead be viewed as a higher-order
Markov chain, in which the technology coefficients can differ depending on the identity of the destination to which the
output is to be sold.



                                                          19
et al., 2013) or geography (Antràs and de Gortari, 2020). At a more micro level, the decisions
that firms make over how to structure and organize their production can differ systematically for
upstream versus downstream stages within GVCs (e.g., Antràs and Chor, 2013; Alfaro et al., 2019).
    We describe the formulation of these measures in the setting of a WIOT.24 Each country-industry
in a WIOT is traversed as a stage in many sequential production chains that originate in primary
sources of value added and terminate when the finished goods or services are absorbed in final use.
We distinguish between two production staging concepts. The first captures the positioning of a
country-industry in terms of its "upstreamness" relative to sources of final demand (i.e., consumption
or investment), averaged across the many production chains that connect the country-industry to
final uses. The second measure on the other hand gauges the average positioning of the country-
industry in terms of its "downstreamness" in relation to sources of value added (i.e., labor and other
primary factors).
    The measure of "upstreamness" builds upon the forward linkage decomposition of gross output
presented earlier in equation (2). Recall that the n-th term, An-1 F, in (2) is the vector of gross
output that traverses exactly n stages to reach final demand. One can compute:

                                   F + 2AF + 3A2 F + . . . = [I - A]-2 F,                                          (9)

from which the "upstreamness", Uir , of country-i, industry-r is then defined as the ((i - 1) × J + r)-th
entry of (9) divided by Yir .
    Intuitively, Uir computed in this manner is a weighted-average of the number of production
stages that this country-industry's output takes to arrive at final demand. This is because the
weights applied ­ the ((i - 1) × J + r)-th entry of An-1 F (for n = 1, 2, . . .) divided by Yir ­ are
equal to the respective shares of that gross output that traverses exactly n stages before being
absorbed in final uses.25 It is straightforward to see that Uir  1, and that the minimum value of 1
is attained if and only if the entirety of the country-industry's output, Yir , is absorbed directly in
final demand. Moreover, Uir takes on a larger value when a greater share of Yir is purchased as an
intermediate input, and particularly so when multiple production stages are still needed before the
point of final consumption/investment is reached.26
    This upstreamness measure has several interesting properties and interpretations. Fally (2012)
   24
      While Fally (2012) and Antràs et al. (2012) proposed the production staging measures with domestic input-output
tables in mind, these extend readily to the setting of a WIOT (see Miller and Temurshoev, 2017; Antràs and Chor,
2019).
   25
      In practice, one needs to account too for the value of net inventories Nir reported for each country-industry in
a typical WIOT. The standard approach is to adopt a proportionality assumption, that the breakdown of uses of
inventories across both intermediate and final use is identical to that observed in the same WIOT for non-inventorized
                                                                                                    rs       rs
output for each country-industry. This implies a simple correction procedure ­ multiplying each Zij    and Fij  term in
                  r    r     r
the WIOT by Yi /(Yi - Ni ) ­ before one computes the production staging measures (for details, see Antràs et al.,
2012; Antràs and Chor, 2019).
   26
      In terms of nomenclature, Fally (2012) refers to this measure of "upstreamness" as the "number of stages between
production and final consumption". This measure of stage distance to final demand was developed contemparaneously
by Antràs and Chor (2013) to test their model of firm organizational decisions along sequential production chains,
though somewhat unhelpfully, they refer to it as DownM easure in that paper.



                                                         20
and Antràs et al. (2012) show that the Uir defined as above by construction from first principles is
also the unique solution (up to a normalization) to the recurrence relation:

                                                Uir = 1 +          brs  s
                                                                    ij Uj ,                                         (10)
                                                             j,s


where recall that brs   rs    r
                   ij  Zij /Yi is the allocation coefficient of country-i, industry-r 's use by country-j ,
industry-s. In other words, each country-industry is deemed according to Uir to be one stage more
upstream than a weighted-average of all country-industries that purchase inputs from it. This
provides an alternative foundation for the use of Uir as a measure of stage distance to final demand.
Furthermore, stacking (10) across all country-industries and applying a quick matrix manipulation,
one arrives at the result that Uir is precisely equal to the ((i - 1) × J + r)-th row sum of the Ghosh
inverse matrix, [I - B]-1 .27 This establishes an equivalence between Uir and the measure of total
forward linkages proposed by Jones (1976): Apart from capturing the average number of stages to
final demand, Uir is also equal to the overall increase in costs that would be transmitted to total
gross output in the world economy (assuming full pass-through at each stage) as a result of a unit
increase in payments to primary factors in country-i, industry-r (see Chapter 12, Miller and Blair,
2009).
    In an analogous fashion, the "downstreamness" from primary sources of value added is defined
by working with the backward linkage gross output decomposition in equation (4). Multiplying the
n-th term in (4) by n, we have:

                                   V + 2BV + 3B2 V + . . . = [I - B]-2 V.                                           (11)

                       s , of country-j , industry-s from primary factors is then computed by
The "downstreamness", Dj
taking the ((j - 1) × J + s)-th entry of (11) and dividing it by Yjs .
     s is thus a weighted-average of the number of production stages traversed from primary factors
    Dj
to arrive at gross output in country-j , industry-s. The weights in question ­ the ((j - 1) × J + s)-th
term in Bn-1 V divided by Yjs ­ are the respective shares of gross output that accrue from value
                                                                    s  1, with equality if and
added that has passed through exactly n stages.28 Once again, each Dj
only if all of the gross output of the country-industry is derived directly from primary sources
                                                              s is larger the greater is the use
of value added (with zero purchases of intermediate inputs). Dj
of intermediate inputs as a share of Yjs , and particularly so if the directly purchased inputs are
themselves multiple stages removed from primary factors.
                                                                           s is the unique solution
    Fally (2012) and Miller and Temurshoev (2017) moreover establish that Dj
   27
      To see this, observe that when we stack (10) across all country-industries, the recurrence relation can be written
in matrix notation as: U = 1 + BU. Here, U is a column vector whose ((i - 1) × J + r)-th entry is equal to Uir ; 1 is a
JS × 1 vector of 1's; while B is the matrix of allocation coefficients. It follows that U = [I - B]-1 1, from which Uir is
equal to the sum of entries in the ((i - 1) × J + r)-th row of [I - B]-1 .
   28
      Fally (2012) refers to this as the "number of production stages" embodied in the gross output of a particular
country-industry.




                                                           21
(up to a normalization) to the recurrence relation:

                                                 s
                                                Dj =1+             ars  r
                                                                    ij Di ,                                          (12)
                                                             i,r


where ars   rs    s
       ij  Zij /Yj is the direct requirements coefficient of country-j , industry-s's use of inputs
from country-i, industry-r. Thus, a country-industry is one stage more downstream than a weighted-
                                                                                s can also be
average of industries that it purchases inputs from. As a consequence of (12), Dj
computed as the sum of the entries in the ((j - 1) × J + s)-th column of the Leontief inverse matrix,
[I - A]-1 .29 This means that Dj
                               s is equivalent to the total increase in gross output in the world

economy that would be required to generate the inputs to facilitate a unit increase in country-j ,
industry-s's output (total backward linkages).
      Miller and Temurshoev (2017) and Antràs and Chor (2019) explore the empirical features of
these measures of upstreamness and downstreamness, constructed using the 2013 release of the
WIOD. Figure 4 below highlights a key set of stylized facts from these papers: Between 1995 and
2011, the upstreamness of country-industries rose modestly but steadily (left panel). While the
median country-industry is positioned slightly more than two stages upstream from final demand,
this stage distance displays a clear upward trend not just for the median observation, but also across
the 25th and 75th percentiles of the distribution (within each year) of the Uir values. Somewhat
surprisingly, the summary statistics and time trends exhibited by the downstreamness measure are
very similar (right panel). The median country-industry is slightly more than two stages downstream
                                  s values display less cross-sectional dispersion than the U r
from primary factors, though the Dj                                                          i
measure. That said, there is a distinct rise too in the downstreamness of country-industries over this
sample period. Using fixed effects panel regressions, Antràs and Chor (2019) document that this
upward trend in both Uir and Dj
                              s is a robust feature even in the within country-industry variation.

Put otherwise, during this period when GVC activity as a whole was on the rise (cf., our earlier
Figure 3), the average stage length of GVCs that each country-industry is positioned within was also
increasing, as a result of an increase in both the stage distance from primary factors and the stage
distance to final demand; GVCs have thus become more complex ­ in the sense of involving more
production stages ­ over time.30 Interestingly, this trend of "lengthening" GVCs tapered off after
2008, a timing that coincides with the broader slowdown described earlier in the macro measures of
GVC activity.31
   29
      Stacking (12) across all country-industries, the recurrence relation can be written as: DT = 1T + DT A. Here,
  T                                                                   s
D is the row vector whose ((j - 1) × J + s)-th entry is equal to Dj     ; 1T is a JS × 1 row vector of 1's; while A is the
matrix of direct requirements coefficients. We thus have: DT = 1T [I - A]-1 , from which Dj       s
                                                                                                    is equal to the sum of
                                                        -1
entries in the ((j - 1) × J + s)-th column of [I - A] .
   30
      By contrast, Fally (2012) finds a decrease in the measure of downstreamness when computed for a long time series
of benchmark years of the U.S. input-output tables from 1947-2002. This suggests that some within-U.S. segments of
GVCs were decreasing in stage length over time, even while GVCs as a whole have been spanning more production
stages since the mid-1990s.
   31
      On a related note, within any given year of WIOD data, there is a strong positive correlation between upstreamness
and downstreamness across country-industries (Antràs and Chor, 2019). This is driven in part by goods-producing
industries exhibiting larger Uir and Di r
                                          values on average (in line with there being more production fragmentation in
the manufacturing sector), while service-producing industries tend to be in chains with low Uir and Di       r
                                                                                                               values (that


                                                           22
          Figure 4: GVC Positioning ("Upstreamness" and "Downstreamness") over Time




                                             2.8




                                                                                                                                         2.8
                                                            75th percentile                                                                             75th percentile
                                                            50th percentile                                                                             50th percentile
                                                            25th percentile                                                                             25th percentile



                                             2.6




                                                                                                                                         2.6
                                             2.4




                                                                                                                                         2.4
            (country-industry percentiles)




                                                                                                        (country-industry percentiles)
                                             2.2




                                                                                                                                         2.2
                     U over time




                                                                                                                 D over time
                                             2




                                                                                                                                         2
                                             1.8




                                                                                                                                         1.8
                                             1.6




                                                                                                                                         1.6
                                             1.4




                                                                                                                                         1.4
                                                   1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012                                           1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
                                                                              Year                                                                                        Year




    The above measures of production staging have found their way into a wide range of empirical
applications. At a descriptive level, the measures have helped to shed light on how production
and trade patterns have evolved, providing in particular a formal way of answering policy-relevant
questions related to where countries are positioned within GVCs. Chor et al. (2020) use a measure
of industry-level upstreamness computed from China's input-output tables and combine these with
detailed customs data, in order to infer how the global production line position of Chinese firms has
shifted over time, in the absence of more direct information on these firms' production activities
within GVCs. They report a distinct rise in the upstreamness of China's imports, at least up
until 2007, even as the positioning of China's exports became slightly more proximate to final
demand; overall, this suggests that as Chinese firms have grown in size, the span of stages that
they undertake within China has widened. On a related note, Li et al. (2015) find that China's
state-owned enterprises have maintained significantly higher shares of output and value added in
upstream industries (such as petrochemicals and electricity generation), relative to their presence in
industries that are closer to final demand.
    Of note for the study of trade policy, using a broad sample of countries, Shapiro (2020) uncovers
a strong negative relationship between the upstreamness of an industry and the level of protection
­ both tariffs and non-tariff barriers ­ enacted on imports from that industry. This constitutes
some of the most extensive evidence to date that the pattern of applied protection is consistent
with the logic of tariff escalation (see Section 6). Elsewhere, the production staging measures

employ primary factors and service final-users directly).


                                                                                                       23
have been used to good effect to investigate the propagation of shocks across economic units.
Olabisi (2020) demonstrates that industries that are more upstream display more nominal output
volatility, a pattern that can be generated by a simple model of transmission of shocks to final
demand. By extension, Olabisi (2020) finds too that countries whose export profiles are tilted
towards more upstream industries in turn exhibit more export volatility. Separately, Liu (2019)
finds that industries that are more upstream also tend to feature a higher "distortion centrality",
where the latter measure captures the extent of the welfare gains that would be propagated through
an input-output network when the efficiency wedges faced by the industry are reduced. With
regard to the transmission of credit shocks, Kalemli-Özcan et al. (2014) find using Orbis data that
firms located in more upstream sectors maintain higher levels of working capital in the form of
accounts receivable, and that these levels of working capital are more sensitive to aggregate credit
conditions; these patterns are consistent with the model of moral hazard in the provision of credit
along production chains, developed by Kim and Shin (2012).
   Looking across and within firms, a body of studies has applied these measures of production
staging to test theories related to the structure and organization of GVCs. A leading though
somewhat loosely-articulated theory that has drawn attention is the "smile curve" hypothesis: Based
on an observation made in the early 1990s by former Acer CEO Stan Shih, this postulates that
the value added in production chains is highest in the most upstream stages (e.g., research and
development) and the most downstream stages (e.g., marketing and sales), with the value added
contribution of midstream processing and assembly being lower in comparison. Using data from
Orbis, Rungi and del Prete (2018) indeed uncover a characteristic U-shape relationship between
firm-level value added and the upstreamness of their main industry of activity with respect to final
demand; this complements other work that tests for a "smile curve" using broader cross-sectoral
data (Ito and Baldwin, 2021).
   The upstreamness measure has also been used to formally test models of firm organizational
decisions along sequential production chains, such as that developed in Antràs and Chor (2013).
The predictions of this model are relatively subtle (cf., Section 5.3.2): When final-good demand
elasticities are sufficiently high, firms would have a greater propensity to outsource upstream
stages (to better incentivize suppliers located early in the production process), before possibly
integrating within firm boundaries suppliers that are positioned closer to final demand (as rent
extraction motives start to dominate). A converse pattern is expected to hold when final-good
demand elasticities are relatively low. Empirical tests of these predictions have been performed
by using industry-level data on intrafirm import shares as a proxy for integration, and combining
these with measures of the upstreamness of the imports in question (Antràs and Chor, 2013). More
recent empirical work on this topic ­ examining the relative propensity to integrate upstream versus
downstream stages ­ has brought in micro data, with the identity of inputs that are integrated
within firm boundaries being inferred from the set of industry codes that a firm and its subsidiaries
are listed to be active in (del Prete and Rungi, 2017; Alfaro et al., 2019).32 Alfaro et al. (2019) in
  32
       See also Bolatto et al. (2018) who examine the interplay between intangible assets and production line positioning



                                                            24
particular introduce a more refined measure of upstreamness in their test, that captures the stage
distance of an input industry r with respect to the primary industry s of the firm headquarters
(rather than measuring this with respect to final demand). This latter variable is of potential
interest for empirical researchers seeking a measure of the production chain distance between pairs
of industries. It is moreover equivalent to the measure of average propagation length ­ the average
number of stages taken for a shock to be transmitted from one industry to another ­ formulated in
Dietzenbacher et al. (2005). (See also Wang et al. (2017) and Imbs and Pauwels (2020) for several
further variants and extensions of these measures of production line positioning.)
    As a final and more critical remark, it should be acknowledged that the WIOT data concerns
highlighted in Section 2.2 apply too to these measures of positioning within GVCs. In particular, the
measures of upstreamness and downstreamness have been formulated conditional on the assumption
underlying the gross output accounting identities, that there is a uniform technology matrix that
fully describes the structure of roundabout production. To the extent that departures from this
assumption are relevant in practice, this would suggest that there is some degree of measurement
error in the upstreamness and downstreamness variables as currently constructed. Furthermore, the
industry categories in most available WIOTs remain relatively coarse, which limits the usefulness
of these upstreamness and downstreamness measures in terms of how much they can inform us
about production-line positioning within GVCs at a more micro level. It goes without saying that
a more detailed understanding of how production stages are sequenced will require that we move
beyond the information aggregated in a WIOT, to work instead with firm-level data that will allow
researchers to more directly observe sourcing decisions and buyer-supplier linkages.


3     Empirical Work: Micro
We turn next to survey an extensive body of work based on micro data at the firm or establishment
level, that has uncovered empirical regularities and stylized facts on GVC activity as observed from
the ground up. Although not all of these papers are explicitly framed as studies about GVCs per se
­ in some cases, the term "GVC" may not even appear in the paper ­ these have contributed to
a more complete picture of the firm-level correlates of forward participation (as evidenced more
broadly through exporting) and backward participation (importing) in GVCs. More recently, richer
datasets have become available that track the identities of both parties involved in cross-border or
within-country transactions. These have shed further light on the nature of buyer-supplier links
within production chains and sourcing relationships.
    This work uncovering micro-level evidence on GVCs is complementary to the macro measurement
literature just reviewed in Section 2.1.3, with each approach having its pros and cons. The richer
data environments in the micro-level studies allow for detailed investigations of mechanisms and more
scope for achieving causal identification. On the other hand, virtually all existing firm-level studies
are limited to data from a single country, given the practical hurdles to merging administrative
in global supply chains using firm-level data from Slovenia.



                                                         25
datasets from different countries. The view of GVCs that one obtains is thus limited to the particular
segments of value chains that pass through the country in question; in particular, this makes it more
difficult to infer the aggregate implications of GVC activity without making assumptions about the
structure of value chain stages that operate outside the country.

3.1     Selection into GVC Participation
The advent of large firm-level datasets in research in international trade, starting in earnest in the
mid-1990s, has generated a series of key stylized facts focusing on firms that export. By extension,
these facts speak too to the nature of firms' forward participation in GVCs. It is now well-known
that only a small share of firms engages in exporting; for example, 18% of U.S. manufacturing
firms did so in 1997 (Bernard et al., 2007). These firms are nevertheless highly consequential to an
economy: Exporting firms are on average larger in size and more productive than their non-exporting
counterparts, and this advantage is often in place prior to the commencement of a firm's exporting
episode. These patterns are consistent with the positive selection of firms along these dimensions
into exporting, as more productive firms are better able to bear and amortize various fixed costs
associated with attempts to enter into an export market.33 This empirical facts about exporters
have been documented extensively in developed economies (e.g., the U.S., Bernard and Jensen,
1999) as well as in developing countries (e.g. Clerides et al., 1998); see in particular Section 2 of
Melitz and Redding (2014a) for an extensive review of this body of evidence.
    It goes without saying that not all firms that export are necessarily engaged in forward GVC
participation. One would in principle be able to more confidently label a firm as being part of a
GVC if its exports were composed mainly of intermediate inputs or semi-finished goods that are
being delivered to another country for further processing or assembly. That said, existing studies on
firms that export typically do not distinguish between exports of final goods versus intermediates,
nor are there many studies that seek explicitly to tease out the import content of firm-level exports
(Kee and Tang, 2016, being a key exception).
    In comparison, work on the correlates and drivers of firm-level importing has received less
spotlight, even though the patterns here are no less robust and arguably no less important for
understanding firms' performance. Firms that import are once again the exception rather than
the rule, with only 14% of firms recorded as importers in the U.S. Census of Manufacturing in
1997 (Bernard et al., 2007). There is an analogous set of stylized facts that points to the relevance
of selection into importing (and by extension into backward GVC participation), with the size
and productivity advantage of importing firms over non-importers comparable in magnitude to
the corresponding "premia" of exporting firms over non-exporters.34 Importing firms that are
   33
      This does not rule out the possibility that the converse relationship could hold too in practice, namely that firms
can become more productive as a result of engaging in exporting. See for example de Loecker (2007) for evidence on
"learning by exporting" in the context of Slovenia.
   34
      For evidence on this, see for example Table 8 in Bernard et al. (2007) for U.S. manufacturing; Table 4 and Table
14 in Muûls and Pisu (2009) for Belgium; Table 7 in Castellani et al. (2010) for Italian manufacturing; and Appendix
Table B1 in Blaum et al. (2018) for France.



                                                           26
larger moreover tend to purchase goods from a greater number of source countries (Antràs et al.,
2017). This suggests that there are significant fixed costs associated with each source country
that firms import from, which smaller firms that lack sufficient scale are not able to afford. The
model-based estimates from Antràs et al. (2017) for example place these fixed costs of importing in
the range of US$10,000 to US$56,000 per annum for U.S. firms depending on the source country.35
There is moreover interesting evidence that as firms become more productive, they do not scale up
their imports proportionately across all existing source countries. Blaum et al. (2019) find using
French data that firms especially raise their imports from countries that are better able to produce
high-quality inputs, generating what the authors term a "non-homothetic" import demand response.
This builds on earlier work that has highlighted how importing firms tend to have access to more
input varieties, and often end up paying higher prices ­ more specifically, unit values ­ for both
domestic and imported inputs, consistent with their using higher quality inputs (see Kugler and
Verhoogen, 2009, based on Colombian plant-level data).
    For the study of GVCs, firms that both import and export at the same time are of particular
interest. This is because these firms oversee flows of what we have termed GVC trade, namely
value added that experiences more than one border crossing. In light of the above discussion
on selection into importing and exporting respectively, it comes as no surprise that firms that
simultaneously engage in both imports and exports are an even smaller share of all firms (11% of
U.S. manufacturing firms in Bernard et al., 2007). Yet, though small and granular in terms of count,
these GVC participants are clearly crucial for understanding aggregate outcomes in an economy
given the disproportionate share of activity that they account for. In the U.S., firms that both
import and export constituted close to a third of private-sector employment and an overwhelming
share (close to 90%) of U.S. trade in 2000 (Bernard et al., 2009); these firms are moreover more likely
to undertake complex sourcing strategies or to be engaged in multinational activity. Such patterns
have been documented too in other countries, including in emerging economies: Using data from
key Chilean manufacturing industries, Kasahara and Lapham (2013) show that the productivity
distribution of firms engaging in both imports and exports is shifted to the right relative to that for
firms that only import, only export, or do neither.36
    There are strong conceptual reasons ­ and an accompanying body of evidence ­ that support the
view that the respective firm-level decisions to import and export are often intrinsically linked. A
growing number of studies has demonstrated that firms that raise their purchases of imported inputs
tend themselves to become more productive and to expand the range of products they manufacture.
This has been documented across a broad range of country settings, including Indonesia (Amiti and
Konings, 2007), Chile (Kasahara and Rodrigue, 2008), India (Goldberg et al., 2010), and Hungary
(Halpern et al., 2015); the latter two papers in particular point to a substantial role for the extensive
   35
      Using a structural model of firm importing and exporting decisions with both sunk and fixed costs, Kasahara
and Lapham (2013) estimate fixed costs of importing that lie in a similar ballpark ­ between $28,000 and $117,000 in
1990 US dollars ­ for Chilean firms in selected manufacturing industries. (They also recover estimates of the fixed
costs of exporting between $36,000 to $83,000.)
   36
      Lu (2010) can be viewed as an exception in this regard: Firms that engage in processing trade appear to exhibit
a low exporter productivity premium in China.


                                                         27
margin of import growth, namely access to a greater set of imported input varieties, as a crucial
margin behind the overall improvement in firm performance.37 On a closely related note, Bøler et al.
(2015) show using Norwegian data that there can be strong complementarities at the firm level
between the decisions to import intermediate inputs and to undertake R&D, so that reductions in
costs associated with importing can spur R&D-driven productivity improvements (and vice versa).
Conversely, firms that experience an adverse shock in their access to imported input varieties have
been found to suffer a severe hit to their productivity; see specifically Gopinath and Neiman (2014),
who exploit micro data from Argentina's currency crisis of 2001-2002.
   Given the strong evidence on positive selection into exporting, it stands to reason that firms
that import inputs from abroad and become more productive as a result would find themselves in
a better position to commence or expand their exporting activities as well. Several papers have
indeed sought to uncover explicit evidence of such a link from access to imports on the one hand to
improved export performance subsequently. Using Argentina's earlier trade liberalization episode
in the mid-1990s, Bas (2012) finds that firms that saw greater input tariff reductions in turn had
a higher probability to commence exporting. Firm-level studies using data from France (Bas and
Strauss-Kahn, 2014) and from China (Feng et al., 2016) have also uncovered how greater access to
imports is linked to expansions in firms' export value, their range of exported varieties, as well as to
possible upgrading in the quality of the products they export.
   From a methodological standpoint, the above body of micro empirical studies ­ that explore the
effects of imported inputs on productivity, and possible subsequent links to export performance ­
has benefited from the ability to exploit country trade liberalization episodes in a firm-level data
setting in order to design a credible identification strategy. To the extent that these events are
either unanticipated or otherwise plausibly exogenous from the perspective of the firm, the variation
across firms in the change in tariff exposure they experienced, often involving the use of a shift-share
instrumental variable, has been leveraged to identify a causal effect of improvements in access to
imports on firm-level outcomes.
   We conclude this review of evidence on firm-level importing and exporting by highlighting some
broader limitations of this literature's ability to shed more detailed light on GVC activity. Though
such empirical work provides an understanding of firm-level trade patterns for a single country, this
by definition only constitutes a particular snapshot of GVCs that pass through the country, but not
information about the input-output links along an entire GVC. While there is work in this vein that
seeks to dive deep to map out an entire GVC, this is typically limited to case studies or teardown
analyses of particular goods such as the iPod (Dedrick et al., 2010) or bicycles (World Bank, 2020,
Chapter 1). One can envision that there may be more systematic data efforts in the future that
seek to unpack the complete GVC for multiple firms in a given industry, particularly one in which
the set of inputs that lie upstream in the value chain is easy to enumerate and identify, in order to
uncover a more comprehensive set of empirical facts on firm-level participation in GVCs.
  37
    Colantone and Crinò (2014) document a relationship between imported inputs and an expansion in domestic
products for a panel of European countries, albeit using industry-level rather than firm-level data.



                                                    28
3.2    Evidence on Buyer-Supplier Matching
Moving beyond data that reports on the import and export activities of individual firms, empirical
work related to GVCs has benefited from the emergence of a limited number of datasets that contain
information on firm-to-firm linkages, and even (in some data sources) firm-to-firm transaction flows.
By identifying both parties that are connected in buyer-supplier or importer-exporter relationships,
these provide the opportunity to examine the formation and features of particular links within
domestic and global value chains. We discuss below the nature of such proprietary firm-to-firm
datasets that have become available over the past decade, the key stylized facts on buyer-supplier
matches that have been uncovered, as well as how these relate to the observations on selection into
GVC participation discussed earlier in Section 3.1.
    We touch first on studies based on datasets that contain firm-to-firm links in cross-border trade,
this being the type of data that most directly speaks to flows within GVCs. An example of early
work on this front is Blum et al. (2010), who performed a laborious merge of customs data from
Chile and Argentina. Rather than merging datasets from different countries, several more recent
studies have instead worked with customs data from individual countries that do a reasonable job of
maintaining consistent records of the identity of the importing/exporting counterparty. Empirical
researchers have successfully exploited such data from countries such as Norway (Bernard et al.,
2018), Colombia (Eaton et al., 2016; Bernard et al., 2019), Costa Rica, Ecuador and Uruguay
(Carballo et al., 2018), as well as France (Kramarz et al., 2020).38
    These studies have unearthed a set of common empirical regularities. We overview these below,
but would also direct interested readers to Section 2 of Bernard and Moxnes (2018) for a more
comprehensive account of these facts on firm-to-firm links. Given an importer-exporter or buyer-
supplier dataset with sufficiently universal sample coverage, one typically finds that the distributions
of the number of importing firms per exporter (or buyers per seller) and the number of exporting
firms per importer (or sellers per buyer) are very skewed. Most exporters sell to a small number
of foreign buyers, and most importers purchase from a small number of foreign sellers. Only a
select small subset of exporters successfully match and trade with a large number of foreign buyers ­
and similarly, only a small fraction of importers are linked with a large number of foreign sellers
­ even though these links tend to account for the bulk of bilateral trade value that is observed.
Furthermore, at least one party in any given firm-to-firm match tends to be a large firm; there are
few links observed between small buyers and small sellers.
    Digging deeper, exporters that have few links (and are thus presumably smaller and less
productive firms) tend on average to sell to importers that have many connections (and are thus
presumably larger and more productive firms). On the other hand, exporters that have many links
tend on average to be less selective, in that the set of importers that they sell to comprises firms
with a lower average number of links. An analogous pattern applies in parallel to the number of
exporters per importer (or sellers per buyer). Put in the vocabulary of graph theory, the set of
  38
    See Section 3.3 for a discussion of how such data from the US and France have been exploited to establish facts
about the duration of firm-to-firm relationships.



                                                        29
buyer-supplier links features "negative degree assortativity".
    Taken together, these empirical regularities are consistent with selection not just in importing
or exporting per se, but in the formation of buyer-supplier matches. Such selection could be driven
for instance by the presence of match-specific fixed costs (Bernard et al., 2018), so that it is larger
and more productive firms that can incur and amortize such fixed costs, and that are therefore able
to participate more extensively in domestic and global value chains. A number of recent studies
have exploited shocks to trade patterns or trade policies to uncover adjustments in buyer-supplier
matches that are broadly consistent with such selection mechanisms. Benguria (2021) shows that
following the establishment of the U.S.-Colombia Free Trade Agreement, which lowered tariffs faced
by U.S. firms in the Colombian market, U.S. exporters were more inclined to switch their firm-to-firm
matches to establish links with larger Colombian importers. This is consistent with the higher profits
from exporting to Colombia encouraging U.S. firms to incur the search costs to seek a better match
in the local market. On the other hand, Sugita et al. (2020) uncovers how Mexican textile/apparel
exporters became de facto less selective in their matching with U.S. importers following the removal
of the Multi-Fiber Arrangement (MFA) quotas, which significantly expanded the pool of competing
suppliers in the U.S. market from a major third-country source (China).39
    Given the relatively limited number of datasets that record firm-to-firm flows in international
trade, researchers interested in studying buyer-supplier matches have also turned to a range of other
data sources that report only on links (and not actual transaction values) or sources that provide
detailed information on domestic (but not necessarily cross-border) linkages. Atalay et al. (2011),
for example, use Compustat to map out the production networks of U.S. publicly-listed firms; note
though that this network mapping is a partial one, since the accounting rules only require these
firms to disclose the identity of major customers that account for more than 10% of their revenue
in a given reporting period. Researchers have also tapped into other commercial company-level
datasets that identify firms' supply chain partners, such as S&P Capital IQ (e.g., by Lim, 2018)
and Factset Revere (e.g., by Huang et al., 2020; Amiti et al., 2020; Charoenwong et al., 2021).
These other data sources are more comprehensive than Compustat, in that their coverage extends
beyond publicly-listed firms, made possible by the respective data provider's proprietary methods
for aggregating supply-chain information from company news, announcements, or reports/filings;
while this falls short of being a universal administrative dataset, it can nevertheless be sufficient
for empirical applications in which it is the largest firms that are of interest. For example, the
three papers cited above which tap the Factset Revere dataset have used it to study the recent
U.S.-China tariff war, to explore if there have been adverse consequences on firms propagated
through supply chain links. That said, even as the coverage of such commercial databases has been
rapidly expanding, these remain more limited in the information they currently provide on actual
input flows from suppliers to firms on the intensive margin.
    The empirical literature on firm-to-firm networks has worked with two further classes of detailed
  39
    Sugita et al. (2020) find at the same time that U.S. importers were conversely able to then match with higher-
capability Mexican textile/apparel exporters, in line with the predictions of their model.



                                                       30
data. First, researchers have examined confidential data from credit bureaus or agencies that
maintain records of the set of suppliers that individual firms are linked with. Bernard et al. (2019),
for instance, use the Tokyo Shoko Research database from Japan, and demonstrate how the extension
of a high-speed passenger rail-line increased the number of buyer-supplier links between firms in
southern Japan and the rest of the country; this is highly suggestive evidence on the importance
of face-to-face meetings for establishing supply chain links, as the new rail-line affected passenger
travel times but not cargo shipping times.40 Second, there has been a growing trend towards the
use of administrative data on value added tax (VAT) records, that provide a close to full profile
(modulo what are usually mild data censoring rules) of buyer-supplier transactions within the formal
economy. Work that exploits such VAT data from countries including Belgium (Bernard et al., 2019;
Dhyne et al., 2020) and Chile (Huneeus, 2018) has found that many of the empirical regularities
found in importer-exporter data are replicated in domestic buyer-supplier networks as well. This
includes the highly-skewed nature of the distributions of buyers per seller and sellers per buyer, as
well as the "negative degree assortativity" of buyer-seller links, suggesting that selection into value
chain participation is relevant too in the formation of domestic supply chain linkages. Demir et al.
(2021) document a further feature in buyer-supplier matching that is present at least in the detailed
VAT data from Turkey: Skill-intensive firms tend to purchase inputs from more skill-intensive
suppliers, which the authors relate to the former's use of higher-quality inputs in their production
processes. Alfaro-Urena et al. (2020) use firm-to-firm transaction data from Costa Rica of this
nature to trace out how domestic firms benefit from spillovers through backward linkages when they
become suppliers to multinational firms. Although the focus in these VAT datasets on domestic
transactions represents a limitation in the extent to which they can shed light on GVC activity, the
frontier of empirical research here is (arguably) not that far removed from working with merged
administrative datasets that contain both domestic and international transactions; see for example
Adao et al. (2020) for one such ambitious effort that has already been put together for Ecuador.
    We touch briefly on a series of papers that has investigated the nature of shock propagation
(both forward and backward) through buyer-supplier linkages, as these speak to how such shocks
can be transmitted through and impact GVCs.41 This line of work can be characterized by their
relatively clean empirical design, often exploiting natural disasters as sources of near-experimental
variation in the severity of shocks that firms are exposed to. Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016) make
use of the above-mentioned Compustat data to show that natural disasters that affect supplier
firms have adverse impacts on the market values of their major customers, particularly if the inputs
provided are highly specific. Boehm et al. (2019) study how the 2011 Tohoku earthquake disrupted
the supply chains of Japanese multinationals, as evidenced through the impact on the production
of their affiliates located in the U.S. Carvalho et al. (2020) examine the aggregate implications
  40
       See also Miyauchi (2019) who uses the same Japanese credit agency dataset to discipline a model of network
formation that features agglomeration effects in buyer-supplier matching.
    41
       This is related to the "bullwhip effect" in supply chain management: As shocks to demand for final goods
work their way through supply chains, industries or stages of production that are further upstream experience larger
variability in demand for their output. See Wang and Disney (2016) for a recent survey of the operations research
literature on this topic.


                                                        31
of this same earthquake, focusing on the transmission of these shocks through Japan's domestic
firm-to-firm network.42 Using the FactSet Revere data on firms' suppliers, Kashiwagi et al. (2021)
document how Hurricane Sandy adversely affected companies that were not directed affected by the
disaster, but had links with other firms located in severely afflicted areas.

3.3     Evidence on the Relational Nature of GVC Links
The growing body of evidence on firm-to-firm links raises a natural question: What distinguishes
buyer-supplier links within GVCs from regular market-based spot transactions? Toward this end,
an active stream of work has spotlighted the relational nature of buyer-supplier links within GVCs.
As emphasized by the World Development Report (World Bank, 2020), GVC links often exhibit
durability or persistence over time, rather than merely being one-shot interactions. In this subsection,
we review the progress that has been made in documenting the relational nature of buyer-supplier
links in GVCs, in understanding the forces that support (or undermine) such links, as well as in
exploring its consequences. Recent events such as the U.S.-China tariff war and the COVID-19
pandemic have raised interest in these issues, particularly as these can be informative of how durable
GVC links might prove to be in the face of supply-chain disruptions.
    It is proper first to acknowledge that economists are not alone in recognizing the importance of the
relational nature of many GVC links. There is a large extant literature on value chain "governance"
forms, that seeks to characterize and categorize the nature of buyer-supplier interactions within
GVCs in more descriptive and textured terms, to which scholars in economic sociology, economic
geography, and international business have contributed extensively. The seminal work of Gereffi
(1994) and Gereffi (1999) laid out a key distinction between "producer-driven" and "buyer-driven"
GVCs. The former ("producer-driven") refers to value chains in which the lead firm exercises a high
degree of control over the production process, due for example to a desire to manage a proprietary
technology; this often manifests itself in conscious decisions to vertically integrate production stages
within firm ownership boundaries. The latter form ("buyer-driven") is instead characterized by
input purchases that are conducted at arm's length, through market-based transactions. Gereffi
et al. (2005) expanded on this typology, to introduce governance modes that lie between these
two extremes, including in particular the notion of "relational value chains". Such value chain
arrangements are more likely to emerge when the production process requires high levels of input
customization or relationship-specific investment, and when the pool of available suppliers has
sufficiently strong capabilities to deliver on these production requirements of the buyer. In such
settings, the link between a buyer and its supplier is "built-up over time", with these repeated
interactions often accompanied by an exchange of tacit knowledge. This generates a "mutual
dependence" in the GVC link that makes "the costs of switching to new partners high" (Gereffi
et al., 2005, p.86).43
   42
      See also Todo et al. (2015) who find that Japanese firms in the earthquake area were better able to recover if
they had supply chain links with domestic firms that were not directly affected.
   43
      For completeness, the five value-chain governance modes in the Gereffi et al. (2005) typology are: hierarchical (or
"producer-driven"), market (or "buyer-driven"), relational, modular, and captive.


                                                           32
    The above characterization of "relational value chains" dovetails with a small but growing body
of evidence uncovered from detailed micro data, on the average duration and durability of buyer-
supplier links in international trade flows. The data that one needs in order to establish definitive
facts on this front is fairly demanding, requiring time series data on cross-border transactions that
reliably records the identities of both the buyer and seller. Such information on identities is in
principle available in the raw customs paperwork that is filed in many countries, but in practice may
require extensive work to clean of recording errors, as well as to pin down and link firm identities
over time. Not surprisingly, the number of countries for which such evidence on the duration of
firm-to-firm trade links is available remains small at present, although we anticipate that this will
grow with more concerted data efforts.
    Along these lines, Monarch and Schmidt-Eisenlohr (2017) document a series of stylized facts that
speak to the duration of relationships between U.S. buyers and their foreign suppliers, using the U.S.
Census Longitudinal Foreign Trade and Transaction Database (LFTTD).44 Focusing on arm's-length
imports at the HS-10 digit level by U.S. entities that are not in wholesale or retail, they find that
new buyer-supplier links make up more than half of all new import relationships by count, but only
for about a quarter of U.S. imports by value in 2011. Put otherwise, while there is dynamism in the
formation of new links, it is ultimately existing or continuing relationships that account for a much
greater share of trade value. Consistent with this, Monarch and Schmidt-Eisenlohr (2017) find that
the value of transactions rises over time with the number of consecutive years that a buyer-supplier
pair remain linked, while the hazard rate (that a link gets severed) falls steadily with relationship
age. Eaton et al. (2014) uncover a similar pattern when zooming in on the subset of the LFTTD
that comprises U.S. imports from Colombia, namely: a high initial hazard rate in the first year of a
buyer-supplier link, but rising trade volumes conditional on survival.45
    Using a particularly rich French customs dataset on firm-to-firm trade at the monthly frequency,
Martin et al. (2020) illustrate that the duration of buyer-supplier links ­ defined as the number of
months between when a French firm first imports a product from a given foreign supplier and when it
first switches suppliers ­ has a distribution that features a long right tail. While close to 40% of links
are one-shot transactions (i.e., with the buyer switching foreign suppliers in consecutive months), the
median and mean durations are respectively 10 and 18 months, with a non-trivial share of around
5% of relationships sporting durations of seven or more years. The value transacted within a link
is moreover increasing in the duration of the relationship. Building on these observations, Martin
et al. (2020) develop a measure of "relationship-stickiness", which they construct by filtering the
link duration data through the lens of a simple search model. This "relationship-stickiness" measure
at the HS 6-digit level correlates positively with prior variables that have been associated with the
  44
       The identity of the foreign supplier in U.S. import transactions is contained in the "manufacturer ID" variable
on U.S. customs forms. This can be prone to inconsistencies in recording, but see Monarch and Kamal (2018) for a
description of the data cleaning process they implemented to improve the accuracy of this variable.
    45
       These expand upon the findings of Besedes and Prusa (2006a, 2011), who document an analogous set of stylized
facts using detailed product-level trade flows, though without exploiting confidential firm identifiers. Besedes and
Prusa (2006b) show that the survival probability of a given product-by-country import flow into the U.S. is higher for
differentiated products, as classified by the Rauch (1999) measure.



                                                         33
formation of "relational value chains", such as product specificity (Rauch, 1999), contract-intensity
(Nunn, 2007), and complexity (Hausmann and Hidalgo, 2014).
   Focusing on U.S. imports from China in the LFTTD, Monarch (2020) reports that between
2002-2008, around one-half of U.S. buyer-supplier links in a given year persist into the next year. This
survival rate is systematically higher for products that are more skill-intensive or contract-intensive
(as measured by Nunn, 2007), in line with the idea that relationship-specificity in production tends
to encourage the formation of relational GVCs. At the same time, U.S. buyers who switch a Chinese
supplier are disproportionately more likely to select a new seller from the same Chinese city, which
one can interpret as consistent with the costs of searching and gathering information being lower in
a geographic location that is already familiar to the U.S. firm.
   While the above empirical work has successfully exploited detailed micro data to deliver clear
descriptive insights, it remains several steps removed from definitely decomposing the economic
forces that account for cross-product variation in relationship duration. As has been touched on
above, GVC links can exhibit persistence for a variety of reasons. Production of GVC inputs may
require customization and relationship-specific investments, which may be more easily sustained
through repeated interactions when the parties involved are sufficiently patient (Baker et al., 2002).
GVC links could also be sticky because it is costly to search for alternative suppliers, or because
there are barriers to the diffusion of information (Allen, 2014; Startz, 2016). On the other hand,
the persistence of buyer-supplier links may itself depend on the size of the pool of potential buyers
or suppliers, pointing to the relevance of considerations related to market power in the formation
of GVCs. Understanding the relative importance of these various explanations for the relational
nature of GVC links remains an interesting avenue for future work, which could moreover have
practical consequences for the efficacy of policies intended to help a country's suppliers establish
themselves in GVCs.
   Moving beyond studies that have examined link duration, we round off this subsection by
discussing empirical work that has studied relational contracting in global supply chains and
their implications. In settings where contracts are inherently incomplete ­ either because not all
contingencies can be contractually specified or because economic agents cannot count on the legal
enforcement of all contractual terms ­ buyer-supplier links are instead often sustained by more
informal or implicit relational arrangements. An insight that emerges from the relational contracting
modeling framework of Baker et al. (2002) is that the organizational mode of "relational integration"
­ in which both the firm and supplier cooperate over multiple periods to deliver first-best effort
levels, while conferring the firm greater residual rights of control ­ can be more readily maintained
when the parties involved discount the future at a sufficiently low rate. While the intuition comes
directly from the familiar Folk Theorem in repeated games, implementing a successful test of this
prediction requires that one propose a credible proxy for the discount rates of GVC participants.
Kukharskyy (2016) addresses this by drawing on a measure of cultural affinity towards "long-term
orientation" from the social psychology literature (specifically, Hofstede et al., 2010); Kukharskyy
(2016) shows that such measures of economic agents' "patience" indeed correlate positively with


                                                  34
the propensity towards integration, as captured by both intrafirm trade shares and firm ownership
shares.46 This adds to a voluminous empirical literature exploring firm boundary decisions, and
more specifically the propensity to integrate suppliers, that has been reviewed extensively in Antràs
and Yeaple (2014) and Antràs (2016).
   The empirical work on relational contracting has been enriched significantly by studies at
the intersection of the fields of international trade and development, that have collected detailed
information on transactions in specific supply chain links, often involving local suppliers and
foreign buyers. By gathering fine-grained data and combining this with a keen appreciation of the
institutional setting at hand, such studies have shed valuable light on the forces that can shape
the terms of relational contracting arrangements, particularly in developing-country contexts where
formal legal enforcement can be weak.
   In such circumstances, repeated interactions can be important for establishing reputation when
there is initial uncertainty about the seller's "type", and this appears to be key in determining
the durability of a given buyer-supplier link. In the context of the Kenyan rose export market,
Macchiavello and Morjaria (2015) find that the value of cut flowers sold by a domestic supplier to
a foreign buyer tends to increase as the relationship ages, consistent with the seller developing a
good reputation over time with the buyer. In response to a negative supply shock, Kenyan suppliers
appear to prioritize which buyers to restart transactions with in a subtle and strategic manner
that is consistent with their incentives to build reputation: Priority was placed on maintaining
links with buyers with whom the supplier had a relationship of intermediate duration, rather than
with new buyers (with whom the value of the relationship was smaller) or with long-standing
buyers (who were already fully aware of the supplier's "type"). Using transaction-level data from
Ecuadorian manufacturing supply chains, Brugués (2020) documents a pattern of rising quantities
and falling prices in buyer-supplier transactions as the relationship between a given pair ages; given
the prevalence of the use of trade credit as a terms of payment in this setting, Brugués (2020)
rationalizes these patterns through a model in which suppliers use the implicit promise to maintain
a link to incentivize buyers to make good on the trade credit extended to them. On the other
hand, Startz (2016) shows how undertaking international travel to meet face-to-face with foreign
suppliers plays an important role for Nigerian traders, when it is difficult for the foreign suppliers to
credibly establish a public reputation. The relational nature of buyer-supplier links can also shape
the payment and trade financing terms that exporters extend to importers, as shown by Antràs and
Foley (2015).
   While reputation can help to sustain buyer-supplier links, several studies have highlighted
economic circumstances and forces that instead place relational supply chains under strain, particu-
larly these improve the outside option of either the buyer or the seller. For example, Kenyan rose
exporters are more prone to divert supply away from their regular buyers towards global auction
markets instead when auction prices rise (Macchiavello and Morjaria, 2015). In the Rwanda coffee
supply chain, buyers (coffee mills) are less likely to engage in relational contracts with sellers (coffee
  46
       See Kamal and Tang (2014) for a similar effort at an empirical test using the LFTTD micro-data.



                                                         35
farmers) when they are situated near more competing coffee mills (Macchiavello and Morjaria, 2020).
    When relational contracting becomes more difficult to sustain, buyers have been observed to
opt instead for vertical integration of their suppliers, as has been the case in Costa Rica's coffee
supply chain (Macchiavello and Miquel-Florensa, 2018). On the other hand, contrasting relational
contracting with spot transactions in the Bangladesh garment supply market, Cajal-Grossi et al.
(2020) find that relational buyers pay higher markups than spot buyers for products that are
observationally equivalent on many dimensions. This is established through an original dataset with
comprehensive information on material inputs, labor used and garment quality at the order level,
and by exploiting within-supplier variation across different buyers. The higher markups paid by
relational buyers can be viewed as an "efficiency wage" of sorts, to incentivize suppliers to meet
benchmarks related to the reliable delivery of orders at short notice when necessary that can be
hard to specify in an ex-ante contract.


4     Modeling GVCs: Macro Approaches
Having discussed empirical work in the last two sections, we next turn to overviewing theoretical
work on the modeling of GVCs. We will begin this section by covering `macro' approaches. As
explained in the Introduction, we use this label to refer to work where the unit of analysis is the
country-industry and where the emphasis is largely quantitative in nature. All the frameworks
discussed below share the common feature of emphasizing the role of trade in intermediate inputs
and of global intersectoral linkages in shaping the response of the world economy to various types
of shocks, most notably trade policy shocks, but also productivity shocks, preference shocks, and
labor supply shocks. Beyond providing a useful quantitative tool, these frameworks also provide
a structural interpretation of the cells in a WIOT, and in some cases, these frameworks offer a
microfoundation for the type of assumptions researchers implicitly make when invoking Input-Output
analysis tools to compute the value-added content of trade flows or the positioning of countries
in GVCs (as reviewed in Section 2). Although the vast majority of the papers reviewed in this
section were written in the last ten years, we should of course acknowledge that quantitative work
in international trade has a long tradition as a branch of the field of computable general equilibrium
(or CGE) modeling (see Kehoe, 2005; Hertel, 2013; Hillberry and Hummels, 2013).
    We will begin by reviewing the `roundabout' model in Caliendo and Parro (2015), which has
quickly become a benchmark model in the field. We will later discuss a few extensions of this
framework, and we will close this section with an overview of recent work developing quantifiable
models of multi-stage production.

4.1   Roundabout Models: The Caliendo-Parro Model
Caliendo and Parro (2015) present a multi-industry extension of the Eaton and Kortum (2002)
Ricardian model of international trade. Although Eaton and Kortum (2002) already incorporated
trade in intermediate inputs, it did so in a single-sector economy via a roundabout production


                                                 36
assumption, and thus was not designed to assess the role of global interesectoral linkages in shaping
the gains of international specialization and the response of the world economy to various types
of shocks. Below, we review the basics of the Caliendo and Parro (2015) model, how it connects
with the `macro' measurement literature of GVCs reviewed above, and how this facilitates the
computation of policy counterfactuals.

4.1.1    Theoretical Framework

Environment and Notation Caliendo and Parro (2015) consider a world with J  1 countries and
S  1 sectors or industries. Producers in all sectors produce an output that can be interchangeably
used as an intermediate input or as a final (consumer) good. There is a unique primitive factor
of production, equipped labor, which is inelastically supplied in each country. All production
technologies feature constant returns to scale and all producers behave competitively.
   For the purposes of clarity, let us establish upfront the notation we use to index the economic
variables in the exposition, which follows closely the one in Section 2, but deviates from that used
in Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Caliendo and Parro (2015). We use subscripts i and j (and
occasionally k ) to refer to countries; whenever a pair of subscripts is used, the left subscript will
denote the source country, while the right subscript will denote the destination country (so ij
corresponds to a flow from i to j ). On the other hand, we use the superscripts r and s to refer to
industries; once again, whenever a pair of superscripts is used on a variable, the left superscript will
be the identity of the source (i.e., selling) industry, while the right superscript will be the identity
of the destination (i.e., buying) industry (so rs is a purchase from industry r by industry s).

Preferences and Technology The representative consumer in each country has preferences over
the output of the S sectors given by

                                                    S
                                                                  s
                                                            s     j
                                         u(Cj ) =          Cj          ,                           (13)
                                                    s=1

       s denotes consumption of a sector-s aggregate, C denotes the vector of the C s 's consumed in
where Cj                                               j                           j
            s is the share of industry s in the expenditure of the country-j representative consumer,
country j , j
        S   s
and     s=1 j   = 1.
   Within each industry s, there is a continuum of varieties indexed by  s  [0, 1]. Production of
each variety is a Cobb-Douglas function of equipped labor, as well as intermediate inputs. More
specifically, in country i, the production function for each industry-s variety is given by:

                                                          S
                                                                      S
                                                                 rs                 rs
                         s s      s s     s s 1-                 i               s i
                        yi ( ) = zi ( ) (li ( ))          r =1              (Mrs
                                                                              i ( )) .             (14)
                                                                      r=1

Note that Mrs s
           i ( ) is the amount of composite intermediates from industry r used in the production
of variety  s in country i. The exponent i
                                         rs is the (constant) share of production costs spent




                                                    37
on intermediate inputs from sector r by each industry-s producer in country i. It is assumed
         rs < 1, and moreover that 0 <                   S   rs
that 0 < i                                               r=1 i       < 1, so that the equipped labor share (or
simply, value-added share) of production costs is strictly positive in all sectors and countries. The
                      s ( s ) is an i.i.d. draw from a Fréchet distribution with cumulative density
productivity shifter zi
                                   s
function Fis (z ) = exp{-Tis z - }. The scale parameter Tis governs the state of technology of country
i in industry s, while s > 1 governs (inversely) the dispersion of productivity in industry s across
producers worldwide, thereby shaping comparative advantage.
    The country-i composite in industry s, which is used both for final consumption (Cis ), as well as
to provide inputs to other sectors r (Msr
                                       i ), is a CES aggregate over the set of varieties on the unit
interval:
                                                                                s /( s -1)
                                               s s ( s -1)/ s
                                  Qs
                                   i   =      qi ( )          d s                            ,                (15)

       s ( s ) denotes the quantity of variety  s that is ultimately purchased, naturally from the
where qi
lowest-cost source country. It is worth reiterating that the same CES aggregator over varieties
applies to the industry-i composite, whether it is being consumed in final demand or being used as
an intermediate input; we will return to this issue below.
    Note that the framework captures the notion that countries not only import consumer goods,
but also intermediate inputs from various industries and countries, with these imported inputs
embodying foreign value added. Similarly, countries not only export consumer goods, but also
intermediate inputs, thus generating domestic value added in production and exports of foreign
countries. In sum, the Caliendo and Parro (2015) model captures important aspects of GVCs.

Equilibrium Consider the decision problem of either the representative consumer or a firm in
country j , regarding which country to purchase variety  s from. As in Eaton and Kortum (2002),
this corresponds to choosing the lowest-cost source country across i  {1, . . . , J }, after factoring in
the unit production costs cs                         s
                           i and iceberg trade costs ij across all potential source countries i.
                                                                                                 47 The

solution to this discrete choice problem yields an expression for the expenditure share of country j
spent on industry-s varieties (intermediate or final goods) that come from country i:

                                                               s -        s
                                           s
                                                       Tis (cs
                                                             i ij )
                                           ij =        J    s s s -s
                                                                                    .                         (16)
                                                       k=1 Tk (ck kj )


Country j 's spending on country i-sector s's output is higher the higher the state of technology Tis ,
the lower the bundle cost cs                                 s
                           i , and the lower the trade costs ij associated with the i-s pair when
selling in j . The unit production cost cs
                                         j is in turn obtained as the solution to the cost-minimization
problem faced by each industry-s firm in country j , based on the production function (14). This is
given by:
                                                        S      rs   S               rs
                                                  1-           j                    j
                                       cs   s
                                        j = j wj
                                                        r =1
                                                                              Pjr        ,                    (17)
                                                                    r=1
  47
    We ignore tariffs and their implied tariff revenue, but they are modeled and taken into account in Caliendo and
Parro (2015).


                                                          38
where s                                                   rs       r
      j is a constant that depends only on the parameters j , and Pj is the ideal price index of
the industry-r composite being used as an intermediate input in country j . Following Eaton and
Kortum (2002), the expression for Pjr is given explicitly by:

                                                             J                              -1/r
                                                                                     -r
                                            Pjr = r              Tir cr r
                                                                      i ij                         ,                                     (18)
                                                         i=1


where r is a constant that depends only on  r and r .48
         s denote the expenditure of country j on industry-s varieties from country i. This is the
    Let Xij
sum of country-j expenditures on the industry-s composite from country i, over both its use as
                                                                       s =                                              J    s
an intermediate input and for final consumption. In turn, define: (i) Xj                                                i=1 Xij   as the total
expenditure of country j on industry-s varieties; and (ii)                           Yjs    as the value of gross output in industry
s produced in country j . Having defined these objects, we can close the model by clearing the
market for each industry in each country:

                                              S          J
                                    s               sr
                                   Xj =             j            Xir ji
                                                                     r    s
                                                                        + j (wj Lj + Dj ) .                                              (19)
                                              r=1        i=1
                                                                 Yjr


Note that the first term on the right-hand side of (19) is equal to the total purchases of intermediate
inputs from industry s, where the sum is taken over all industries r that purchase intermediate
inputs from s.49 Dj is the national deficit of country j , computed as the sum of all sectoral and
final-use imports of a country minus the sectoral and final-use outputs. Then, the second term on
the right-hand side is the total purchases by country j on industry s for final consumption.
    We finally impose trade balance, equating a country j 's imports to its exports plus its observed
deficit Dj :
                                   S                S    J                       S    J
                                        s                     s s
                                       Xj    =               Xj ij          =               Xis ji
                                                                                                s
                                                                                                   + Dj                                  (20)
                                 s=1              s=1 i=1                       s=1 i=1

One can show that this last equilibrium condition can alternatively be derived from the equality
of (equipped) labor income and total value-added.50 The equilibrium of the model is then pinned
down by the system of equations: (16), (17), (18), (19), and (20).51
   48
      We assume that  r < 1 + r for each r, in order for the ideal price index over this industry-r CES aggregate to
be well-defined.
   49
      The manipulation uses the fact that gross output of industry r in country j is equal to the world's total purchases
from this country-industry.
   50
      Aggregating (19) across sectors, and using (20), one obtains after some manipulations:
                                       S            S              J                  S                S
                                                        sr              r   r                              sr
                           wj Lj =           1-         j               ji Xi =              1-            j    Yjr .
                                     r =1         s=1             i=1                r =1          s=1

In words, the total wage payments to labor in country j are equal to total value-added across all sectors of j .
    51                                                                                   s
       Note that (16) comprises J × (J - 1) × S independent equations, since the shares ij need to sum to 1 for each
j -s pair. Also, (17) and (18) each comprise J × S equations. The market-clearing condition (19) comprises J × S - 1
independent equations, since one of these is redundant by Walras' Law. Finally, there are J trade balance conditions


                                                                       39
4.1.2    Mapping the Model to Data

How does the Caliendo and Parro (2015) model map to available data from World Input-Output
Tables (or WIOTs)? Remember from Section 2 (Figure 1) that a WIOT contains information on
intermediate purchases by industry s in country j from sector r in country i, which we denote by
 rs . It also contains information on the final-use expenditure in each country j on goods/services
Zij
                                                             r . Finally, the values of country-
originating from sector r in country i, which we denote by Fij
industry gross output Yjs and value-added Vjs , as well as country-specific trade deficits Dj , can
all be computed from the WIOT. It is then clear that the model offers transparent theoretical
counterparts to all cells in a WIOT.
    Furthermore, notice that the functional forms imposed by the model ­ namely Cobb-Douglas
technologies, CES aggregators over varieties, and Fréchet distributions of productivity ­ imply that
in line with the implicit assumption made in Section 2, the direct requirements ars    rs    s
                                                                                 ij = Zij /Yj are
constant and given by:

                                   J     rs      rs             rs                  s -    s
                                   k=1 Zkj      Zij             j           Tis (cs
                                                                                  i ij )
                         ars
                          ij   =                           =                                   .
                                     Yjs        J    rs
                                                k=1 Zkj
                                                                S   ts
                                                                t=1 j
                                                                           J    s s s -s
                                                                           k=1 Tk (ck kj )


In other words, the model not only provides a structural interpretation of all the entries of a WIOT,
but it also offers a microfoundation that rationalizes the type of matrix manipulations underlying the
use of Input-Output Analysis to compute the value-added content of trade flows (for more on this,
see Aichele and Heiland, 2018). This feature relates to the results in Burress (1994) demonstrating
a similar homeomorphism in a closed-economy, input-output model with Cobb-Douglas technology
and preferences.
    It is worth stressing, however, a significant limitation of the Caliendo and Parro (2015) model in
matching data from a WIOT. In particular, because production technologies and trade costs are
common for inputs and final goods, and because preferences only vary across countries on account
of sectoral spending shares, this framework imposes a unique market share of a given country i in
the purchases of output of a given sector r by a destination country j , regardless of whether that
output is designated for final-use or for use as an intermediate by other industries. In particular,
note that the model imposes that for a given country pair ij and for a given sector r:
                                                    r
                                                  Fij              rs
                                                                  Zij
                                                 J    r
                                                           =     J    rs
                                                 k=1 Fkj         k=1 Zkj


across all sectors s. To provide a concrete example, the model imposes that when buying finished
products in the automobile industry (e.g., assembled cars), U.S. consumers spend their income
across foreign sources of these finished goods in the same proportion in which U.S. auto makers buy
                                                                                                    s
in (20). On the other hand, the equilibrium seeks to solve for the following objects: the shares ij   (of which there are
J × (J - 1) × S independent shares), the unit production costs csj and  price indices P s
                                                                                        j (of which there are J × S each),
as well as the J - 1 wage levels wj 's (with one country's wage chosen as the numéraire) and the J × S expenditure
         s
levels Xj  's. Thus, we have as many equilibrium conditions as variables to be solved for.



                                                           40
parts and components across foreign suppliers. As explained in Section 2.2, although traditional
proportionality assumptions used to construct WIOTs tend to generate very similar if not identical
trade shares for final goods and for intermediate inputs, more recent and sophisticated WIOTs have
attempted to break these proportionality assumptions when constructing the tables. For instance,
one of the contributions of the WIOD project was precisely to bring additional information to bear
to distinguish imports across different end-use categories (see Dietzenbacher et al., 2013). Although
even in state-of-the-art datasets, differences in trade shares are likely to be of little quantitative
importance, we have argued in Section 2 that there are good reasons to believe (see de Gortari,
2019) that trade shares do vary significantly in the real world depending on what and where the
input is used for, and we expect future WIOTs to more effectively exploit firm-level import and
export data to document larger departures from the commonly-used proportionality assumptions.
    A simple way to sidestep this issue, which Caliendo and Parro (2015) follow, is to simply
                                                                                      s in
aggregate intermediate inputs and final-good purchases as we have done when defining Xj
                                          s in the model to an empirical trade share computed as
equation (19), and to map the trade share ij
        s /X s . As we shall see next, conditional on the structure of the model being the correct
simply Xij  j
one (and thus ignoring the existing deviations of the model from actual WIOTs), it turns out that
one can perform counterfactual analyses with knowledge of only these empirical trade shares, as well
as a set of model parameters that can be easily calibrated to make the model fit the data exactly
                                 rs and s ) or that can be estimated (namely, the vector of trade
(namely, the Cobb-Douglas shares j      j
elasticities s ).

4.1.3      Counterfactual Analysis: The Hat-Algebra Approach

As Caliendo and Parro (2015) note, the hat-algebra approach to counterfactual analyses devised
by Dekle et al. (2008) in a one-sector model works equally well in their multi-sector model. More
specifically, suppose one is interested in computing the counterfactual value of some key equilibrium
variables of the model (such as real income per capita) following a shock to some of the parameters
of the model. We denote the counterfactual value of a parameter or variable x with a prime (e.g.,
x ) and use hats to denote the relative change in these variables, i.e., x
                                                                         ^ = x /x. In practice, we will
                                                                                      s , though one
follow Caliendo and Parro (2015) in focusing on the effects of changes in trade costs ij
                                                                             s , or in the technology
could also use this approach to explore changes in the preference parameters j
parameters Tir . For simplicity, assume that deficits Dj are held constant in the counterfactuals one
studies.
    Consider first the effects of trade cost shocks on trade shares. Using the hat algebra notation, it
is easy to verify that (16) can be re-written

                                                            -r
                                          r
                                                   ^r
                                                   ci
                                                       r
                                                      ^ij
                                         ^ij   =                 .                                (21)
                                                    P^r
                                                      j

In words, the percentage response of trade shares is purely shaped by the trade elasticity parameters
r and by the percentage shifts of the various trade cost parameters, as well as the percentage

                                                   41
responses of the unit costs cr                        r
                             i , and the price index Pj . It is worth stressing that (21) is not an
approximation: it holds exactly for any shock to trade costs, regardless of the size of the shock.
Notice also, that the level of trade costs or the unobserved technological parameters Tir do not
appear directly in these equations (though in some cases, it may be necessary to have knowledge of
the initial level of trade costs to calibrate the relevant percentage change  r in these costs).
                                                                             ^ij
    The responses of the unit costs cr                      r
                                     i and the price index Pj to changes in the environment can be
obtained from simple manipulations of equations (17) and (18). More specifically, plugging in the
expressions for the trade shares from (16), we obtain:

                                                                             S               rs
                                                               S        rs                   j
                                         ^s
                                         c     ^j )1-
                                          j = (w
                                                               r =1
                                                                        j              ^r
                                                                                       P j        ,              (22)
                                                                             r=1

and
                                                     J                                 -1/r
                                                                             - r
                                         ^r
                                         P                r
                                                          ij     ^r
                                                                 c   r
                                           j   =                  i ^ij                       ,.                 (23)
                                                    i=1

    There are two key features of these two sets of equations. First, the only variables in levels
that appear in these equations are the trade shares prior to the shocks (which are observable), the
                                      rs (which are retrievable from the data in a WIOT), and
Cobb-Douglas technological parameters j
the trade elasticity parameters r .52 Second, it is clear from inspection that combining (22) and
                                                         ^ r as a function of these initial trade shares,
                                                  ^s and P
(23), one should be able to solve numerically for c                 j              j
as well as the percentage changes in wages (w  ^j ) and input trade costs ( r ). Plugging these resulting
                                                                           ^ij
                 ^ r into (21), this then allows us to express the changes in trade shares as a function
          ^s and P
values of cj        j
                  s and  rs ), the trade elasticity parameters  s , and the percentage changes in
of `observables' (ij    j
wages and trade costs.
    We finally discuss how to trace the response of wages, as well as gross output and value-added,
to the shocks. For that, we invoke the goods-market clearing conditions (19) and the trade balance
conditions (20). In the counterfactual equilibrium, these can be re-written as

                                         S          J
                              s                sr          r
                             Xj    =           j           ji       (Xir ) + j
                                                                             s
                                                                                ^j wj Lj + Dj )
                                                                               (w                                (24)
                                       r=1          i=1

and
                                     S                     S    J
                                              s                          s
                                             Xj      =                   ji        (Xis ) + Dj .                 (25)
                                    s=1                   s=1 i=1

            r
Noting that ij          = r ·  r , this system of equations delivers solutions for X s
                         ^ij                                                                              and w
                                                                                                              ^j as a
                              ij                                                    j
function of changes in trade costs, observable pre-shock trade shares, and Cobb-Douglas parameters
(as well as the elasticities).
                                                       rs                               rs            J
                                                                                                     rs
   52
     Specifically, if the model is not misspecified, j    can be obtained by computing j   = i=1 Zij    /Yjs for each
                                                                                               s
country j and each pair of industries rs. Similarly, the Cobb-Douglas consumer spending shares j , which will appear
                                                 s      J    s
in expression (24) below, can be obtained as j     = i=1 Fij   / (wj Lj + Dj ).



                                                                42
    In sum, equations (21)-(25) demonstrate that in order to compute counterfactuals that shock
trade costs while holding all other parameters constant, all that is required is the initial values of a
set of variables that are easily retrieved from a WIOT, as well as values for the trade elasticities s .
    In their paper, Caliendo and Parro (2015) back out a log-linear estimating equation that amounts
to running a triple-differences normalization of trade shares on a triple-differences normalization of
asymmetric trade barriers such as tariffs.53 This results in trade elasticities ranging from 0.37 for
`Other Transport' to 51.08 for `Petroleum'. With these at hand and the other calibrated parameters,
they quantify the consequences of NAFTA's tariff reductions. They find that although the model
predicts that these tariff reductions increased intra-bloc trade very substantially (by 118% for Mexico,
11% for Canada, and 41% for the U.S.), the real income implications of NAFTA are predicted to
be much more muted. In particular, according to the model, these tariff reductions increased real
income in Mexico and the United States (by 1.31% and 0.08%, respectively) but decreased real
income in Canada (by 0.06%).
    Despite these meager effects, it is important to emphasize that the gains from trade-cost
reductions in multi-sector models with intersectoral input linkages tend to be much larger than
those implied in one-sector trade models, and are also larger than in multi-sector models without
traded inputs (see Table 11 in Caliendo and Parro, 2015). This is further illustrated in Costinot and
Rodríguez-Clare (2014), who compute the `gains from trade' (or real income losses from moving to
autarky) for various countries and for various possible environments. It turns out that these gains
from trade are captured by the neat formula

                                                         S     S        rs s / s
                                                                        j
                                                                   s       j
                                            GTj = 1 -              jj              ,
                                                        s=1 r=1

                    s is the own trade share in sector j , s is the share of industry s in country
where remember that jj                                     j
j 's final consumption, and s is the sectoral trade elasticity. The new term j
                                                                             rs is the rs element of

the Leontief inverse matrix [I - j ]-1 , where I is the S × S identity matrix, and j is an S × S
                              rs . To illustrate the role of GVC linkages, it is particularly interesting
matrix with a typical element j
to compare the estimates in columns 2 and 4 of their Table 4.1, which correspond to the gains from
trade in a multi-sector competitive model with no input trade versus a multi-sector competitive
model with input trade (as in Caliendo and Parro, 2015). These values are plotted in Figure 5. As is
clear from the figure, gains from trade are higher for all countries in a world with intermediate input
linkages, and the differences are quite large for some countries (the blue dotted line corresponds to
a doubling of the gains from trade). On average, the gains from trade are 75% larger in a world of
intermediate input trade.54
  53
       More specifically, from equation (16), they obtain
                                             s  s s                     s  s s
                                             ij ki jk                   ij ki jk
                                       ln    s  s  s
                                                             = -s ln    s  s   s
                                                                                       .
                                             kj ik ji                   kj ik ji

   54
      Giri et al. (2021) provide a more extensive analysis of the effects of several sources of sectoral heterogeneity
for the size of the aggregate income gains from trade. An interesting observation in their work is that, because the


                                                              43
                                                                         Figure 5: Gains from Trade With and Without Input Trade

                                                   60%                                                                              SVN

                                                                                                                              BEL
                                                                                                                    HUN


                                                                                                                        AUT
                                                   50%                                                 SVK
  Gains from Trade With Intermediate Input Trade




                                                                                                                        DNK
                                                                                                             NLD
                                                   40%
                                                                                                             IRL
                                                                                              RUS            PRT
                                                                                            CZEPOL
                                                                                         RoW

                                                                                             CAN
                                                   30%
                                                                                             ROM
                                                                                 SWE
                                                                                          GRC
                                                                                   GBR
                                                                                   DEU
                                                                            TWN FIN
                                                                                 TUR
                                                   20%                     ESP MEX
                                                                            FRA
                                                                           ITA
                                                                          AUS

                                                               KOR IDN
                                                               CHN

                                                   10%           IND
                                                                USA
                                                               BRA
                                                         JPN




                                                   0%
                                                         0%                  10%                     20%                30%          40%        50%   60%

                                                                                            Gains from Trade Without Intermediate Input Trade




4.1.4                                                Applications and Extensions

The last ten years have seen an explosion of quantitative work in the international trade field, and
the awareness that intermediate input trade flows are a first-order feature of world trade, has led
many researchers to adopt the Caliendo and Parro (2015) framework as the basis for conducting
several types of counterfactual exercises. For instance, several authors have used the framework to
quantify the effects of trade wars, and more specifically, of the recent U.S-China trade tensions (see,
among others, Caceres et al., 2019; Beshkar and Lashkaripour, 2020; Ju et al., 2020; Charbonneau
and Landry, 2018; Wicht, 2019). Another salient application is Dhingra et al. (2017)'s analysis of
the aggregate income implications of UK's exit from the European Union (or Brexit). Other authors
have employed the Caliendo-Parro framework to study the consequences of specific preferential
trade agreements, such as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (Aichele et al., 2016),
or the U.S.-Japan Free Trade Agreement of 2019 (Walter, 2018). Furthermore, the framework has

relevant value of the trade elasticity in one-sector models should be lower than the sectoral trade elasticities estimated
by Caliendo and Parro (2015), it is not hard to generate cases in which the gains from trade are actually lower with
multiple sectors.


                                                                                                                   44
been employed to assess the economic consequences of the Belt and Road Initiative (De Soyres
et al., 2018), and to quantify the welfare implications for Japan of productivity growth in emerging
economies during the period 1995-2007 (Furusawa and Sugita, 2020). A more recent wave of work
has employed the framework (or slight variants of it) to study the economic consequences of the
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, largely interpreting the shock as a labor supply shock (see Bonadio
et al., 2020; Sforza and Steininger, 2020; Eppinger et al., 2020).
    Beyond these largely "off-the-shelf" applications of the Caliendo and Parro (2015) model, it
is worth discussing a bit more extensively a few more substantive extensions of their work. First,
several sets of authors have worked to relax some of the assumptions of the framework so as to
allow the model to more flexibly fit more of the cells in a WIOT. An early attempt is Alexander
(2017), who develops a two-sector extension of Caliendo and Parro (2015) that delivers distinct
trade shares for intermediate inputs and for final goods by allowing the technology parameter Tir
to differ depending on whether producers in sector r produce final goods for consumers or inputs
for other industries. More recently, Antràs and Chor (2019) have relaxed the assumption that
                    s are only country-pair and (selling) industry specific. Instead, they consider
iceberg trade costs ij
                                             rs when goods/services in sector r from country i are
the case in which trade costs are denoted by ij
                                                                 rF the trade costs incurred when
shipped to industry s in country j (and they similarly denote by ij
goods/services in sector r from country i are shipped to final consumers in country j ).55 Antràs
and Chor (2019) show that this simple extension allows the model to fully match all entries of a
WIOT, and they also demonstrate that in order to conduct counterfactuals, one does not need more
information than in the original Caliendo and Parro (2015), with `hat-algebra' equations similar
in nature to those developed in equations (21)-(25) above. This extension proves fruitful when
studying how different shocks to the world economy shape the average positioning (upstream or
downstream) of countries in GVCs.56
    A second salient line of extensions have sought to relax the strong functional forms built into
the Caliendo and Parro (2015) model. For instance, Caliendo et al. (2017) relax the Cobb-Douglas
assumptions on preferences in (13) and on technology in (14), and show that this delivers an
endogenous matrix of input-output or (direct requirement) links.57 Baqaee and Farhi (2019) go even
further and study nonparametric scenarios, while demonstrating that the gains from international
integration can be significantly larger when input substitutabilities are lower than the unit ones
imposed in Cobb-Douglas economies of the type studied by Caliendo and Parro (2015) (see also
Fally and Sayre, 2018).
    A third set of contributions has extended the model by introducing features from the economic
    55
       This variation could reflect, for instance, underlying heterogeneity in the characteristics (weight, value, etc.) of
the various inputs and final goods that are lumped together into a `sector' in a WIOT. Naturally, it might also be
driven by heterogeneity in the man-made trade barriers applied to these various industry subcategories. To the extent
that different sectors buy different types of inputs in a given sector in different proportions, they will effectively face
different trade costs, with the same being true of purchasers of final varieties.
    56
       See Wicht (2020) for an exploration of the consequences of this same extended framework for the gains from
trade.
    57
       Ju et al. (2020) further relax the assumption of Cobb-Douglas technologies built into (14).



                                                            45
geography literature, such as the existence of multiple regions across countries, and the introduction
of partial labor mobility across regions within countries. Two salient examples are Caliendo et al.
(2018), who explore the implications of productivity shocks for the U.S. economy in the presence of
interindustry and interregional intermediate input linkages, and Caliendo et al. (2019), who conduct
a general-equilibrium analysis of the China trade shock, thus connecting with the reduced-form
work of Autor et al. (2013) exploiting geographical variation across U.S. commuting zones in the
incidence of import competition from China.
   We close this section by briefly mentioning a few additional extensions of the Caliendo and
Parro (2015) framework, which have permitted the quantitative evaluation of counterfactuals
that were not feasible in the original model. Levchenko and Zhang (2016) present a dynamic
model that allows them to trace the implications for trade flows and for real income of growth in
sectoral total factor productivity in 72 countries and 19 sectors over 50 years. Di Giovanni et al.
(2014) apply the same framework to isolate the implications of trade integration with China for
other countries in the world economy. Caselli et al. (2020) incorporate sector-specific productivity
shocks into the framework and study the extent to which international specialization increases or
decreases the exposure of countries to productivity shocks in other countries. Morrow and Trefler
(2017) explore another interesting extension of the framework which allows for multiple factors of
production, and employ this framework to structurally study the implications of changes in trade
costs, endowments and technology for the factor content of trade. More recently, Bagwell et al. (2018)
have embedded a Caliendo and Parro (2015) in a model of international tariff negotiations, and
study the counterfactual implications of tariff negotiations in the absence of the most-favored-nation
clause. Finally, and even more recently, Rodríguez-Clare et al. (2020) have incorporated nominal
rigidities into the framework to study the effects of trade shocks (and the China shock, in particular)
on unemployment.

4.1.5   Critical Assessment

As the previous subsection has illustrated, the Caliendo and Parro (2015) model has quickly become
a staple in the toolkit of international trade economists. It is important to close this section, however,
with a critical assessment of the framework and its usage.
   First, although the hat-algebra approach to counterfactual analysis is a remarkably useful tool,
the minimal estimation requirements imposed by it are often overhyped. To be more precise,
practitioners of this approach will often praise how parsimonious this approach is as opposed to the
one followed in computable general equilibrium models, which instead requires estimating thousands
of parameters. An often glossed fact, however, is that the hat-algebra approach requires the model
to fit the data exactly, which amounts to calibrating all parameters of the models (or combinations
of them) to values that ensure that the model fits the data exactly. In particular, this requires one
to calibrate trade costs to infinity for the numerous country-sector to country-sector trade flows that
take a value of zero in the data. Whether one should describe this approach as being `parsimonious'
is thus not entirely clear-cut.


                                                   46
    Second, and more substantially, although quantitative work often requires strong assumptions
on functional forms, calibrating thousands of parameters to fit the data exactly ­ even when
those parameter values are implausible ­ can be problematic for the validity or reliability of the
counterfactual predictions of those models. The problem is similar to overfitting in regression
analysis leading to poor out-of-sample performance. As recently shown in Dingel and Tintelnot
(2020), this is a particularly severe problem in spatial environments in which the data the model is
fitted to contains a significant number of zeros, but note that even in the WIOD ­ a WIOT focusing
on relatively rich countries ­ the share of zeroes is 13.7% in the matrix of input-use coefficients
and 46.8% in the matrix of final-use column vectors.58 It is then perhaps not too surprising that,
as discussed in Kehoe et al. (2017), the performance of the Caliendo and Parro (2015) model in
predicting the actual bilateral trade implications of NAFTA ­ as measured by the change in trade
flows from 1991 to 2006 ­ is rather underwhelming. A natural counterargument is that `many things'
happened between 1991 and 2006, but the lack of `external' evidence supporting the out-of-sample
performance of these models remains problematic, and a clear area with room for improvement in
future research.

4.2     Multi-Stage Approaches
The framework in Caliendo and Parro (2015) and its various extensions provide an interesting lens
through which to interpret and quantify the implications of the rise in GVCs. The model features
intermediate input trade and intersectoral linkages, and thus can be interpreted to capture the
fact that global production takes places in "a series of stages with each stage adding value," to
paraphrase our definition of GVCs in the Introduction. But by adopting a roundabout structure,
the model essentially assumes that goods are produced via an endless sequence of steps, with each
stage using inputs from prior stages in an infinite loop. Furthermore, all producers in a given sector
use the same bundle of inputs in production, and operate the same technology in equation (14)
regardless of the stage of production in which that production takes place.
    In this section, we will turn attention to `macro' approaches that specify multi-stage production
technologies featuring a discrete number of vstages that add value in a pre-determined order. To
simplify matters, we will begin by outlining a model with just two stages and no use of inputs or
materials other than those proceeding from the prior stage, but will later incorporate the use of a
composite bundle of inputs at each stage, as in roundabout models.

4.2.1    Two-Stage Case

Let us consider a simple multi-country Ricardian model of trade with multi-stage production inspired
by the pioneering work of Yi (2003), and related to the frameworks in Yi (2010), Johnson and
Moxnes (2019), and Antràs and de Gortari (2020). The world economy consists of J  1 countries in
   58
     Furthermore, there are a lot of observations that have very small value, and can thus only be rationalized with
very large bilateral trade costs. As an example, the 25th percentile input-use coefficient value is 0.0001584 (compared
to a mean value of 35.2).



                                                          47
which consumers derive utility from consuming differentiated varieties in a single sector. Preferences
across varieties are CES, as in equation (15) in the Caliendo-Parro model reviewed in Section 4.1.
    On the technology side, the good is produced combining two stages that need to be performed
sequentially. Production in the initial stage n = 1 only uses labor, while the second stage of
production combines labor with the good produced in the first stage. More specifically, we write
these production technologies as follows:

                                                        1         1 s 1 s
                                                       yi (  ) = zi ( )li ( )                                         (26)

and
                                                                          2            1-2
                                               2 s       2     2               1
                                              yi (  ) = zi ( )li ( )          yi ( )            ,                     (27)
                                                                    n ( ) is labor productivity at
where 2  (0, 1) denotes the labor share in stage-2 production, and zi
stage n in country i. Firms are perfectly competitive and the optimal location (n)  {1, . . . , J } of
the different stages n  {1, 2} of the value chain is dictated by cost minimization.
    Countries differ in three key aspects: (i) their size, as reflected by the measure Li of `equipped'
labor available for production in each country i (labor is inelastically supplied and commands a
wage wi ), (ii) their geography, as captured by a J × J matrix of iceberg trade cost ij  1, and (iii)
                                                                               n ( ). Following the
their technological efficiency, as determined by the labor productivity terms zi
                                                 n ( ) is drawn independently (across goods and
lead of Eaton and Kortum (2002), we assume that zi
                                                                                                                       s
stages) from a Fréchet distribution with cumulative distribution function Fin (z ) = exp{-Tin z - }.
    Consider the lead firm problem of choosing the least-cost path of production to deliver consump-
tion good  to consumers in country j . Given equations (26) and (27), this amounts to choosing
locations   j   (1) and   j   (2) to minimize

                                                                          2                                 1-2
                              j           j
                                                                w j (2)                    w
                                                                                  j (1) j (2)       j (1)
                      c           (1) ,       (2) =    j (2)j
                                                                 2 ( )                  1                         .   (28)
                                                                zi                     zi ( )

Following the logic of Eaton and Kortum (2002), the hope is that the Fréchet assumption on the
                    1 ( ) and z 2 ( ) will deliver a convenient distribution for the equilibrium marginal
labor productivity zi          i
cost of production of active GVCs, which will then facilitate a description of the general equilibrium
of the model. Unfortunately, the minimum cost (28) associated with a given GVC path is not
characterized by a particularly tractable distribution. The reason for this is that, although taking the
                                                                              1 ( )1-2 and z 2 ( )2
minimum of a series of Fréchet draws is itself distributed Fréchet, and both zi             i
are Fréchet distributed, the product of Fréchet random variables is not Fréchet distributed.59 As
a result, papers adopting this lead firm approach to cost minimization with stage-specific Fréchet
productivity draws need to resort to numerical methods to approximate the solution of their models,
even when restricting the analysis to two-stage chains (see Yi, 2010; Johnson and Moxnes, 2019).
    Antràs and de Gortari (2020) instead develop two alternative approaches that all permit a sharp
  59
     Assuming a Leontief cost function (i.e., perfect complementarity) does not solve this problem because the sum of
Fréchet random variables is not distributed Fréchet either.



                                                                  48
and exact characterization of some of the features of the equilibrium, much as in the work of Eaton
and Kortum (2002) and Caliendo and Parro (2015). The first approach considers a decentralized
equilibrium in which stage-specific producers only minimize costs at their individual stage, and
they do so with incomplete information about the productivity of certain suppliers upstream from
them. More specifically, Antràs and de Gortari (2020) assume that firms know their productivity
and that of the producers immediately upstream from them (i.e., their tier-one suppliers) when they
commit to sourcing from a particular supplier, but they do not know the precise productivity of their
suppliers' suppliers (i.e., tier-two suppliers, tier-three suppliers, and so on). Similarly, consumers (or
retailers procuring goods on their behalf) know the productivity of the final-good producers that
supply them goods, but not of the final-good producers' suppliers, and thus make purchase decision
before knowing the actual minimum cost at which they will able to buy these goods.60
    The second approach to gain tractability consists in simply treating the overall (i.e., chain-level)
unit cost of production of a GVC flowing through a sequence of countries as a draw from a Fréchet
random variable with a location parameter that is a function of the states of technology and wage
levels of all countries involved in that GVC, as well as of the trade costs incurred in that chain.61
To motivate this assumption, consider a given production path                    = { (1) , (2)}  J 2 , where J is
the set of countries in the world. Its associated chain-level production cost is naturally a function
of trade costs, composite factor costs and the state of technology of the various countries involved
in the chain. Yet, two chains flowing across the same countries in the exact same order may not
achieve the same overall productivity due to (unmodeled) idiosyncratic factors, such as compatibility
problems, production delays, or simple mistakes.
    More formally, and building on the cost function in (28), Antràs and de Gortari (2020) assume
that the overall productivity of a given chain              = { (1) , (2)} is characterized by

                                 1-2             2                                  1-2           2
                 Pr      1
                        zi ( )           2
                                        zi ( )        z = exp -z - T 1
                                                                     (1)                   T2
                                                                                            (2)        ,            (29)

                                1 ( )            1-2    2 ( )    2
which amounts to assuming that zi                      zi            is distributed Fréchet with a shape parameter
given by , and a location parameter that is a function of the states of technology in all countries
                                            1-2             2
in the chain, as captured by T 1
                               (1)                   T2
                                                      (2)       . A direct implication of this assumption is that
the unit cost associated with serving consumers in a given country j via a given chain                           is also
distributed Fréchet, which then allows one to readily invoke some key results from Eaton and
Kortum (2002) to characterize equilibrium prices and the relative prevalence of different GVCs.
    First, it is straightforward to verify that the share of country j 's income spent on final goods
   60
      With two stages (N = 2), this is the only relevant source of incomplete information, but as mentioned below,
Antràs and de Gortari (2020) show that incomplete information in upstream stages allows them to easily generalize
their framework to an N > 2 stage environment.
   61
      Antràs and de Gortari (2020) also consider yet a third alternative decentralized approach inspired by the work of
Oberfield (2018), in which technology is again specified at the stage level (rather than at the chain level), but in which
productivity is buyer-seller specific. By appropriate choice of functional forms,they build on Oberfield (2018) to show
that this formulation can also deliver a Fréchet distribution of productivity at the chain level.




                                                            49
produced under a particular GVC path                             J 2 is given by

                                n                  n                  -   1-2               2                  2                  -
                         T1
                          (1)           w   (1)            (1) (2)               × T2
                                                                                    (2)             w   (2)              (2)j
           j   =                                                               1-2                                                        ,        (30)
                                    n                   n                 -                     2                    2                -
                           T1
                            (1)             w     (1)          (1) (2)               ×   T2
                                                                                          (2)           w     (2)             (2)j
                   J 2

and in addition, the exact ideal price index Pj in country j is given by
                                                                                                                                      -1/
                                n                   n                 -    1-2              2                   2                 -
 Pj =                    T1
                          (1)           w   (1)             (1) (2)              × T2
                                                                                    (2)             w   (2)                (2)j
                                                                                                                                                , (31)
               J 2


where  is a constant that depends only on  and .62
   A few observations regarding equations (30) and (31) are in order. First, these equations are
closely related to those in the Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Caliendo and Parro (2015) frameworks.
In fact, when N = 1, we necessarily have 2 = 1, and (30) and (31) reduce to equations (16) and
(18) in our overview of the Caliendo and Parro (2015) model. Second, and quite intuitively, GVCs
that involve countries with higher states of technology Ti or lower labor costs wi will tend to feature
disproportionately in production paths leading to consumption in j . Third, high trade costs penalize
the participation of countries in GVCs, but their effect is more subtle than in models without
multi-stage production. Notice, in particular, that the effect of trade costs `compounds': if all
trade costs in a particular GVC increase by 10%, this GVC's spending share decreases by  (2 - 2 )
percent, rather than  in the roundabout model (see Yi, 2010, for more on this magnification
effect). Another implication of this compounding effect is that, in choosing their optimal path of
production, firms will be more concerned about reducing trade costs in relatively downstream stages
than in relatively upstream stages, as reflected in the higher exponent for                                         (2)j   than for           (1) (2)   in
equation (30). As Antràs and de Gortari (2020) demonstrate, this feature of the model generates a
centrality-downstreamness nexus by which, ceteris paribus, relatively more central countries will
tend to gain comparative advantage and specialize in relatively downstream stages, a nexus for
which they provide suggestive evidence.
   Before completing the discussion of the equilibrium and implications of quantitative models with
multi-stage production, let us briefly illustrate how the results above easily extend to a multi-stage
environment.

4.2.2      Equilibrium with Multiple Stages

The bulk of `macro' quantitative work on GVCs has focused on models of the type developed above
with only two stages. There are various reasons for this focus (more on this below), but one of
them is that in the absence of a tractable framework to pin down the relative prevalence of various
GVCs, estimating models with more than two stages is highly complex. One of the advantages of
  62
       For the price index to be well defined, one needs to impose  - 1 < .



                                                                          50
the formulation of technology in Antràs and de Gortari (2020) is that their equilibrium equations
naturally extend to an environment with an arbitrary number of stages N . More specifically, by
specifying a Fréchet distribution of productivity at the chain level, or by making suitable assumptions
about incomplete information regarding upstream suppliers, Antràs and de Gortari (2020) find
that the share of country j 's spending on final goods produced under a particular GVC path
  = { (1) , (2) , ..., (N )}  J N is given by

              N -1            n                  n                    -    n              N                   N              -
                       Tn
                        (n)           w   (n)             (n) (n+1)            × TN
                                                                                  (N )             w   (N )          (N )j
              n=1
    j   =                                                                      n
                                                                                                                                     , (32)
                N -1              n                    n                   -                   N                  N              -
                         Tn
                          (n)             w     (n)           (n) (n+1)            ×   TN
                                                                                        (N )           w   (N )          (N )j
            J N n=1

where n continues to denote the labor share in stage n, and where n is defined as n 
  N
        (1 - m ). Notice that GVC shares continue to feature a magnified effect of trade costs
m=n+1
as well as an increasing trade-cost elasticity as one moves to more and more downstream stages
(since n is increasing in n). The price index Pj in country j is again a simple power function of the
denominator in (32), exactly as in equation (31).
    To solve for equilibrium wages, notice that for all GVCs, stage-n value added (or labor income)
accounts for a share n n of the value of the finished good emanating from that GVC. Furthermore,
total spending in any country j is given by wj Lj , and the share of that spending by j going to GVCs in
which country i is in position n is given by Pr (n
                                                 i , j) =                          n    j , where n
                                                                                                  i =              J N | (n) = i
                                                                                   i
and     j   is given in equation (32). It thus follows that the equilibrium wage vector is determined by
the solution of the following system of equations

                                      wi L i =                  n n × Pr (n
                                                                          i , j ) × wj L j .                                          (33)
                                                      j J nN


The system of equations is nonlinear because Pr (n
                                                 i , j ) is a nonlinear function of wages themselves,
and of the vector P , which is in turn a function of the vector of wages w. When N = 1, we have
                                             - 1
that N N = 1 and Pr (n
                     i , j ) = ij = (ij ci )  Ti /                             (kj ck k )- Tk
                                                                                            1 . The equilibrium then reduces
                                                                           k
to the general equilibrium in Eaton and Kortum (2002). Antràs and de Gortari (2020) derive a set
of sufficient conditions that ensure that this solution exists and is unique for an arbitrary number of
stages N .
    Although the equilibrium is thus straightforward to compute, it is worth pointing out that with
J country and N stages, there will be J N active value chains for each destination country j . Hence,
although the model can we analyzed for an arbitrary number of stages, in empirical applications,
computational constraints are still likely to constrain how large N (or J ) can be. We will return to
related computational constraints in Section 5.




                                                                      51
4.2.3    Gains from Trade

To study the real income implications of trade in this framework, it is useful to first consider a
`purely-domestic' value chain that performs all stages in a given country j to serve consumers in
the same country j . Let us denote this domestic chain by j = (j, j, ..., j ). Invoking equation (32),
plugging the expression for the price index Pj =  (j )-1/ , and rearranging, we find
                                                                                        1/
                                                                   N          n n
                                                           -1           Tjn
                              wj                 N
                                                       n         n=1
                                                                                        
                                 =  (jj )                                                    .                  (34)
                                                 n=1
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                              Pj                                     j j                



This formula is analogous to the one that applies in the Eaton and Kortum (2002) framework and
the wider class of models studied by Arkolakis et al. (2012). An important difference, however,
is that j j is not the aggregate share of spending on domestic intermediate or final goods (which
are readily available in input-output datasets), but rather the share of spending on goods that are
produced entirely through domestic supply chains. As a result, the sufficient statistic approach
advocated by Arkolakis et al. (2012) is not feasible in this setting, and one needs to estimate
the model structurally to back out j j from available data. For a similar reason, the hat algebra
approach to counterfactual analysis proposed by Dekle et al. (2008) and implemented by Caliendo
and Parro (2015) is not feasible in a multi-stage setting.
    We will provide more details on the mapping between multi-stage models and data in the next
subsection, but let us briefly overview some qualitative implications of the model for the aggregate
income implications of trade shocks. First, notice that the share of spending j j on purely domestic
chains will, other things equal, be lower, the larger is the number of stages, and thus the gains
from trade emanating from multi-stage models are expected to be larger on this account. This
result is similar to the one derived by Melitz and Redding (2014b) in an Armington framework
with sequential production, and also bears some resemblance to Ossa (2015)'s argument that the
gains from trade can be significantly larger in multi-sector models, with stages here playing the
role of sectors in Ossa's framework.63 In their estimated model, Antràs and de Gortari (2020)
find that the gains from trade (i.e., the income losses from reverting to autarky) obtained in their
model are much larger when N = 2 than those obtained from a version of their model without
multiple stages (i.e., N = 1). These values are plotted in Figure 6 for the same set of countries
considered by Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014) and already plotted in Figure 5. As is evident
   63
      For instance, Antràs and de Gortari (2020) show that if all countries are symmetric in all respects, and ij = 
for i = j and ij = 1 for i = j , then the losses of reverting to autarky are given by

                                                 N                            -1/

                                     ^j = 1 -                          -n
                                     G                 1 + (J - 1)                  .
                                                n=1

The gains from trade may thus become unboundedly large as production is sliced into more and more stages of
production, i.e., limN  G^ j = 1. Furthermore, it is straightforward to pick values for the value-added shares n such
that the value-added to gross output ratio remains bounded even when N  .



                                                           52
from the figure, multi-stage production increase the gains from trade in all countries in a world with
intermediate input linkages, and the differences are quite large for most countries (the blue dotted
line corresponds to a doubling of the gains from trade). On average, the gains from trade are 72%
larger in a world with multi-stage production.

                                                                Figure 6: Gains from Trade With and Without Multi-Stage Production

                                                     30%



                                                                                                                   SVK
                                                     25%
                                                                                                                          SVN
 Gains from Trade With MultiStage Production (N=2)




                                                                                                          BRA
                                                                                                        HUN

                                                                                                       CZE
                                                     20%                                                     IRL




                                                                                                BEL

                                                     15%
                                                                                        POL
                                                                                    DNKAUT

                                                                               ROM
                                                                              FIN         NLD
                                                                                  KOR
                                                                                PRT
                                                                                SWE
                                                                                      RoW
                                                     10%                    GRC DEUTWN

                                                                           TURESP
                                                                             FRA
                                                                           ITA
                                                                           GBR
                                                                            MEX
                                                                             CAN
                                                                      CHN RUS
                                                                       JPN
                                                                   IDN
                                                     5%              IND
                                                                    AUS

                                                                 USA




                                                     0%
                                                           0%                   5%                    10%                  15%   20%          25%   30%

                                                                                       Gains from Trade Without MultiStage Production (N=1)




4.2.4                                                 Extensions and Mapping to Data

Our discussion so far has been centered on a stylized model of multi-stage production, in which
production processes are purely sequential. In this section, we briefly demonstrate the flexibility
and applicability of this type of framework, and we show how they can easily nest both the Eaton
and Kortum (2002) and Caliendo and Parro (2015) models. In the process, we also show how to
map these multi-stage models to the observable data points contained in a WIOT.
                                            A first straightforward extension is to allow production at each stage to use both `equipped labor'
as well as a bundle of intermediates or materials. Following Eaton and Kortum (2002), assume
that this bundle is the same CES aggregator as in preferences. In other words, part of final-good


                                                                                                                     53
production is not absorbed by consumers, but rather by firms that use those goods as a bundle of
materials. Letting the cost ci of the composite factor in country i be captured by a Cobb-Douglas
aggregator, we have ci = (wi ) (Pi )1- , where Pi is the ideal price index associated with preferences.
As shown by Antràs and de Gortari (2020), all equilibrium equations ­ (30) through (33) ­ continue
to hold with minor modifications, and the same is true about expression (34) for the gains from
trade. Furthermore, when N = 1 the model reduces exactly to the Eaton and Kortum (2002) model.
   How does one map this strict multi-stage generalization of the Eaton and Kortum (2002)
model to the data? Although the `GVC trade shares' in (30) are not observable in the data, it is
straightforward to manipulate them to obtain closed-form expressions for various entries of a WIOT
(when the data is collapsed into a single sector). Let us illustrate this for the case of the final-use
vector. Notice that for final goods to flow from a given source country i to a given destination
country j , it must be the case that country i is in position N in a chain serving consumers in country
j . Defining the set of GVCs flowing through i at position n by n    N -1 , the overall share of
                                                                i  J
spending in country j in goods assembled in country i (i.e., in GVCs in which country i produces
stage N ) can be expressed as

                     N -1          n                  n                     -     n           N
                            Tn
                             (n)            c   (n)          (n) (n+1)                × TiN       ((ci )N ij )-
                N    n=1
         F      i
         ij =                                                                                                     ,   (35)
                                                                  j

where j is the denominator in equation (32). It then follows that final-good trade flows between
                                                   F × w L (trade imbalances are ignored here but
any two countries i and j are then simply given by ij   j j
would be straightforward to incorporate). Computing intermediate input flows based on the `GVC
trade shares' in (30) is a bit more tedious, since one needs to take into account both vertical trade
between two contiguous stages, but also intermediate input trade flows associated with the use of
the bundle of inputs at each stage. Yet, as Antràs and de Gortari (2020) show, it is straightforward
to obtain closed-form expressions for intermediate-input trade flows between any two countries i
and j . With these expressions at hand, it then becomes feasible to estimate the key parameters
of the model via maximum likelihood by minimizing the distance between various moments of a
WIOT and their model counterparts.
   The above framework can also be easily extended to a multi-industry environment that nests
the Caliendo and Parro (2015) model. To see this, assume there are S industries indexed by s  S ,
with preferences given in (13), with sector specific Fréchet parameters s , and with the cost of the
bundle of labor and inputs used by country j in sector s given by

                                                          S      rs   S           rs
                                               1-                j                i
                                   cs
                                    j   =   s
                                            j wj
                                                          r =1
                                                                            Pjr        ,
                                                                      r=1

as in equation (17) in the previous section. In such a case, letting N = 1, all equilibrium equations
reduce exactly to the roundabout model of GVCs in Caliendo and Parro (2015). As shown in Antràs
and de Gortari (2020) and de Gortari (2019), it is also straightforward to develop extensions of the


                                                             54
framework that add multiple stages to certain variants of the Caliendo and Parro (2015) framework,
such as those in Alexander (2017) and Antràs and Chor (2019), which allow certain parameters
to be a function of the identity of producing country-industry pair, but also of the consuming
country-industry pair.64 A different matter is the ease with which these multi-industry extensions
can be taken to the data, an issue we will address shortly.
    We close this section by briefly mentioning some additional recent applications of quantifiable
multi-stage models of GVCs. Beyond the work of Yi (2003, 2010), and Johnson and Moxnes (2019)
mentioned above, another noteworthy recent contribution is Fally and Hillberry (2018). The main
distinguishing feature of their framework is that they model production processes with a continuum
of stages, and they consider the determination of the optimal set of stages that are carried out
within firms and within countries. As in other papers in this literature, they use their model to
quantify the importance of sequential production for the elasticity of trade flows to changes in trade
frictions and for the aggregate income implications of changes in trade costs.
    Other authors have recently applied or extended the framework in Antràs and de Gortari
(2020) in interesting directions. Zhou (2020) uses a variant of the model to study the quantitative
implications of the U.S.-China trade war, leveraging the fact that multi-stage frameworks allow for
an independent analysis of the consequences of levying tariffs on inputs and on final goods. Lee and
Yi (2018) develop a multi-factor extension of the same framework to study the interplay between
the rise of GVCs and increased wage inequality. Finally, Yang (2018) incorporates within-country
geography into the model to study the role of infrastructure in shaping the participation of countries
in GVCs.

4.2.5    Critical Assessment

A feature of multi-stage models of GVCs that has hindered their widespread use is the fact that they
are much harder to apply than roundabout models. In particular, even when the use of functional
form assumptions dramatically simplifies the characterization of the equilibrium of the model, the
fact that the hat-algebra approach cannot be used in this setting implies that the demands on
estimation are much larger for this line of models. For instance, although a multi-sector model with
multi-stage production can easily be written and solved, such a model is much harder to estimate
because it requires estimating hundreds of parameters associated with technological parameters
that can no longer be easily extracted from WIOTs. Having said this, and as we have argued in
Section 4.1.5, the claim that roundabout models only require estimating a handful of parameters is
somewhat disingenuous, as the hat-algebra approach essentially boils down to calibrating thousands
of parameters to fit the data exactly. Naturally, this may lead one to rely too strongly on functional
forms, which in turn can create problems of overfitting. We envision a future in which the estimation
of macro models of GVCs will result in a more fruitful combination of calibration and estimation.

  64
    de Gortari (2019) interprets these more flexible versions of the model as capturing specialized or customized
inputs along GVCs.



                                                       55
5     Modeling GVCs: Micro Approaches
As we argued in Section 3, world trade flows are dominated by a small number of large firms that
actively participate in GVCs and that capture large market shares in their sector's exports and
imports. In more plain words, it is not countries or `country-sectors' that participate in GVCs, but
it is rather individual firms in those country-sectors that choose to do so. In this section we will
review a body of work that has shed light on the decisions firms face over whether to participate in
GVCs, and when designing their optimal GVC strategies.
    We will proceed as follows. Initially, in Section 5.1, we will focus on decentralized frameworks in
which firms make decisions only pertaining to the specific stages of GVCs in which they produce. A
natural starting point is a model of selection into exporting in which an intermediate-input producer
decides to participate in GVCs by exporting its output to foreign final-good producers instead of
only providing inputs to domestic final-good producers. As will become apparent, under somewhat
restrictive assumptions, this model of forward GVC participation will prove to be isomorphic to the
seminal Melitz (2003) model of exporting. When these assumptions are relaxed, the fact that the
exported goods are intermediate inputs rather than final goods carries significant implications. Next,
we will consider a model of backward GVC participation, along the lines of Antràs et al. (2017), in
which final-good producers select into importing, thus seeking parts and components from foreign
suppliers rather than from local ones. Such a simple framework raises technical challenges and also
generates a rich set of distinct implications relative to simple models of selection into exporting.
Within the realm of decentralized models, we will finally consider frameworks in which both buyers
and sellers make active participation decisions, thus connecting with the literature on firm-to-firm
connections in trade.
    In Section 5.2, we next turn to an overview of theoretical frameworks that consider the problem
of a lead firm who chooses optimally the location of production of all the stages in a value chain,
including stages that this (lead) entity does not directly participate in. This is motivated by the
emphasis in the literature on the role of large multinationals in shaping the geography of GVCs.
These lead-firm approaches raise novel technical hurdles, which the literature has circumvented in a
variety of ways, as we outline in that section.
    Finally, we close in Section 5.3 with an overview of work highlighting the `relational nature' of
GVCs, which is associated with a body of work emphasizing the distinctive role of search frictions,
customized production and contractual insecurity in the recent rise of GVCs. This in turn opens
the door for a succinct overview on the firm boundary and relational contracting decisions faced by
agents participating in GVCs.

5.1     GVC Participation: Decentralized Approaches

5.1.1    Selection into Forward GVC Participation

Environment and Assumptions Consider a world consisting of J countries where consumers
have preferences over a continuum of differentiated products. As in the models in section 4,

                                                  56
preferences are CES and given by

                                                                      /( -1)
                               QF
                                j =
                                                 F
                                                qj ( )(-1)/ d                                       (36)
                                           F
                                           j



in country j , where  > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across varieties, and F
                                                                                  j is the set of
consumption varieties available in country j . The resulting demand for variety  in country j is
 F ( ) = E P  -1 pF ( )- , where E is total spending in country j , pF ( ) is the price of variety  ,
qj        j j     j               j                                  j
and Pj is the ideal price index associated with (36):

                                                                1/(1- )
                                                      1-
                                 Pj =           pF
                                                 j ( )   d                .                         (37)
                                            j


   Consider next the supply side of the model. The only factor of production is equipped labor,
which individuals in each country i supply inelastically in an amount Li . Each final-good variety
 is produced by a single firm: the market structure in this final-good sector is characterized by
monopolistic competition, and there is free entry into the industry. Production of final-good varieties
employs `equipped labor' to assemble a bundle of intermediates, much as in the `macro' models
reviewed in Section 4. The main novel feature here is that technologies will feature increasing
returns to scale. More specifically, in order to produce, firms need to incur a fixed overhead cost
equal to fiF units of labor. Unit costs in final-good production are in turn given by

                                                   1     1-       
                                     cF
                                      i ( ) =    F
                                                        wi  PiI       ,                             (38)
                                                zi (  )

where PiI is the price index associated with the bundle of intermediates used in production, and is
analogous to expression (17) in the Caliendo and Parro (2015) framework in Section 4. We assume
that the bundle of inputs is a CES aggregator of a continuum of inputs, or

                                                                  /(-1)
                                                     (-1)/
                                PiI =           pI
                                                 i( )      d                  ,                     (39)
                                           ~i
                                           


where ~ i is the set of input varieties available in country i, pI ( ) is the price paid in country i for
                                                                 i
input   , and  governs the degree of substitutability across inputs. To simplify matters we will
                                                                                 F ( ) = z F and in
focus on the case in which all final-good producers share the same productivity zi        i
which trade costs on final goods across countries are purely ad valorem in nature and denoted by
F when shipping from i to j .
ij
   Intermediate inputs are producing with only labor under a technology given by

                                        fiI + qi
                                               I        I
                                                 ( ) = zi     I
                                                          ( )li ( )                                 (40)

where fiI is an overhead cost incurred by suppliers and zi
                                                         I ( ) is labor productivity in input

production. This upstream sector is also monopolistically competitive and there is free entry into

                                                    57
the sector. Firms face an additional fixed cost of entry fie incurred before their productivity level
 I ( ) is drawn from some distribution G z I . Intermediate inputs are tradeable across countries
zi
                              I , but in addition, firms exporting inputs need to incur a fixed cost
and incur iceberg trade costs ij
 X in order to export them from country i to market j . This last fixed cost will generate selection
fij
into exporting and thus into forward GVC participation.

Equilibrium with Nontradable Final Goods It is informative to consider first the case in
                                                               F  ). Consider the decisions of
which final goods are prohibitively to trade across countries (ij
final-good producers in a given country j . Invoking constant-markup pricing, it is easy to verify
that their profits are given by

                                               -1                   1-   -( -1)
                                  F
                                  j    F
                                    = zj             (wj ) PjI                     F
                                                                                  Bj       F
                                                                                     - wj fj ,                 (41)

                             1-
       F =
where Bj        1
                
                       
                       -1         wj Lj Pj-1 , and where we have imposed that, given free entry in both the
downstream and upstream sectors, all income in all economies is labor income. Given the definition
of the price index in (37) and the fact that firms are homogeneous, we obtain a simple expression
for the measure of active final-good producers in country j :

                                                         F       Lj
                                                        Nj =      F
                                                                    .
                                                                 fj

                         F producers will allocate a share 1 -  of their operating costs to purchasing
Note that each of these Nj
intermediate inputs. Because unit costs are a constant multiple of operating profits, and the latter
                        F by free entry, we can conclude that intermediate input demand in country
are brought down to wj fj
j is given by
                                                                                -1
                          PjI Mj = Nj
                                    F                        F
                                      × ( - 1) (1 -  ) × wj fj =                   (1 -  ) wj Lj ,             (42)
                                                                                
and is thus a simple multiple of aggregate income in market j .
     We can now turn to the problem of an intermediate producer in country j . Notice that an
intermediate input producer based in i selling to j will face a demand for the variety                     given by
                                  -1          -
 I
qj   ( ) =   PjI Mj   ×     PjI        (pj ( ))    . The profits obtained by this producer when exporting in
country j are thus given by
                                                          -1             1-
                                       I   I    I               I              I       X
                                       ij zi = zi               ij wi         Bj - wi fij ,                    (43)

                                          1-                   -1
       I =       -1           1
where Bj              (1 -  )          -1         wj Lj PjI         . It is then clear that behavior of intermediate
input producers will be identical to that in the Melitz (2003) framework. In particular, only
                                      I z
those firms from i with productivity zi ~iI will find it optimal to export to country j and thus

forward-participate in GVCs in that destination country. This is in line with the empirical fact that
exporters (regardless of whether they are final-good or intermediate-input producers) tend to be
more productive than non-exporters (see Section 3.1). This selection into exporting will operate

                                                               58
independently across countries, that is, the decision to export to a given destination j is not affected
by this same firm's decisions in other markets. This feature greatly simplifies the construction of the
general-equilibrium of the model, particularly when one assumes that the distribution G z I from
which intermediate input producers draw their productivity is Pareto in all countries (see Chaney,
2008; Helpman et al., 2008).
   In sum, when final-goods are nontradable, a model of forward GVC participation essentially
reduces to a Melitz-framework of selection to exporting. Nevertheless, when final-goods are
nontradable, the value added embodied in the exported intermediate inputs does not cross two
borders, so it is not entirely clear that one should consider this a model of GVC participation. With
that in mind, we next consider the case in which final goods are tradable.

Equilibrium with Tradable Final Goods Consider now the case in which trade costs associated
with final goods are bounded. Notice first that conditional on a demand for intermediate inputs
PjI Mj in country j , the behavior of individual intermediate input producers will be identical to that
in the case with nontradable final goods. There will thus be again selection into GVC participation
and entry decisions will be independent market-by-market. The main complication that arises once
final goods are tradable is that the demand for intermediate inputs is harder to determine because it
is not only a function of aggregate income in j , but also of aggregate income in other countries where
final-good exporters sell. More specifically, profits for final-good producers in (41) now become

                                     -1               1-    -( -1)
                      F
                      j    F
                        = zj              (wj ) PjI                       F F
                                                                          jk          F
                                                                             Bk - wj fj ,
                                                                     kJ


where J denotes the set of countries in the world, as in previous sections (given the absence of
fixed costs of exporting, final-good producers export everywhere). Imposing free entry and noting
                          1-
      F =
that Bj         1
                
                     
                     -1        wj Lj Pj-1 , produces a system of J equations that allows to solve for the
                                 F as a function of the vector of wages (w ), market sizes (L )
measure of final-good producers Nj                                        j                  j
and parameters. Further imposing labor market clearing, allows one to solve for the vector of wages
in terms of the parameters of the model. Noting that PjI Mj = Nj
                                                               F × ( - 1) (1 -  ) × w f F , one
                                                                                     j j
can then compute intermediate input demand in country j . Because exported intermediate inputs
get re-exported by final-good producers, this models does produce forward GVC participation in a
strict sense.
   The computation of this equilibrium is, however, involved and thus hard to characterize. Following
Melitz (2003), it is useful to consider a world in which all J countries are symmetric and there is
a unique level of final-good trade costs  F between country-pairs. In that case, Bj
                                                                                  F = B for all
                                                                                       F
j  J , and it is easy to verify that intermediate input demand is given by the same expression as
(42) above, although real wages are naturally higher in this variant of the model than in the one in
which final goods are tradeable.




                                                       59
5.1.2     Selection into Backward GVC Participation

Environment and Assumptions We next turn to outlining a model of backward GVC participa-
tion which builds on the work of Antràs et al. (2017).65 The framework again features a final-good
(or downstream) sector and an intermediate-input (or upstream) sector. Consumer preferences over
manufacturing goods are as in the forward GVC participation framework: individuals value the
consumption of differentiated varieties according to QF
                                                      j in (36).
                                                                 66

    Technology and market structure in the final-good sector is also largely analogous to that
                                        F of final-good producers in each country j  J , each
previous model. There exists a measure Nj
producing a distinct differentiated variety  , and the industry is characterized by monopolistic
competition and there is free entry into the industry. Furthermore, production combines labor and
intermediate inputs exactly as in the cost function in (38) and firms need to incur an overhead cost
of production of fiF units of country i's labor before any production can occur. Unlike in the above
model of forward GVC participation, we will now focus attention on a case in which labor efficiency
 F in downstream production is heterogeneous across producers and drawn from a continuous
zi
                            F
cumulative distribution Gi zi           after incurring a fixed cost of entry equal to fie units of labor. As in
                                                                   F after paying the entry cost, but
Melitz (2003), final-good producers only learn their productivity zi
are assumed to choose their sourcing strategy with knowledge of that core productivity level. The
main novel assumption in this framework is that a firm from country i only acquires the capability
                                                                                              M
to import intermediates inputs from a source country j after incurring a fixed cost equal to fij
                                           M ). We denote by J z F
units of labor in country i (at a cost wi fij                                           J the set of countries for
                                                              i i
which a firm based in i with productivity             F
                                                     zi   has paid the associated fixed cost of offshoring, and
often refer to Ji      F
                      zi    as the sourcing strategy of a firm.
    To emphasize the implications of selecting into importing, and thus of backward GVC partici-
pation, we follow Antràs et al. (2017) in assuming that the intermediate input sector is perfectly
competitive with labor productivity differences across inputs and countries specified as in Eaton and
Kortum (2002). More specifically, we adopt the technology in equation (40), but we set overhead
costs fiI = 0 and assume that the value of zi
                                            I for a given location i is drawn (independently across

locations and inputs) from a Fréchet distribution, Fi (z ) = exp{-Ti z - }. Beyond the fixed cost
importers need to incur to purchase inputs from a given country, shipping intermediate inputs across
                                           I.
countries also involves iceberg trade cost ij

Equilibrium with Nontradable Final Goods As in our discussion of the model of forward
GVC participation, it again proves useful to first solve the model for the case in which final goods
are prohibitively costly to trade across borders. As shown by Antràs et al. (2017), the Eaton-Kortum
   65
      We will refrain from reviewing the vast literature on offshoring and global sourcing, which includes the work of
Feenstra and Hanson (1996), Antràs et al. (2006), and Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008), among many others.
This work is surveyed in Chapter 2 of the 4th volume of this Handbook (Antràs and Yeaple, 2014).
   66
      A significant difference is that tackling the general equilibrium of this type of models is computationally difficult,
so Antràs et al. (2017) introduce an additional (non-manufacturing) sector that captures a large enough (constant)
share of the economy's spending to ensure that the manufacturing sector faces a perfectly elastic supply of labor.



                                                            60
structure of the intermediate input market implies that conditional on a given global sourcing
             F , the share of input purchases sourced from any country j by a firm from i with
strategy Ji zi
              F is given by
productivity zi
                                                                 -
                                                          Iw
                                                       Tj ij j
                                        F
                                  ij   zi    =                         -
                                                                           ,                                   (44)
                                                                Iw
                                                             Tk ij k
                                                       F
                                                 kJi (zi )
          F , and by 
if j  Ji zi               F          = 0 if j       F . The numerator T ( w )- in equation
                                              / Ji zi
                      ij zi                                            j ij j
(44) captures the sourcing potential of country j from the point of view of firms in i, while the
denominator in this expression, which equals the sum of sourcing potentials of the countries included
in a firm's sourcing strategy, summarizes the sourcing capability of that firm. We next note that the
                                                                       F can be expressed as
price index for intermediate inputs faced by a firm with productivity zi
                                                                       -1/
                                                                      - 
                               PiI zi
                                    F
                                      =                       I
                                                           Tk ij wk            ,                               (45)
                                            
                                                                       
                                                    F
                                               kJi zi( )

                                                           F
where  is a constant. Adding a new location to the set Ji zi               naturally increases the sourcing
capability of the firm, and the increased competition across supplying sources leads to a lower price
index paid by the firm for the bundle of inputs. Invoking constant-markup pricing and the price
index for inputs in (45), one can then express the firm's profits conditional on a sourcing strategy
    F
Ji zi     as

                                                                  (-1)(1- )/
                      -1                                        - 
 F
 i  F
   zi    F
      = zi                 (wi )-(-1)                   I
                                                     Tk ik wk                      B i - wi                M
                                                                                                          fik , (46)
                                    
                                                                 
                                               F
                                         kJi (zi                                                    F
                                                 )                                            kJi (zi )

where Bi is a residual demand term that depends on aggregate spending on manufacturing goods,
and the final-good price index in that sector.
                                                                                               F ,
   As is clear from equation (46), when deciding whether to add a new country j to the set Ji zi
the firm trades off the reduction in costs associated with the inclusion of that country in the set
    F
Ji zi     ­ which increases the sourcing capability ­ against the payment of the additional fixed
cost       M.
       wi fij   This tradeoff is similar to the one faced by exporters in our model of forward GVC
participation (see equation (43)), who also trade off higher operating profits (via increased export
revenue) versus higher fixed costs. Nevertheless, there is a very important difference between
selecting into exporting and selecting into importing. In the former case, and given the standard
assumption of constant marginal costs of production, the decision to service a given market is
independent of that same decision in other markets. Conversely, in models of selection into importing,
firms select into offshoring precisely to affect their marginal cost. As a result the marginal change in
                                                                     F
profits in equation (46) from adding a country to the firm's set Ji zi             depends on the set of other
countries from which a firm imports, as well as those countries' characteristics. The problem of a


                                                      61
firm optimally choosing its sourcing strategy is thus much harder to characterize, both analytically
as well as quantitatively, since it requires solving a combinatorial problem with 2J elements (where
J is the number of countries). Despite these complications, Antràs et al. (2017) derive a series
of theoretical results that facilitate a fruitful study of a multi-country model of backward GVC
participation.
    First, Antràs et al. (2017) note that given the fact that the profit function in (46) is log-
                                   F and the firm's sourcing capability, no matter what the actual
supermodular in core productivity zi
                F may be, more productive firms necessarily choose global sourcing strategies that
optimal set Ji zi
give them (weakly) higher sourcing capabilities, which implies that their cost advantage is magnified
by their sourcing decisions, thus generating an increased skewness in the size distribution of firms.
Second, given the structure of the model, whether the decisions to source from different countries
are complements or substitutes ends up depending only on the relative size of ( - 1) (1 -  ) and
. Selection into importing features complementarity across markets whenever ( - 1) (1 -  ) > ,
that is, when (i) demand is relatively elastic (so profits are particularly responsive to variable cost
reductions), (ii) inputs are relatively important in production (low  ), and (iii) input efficiency levels
are relatively heterogeneous across markets (so that the reduction in expected costs achieved by
adding an extra country in the set of active locations is relatively high). Third, whenever sourcing
decisions are complementary, one can use standard tools from the monotone comparative statics
literature to show that the sourcing strategies of firms follow a strict hierarchical structure in
which the number of countries in a firm's sourcing strategy is (weakly) increasing in the firm's core
productivity level, in line with empirical evidence. Fourth, in this same `complements case', one can
                                                                                                 I
also show that, holding constant the market demand level Bi , a reduction in any trade friction (ij
    M ) leads to a (weak) increase in the set J z F
or fij                                                            and also increases (weakly) firm-level bilateral
                                               i i
input purchases from all countries. More specifically, the model predicts that a decrease in sourcing
costs from China ­ perhaps due to a China shock applying to imported inputs ­ is expected to lead
to an increase in firm-level U.S. intermediate input demand not only from China, but also from
other sources including the U.S. itself, as long as one controls for demand conditions, a prediction
for which Antràs et al. (2017) present reduced-form evidence.67
    Beyond these comparative static results, Antràs et al. (2017) show that whenever global sourcing
decisions are complements, one can adopt an iterative algorithm first proposed by Jia (2008), which
uses lattice theory to greatly reduce the dimensionality of the firm's optimal sourcing strategy
problem, a feature which in turns allows them to estimate and simulate the model with limited
computing power.68 In subsequent work, Arkolakis and Eckert (2017) have shown that a variant
   67
       Antràs et al. (2017) also use the model to study how the aggregation of firms' sourcing decisions shapes aggregate
input flows across countries, and show that their model nests several key workhorse trade models, such as the Eaton
and Kortum (2002) and multi-country versions of the Melitz (2003) framework. Nevertheless, the model does not
deliver a standard gravity equation for trade flows, but rather an extended gravity equation featuring third market
effects.
    68
       In plain words, the algorithm is based on the following two facts. First, that the addition of a country to a firm's
                                 I                                                                           I           I
global sourcing strategy Ji zi      will be profitable whenever the addition of that country to a subset Ji zi  of Ji zi
                                                                                                                       I
is already profitable. And, second, that if the elimination of a country from a firm's global sourcing strategy Ji zi     is



                                                            62
of the same type of algorithm can be implemented to solve for the extensive margin of sourcing
even when sourcing decisions are substitutes rather than complements, and Yang (2020) provides
an application to an oligopolistic setting.
    Although we have largely focused on the work by Antràs et al. (2017), the literature on importing
and backward GVC participation is quite extensive. A few of the empirical papers demonstrating
the productivity effects of global sourcing were reviewed in section 3.1. On the theoretical front, the
work of Blaum et al. (2018) and Blaum et al. (2019) is also noteworthy. Blaum et al. (2018) build
on the insights of Arkolakis et al. (2012) to provide sufficient statistics to measure the aggregate
effects of input trade on consumer prices in an environment in which different firms may feature
heterogeneous levels of involvement in global sourcing. Using the structure of their model, they show
that firm-level data on value added and on domestic expenditure shares in materials is sufficient to
compute the change in consumer prices due to a shock to the import environment. In Blaum et al.
(2019), the same set of authors unveil that, inconsistently with the predictions of the Antràs et al.
(2017) framework (see equation (44)), French firms tend to feature highly heterogeneous share of
spending in inputs across a common set of origin countries (i.e., holding the sourcing strategy fixed).
Furthermore, this variation is systematically related to firm size, with larger firms concentrating
their import purchases in their top origin countries much more than smaller firms do. The authors
then develop a model that rationalizes these patterns by incorporating vertical differentiation (i.e.,
variation in quality) in inputs, a complementarity between productivity and quality, and variation
across countries in the ability to produce high-quality inputs.

Equilibrium with Tradable Final Goods We have seen so far that a model of selection into
backward GVC participation produces much richer predictions than a baseline model of forward
GVC participation. Strictly speaking, however, the fact that the framework above focuses on a
model with nontradable final goods implies that goods never cross two borders, so again it is not
obvious that it captures GVC participation. Fortunately, extending the model to the case of tradable
final goods is straightforward, and also generates interesting insights.
    Suppose then that trade in final-varieties is only partially costly and involves both iceberg trade
      X as well as fixed costs f X of exporting. Firm behavior conditional on a sourcing strategy is
costs ij                        ij
largely analogous to that above. In particular, after observing the realization of its supplier-specific
productivity shocks, each final-good producer will continue to choose the location of production
for each input to minimize costs, which will lead to the same marginal price index PiI zi
                                                                                        F                     for
intermediate inputs obtained above in equation (45). The main novelty is that the firm will now
produce output not only for the domestic market but also for a set of endogenously chosen foreign
markets, which constitute the firm's `exporting strategy' (denoted by JiX zi
                                                                           F ). We can then

express the problem of determining the optimal exporting and sourcing strategies of a firm from
                                                                                                   I        I
profitable, such elimination should also be profitable whenever the firm sources from a subset Ji zi of Ji zi .




                                                       63
                                  F as:
country i with core productivity zi
                                                                            (-1)(1- )/
                          -1                                               -                               1-
 F
 i  F
   zi         =      F
                    zi         (wi )-(-1)                          I
                                                                Tk ik wk                              X
                                                                                                      ih        Bh
                                              
                                                                            
                                                         F                               hJiX    F
                                                         ( )
                                                    kJi zi                                      ( )
                                                                                                zi
                                      M                         X
                  -wi                fik   - wi                fih .
                               F
                         kJi (zi                         F
                                                  hJiX (zi
                                 )                         )

Antràs et al. (2017) show that the nature of the interdependencies, as well as the theoretical results
derived from them, continue to hold in this environment with active selection into both importing
and exporting (see also Bernard et al., 2018). The key new feature of the above profit function is
that it also exhibits increasing differences in any pair of export and import entry decisions. This
has at least two implications. First, regardless of whether ( - 1) (1 -  )   or ( - 1) (1 -  ) > ,
any change in parameters that increases the sourcing capability of a firm ­ such as a reduction in
                     I or f M , or an increase in any technology parameter T ­ will necessarily
any input trade cost ij    ij                                               j
(weakly) increase the participation of the same firm in exporting. Second, restricting attention to
the complements case ( - 1) (1 -  ) / > 1, the model delivers a complementarity between the
exporting and importing margins of firms. For instance, holding constant the vector of residual
demand parameters Bi , reductions in the costs of trading final goods across countries will not only
increase the participation of firms in export markets, but will also increase the number of countries
from which a firm sources inputs. Furthermore, when ( - 1) (1 -  ) / > 1, an increase in firm
core productivity raises the firm's import and export participation by more than it would when one
of these margins is shut down.
    We close this section by outlining a series of extensions of this framework of backward GVC
participation (some of these extensions will be discussed in more detail in Sections 5.1.3 and 5.3).
To begin, it should be clear that it would be straightforward to follow the approach in Section 5.1.1
and recast the above framework such that the firm selecting into importing and exporting does not
produce final goods, but rather intermediate inputs, which may themselves be re-exported to third
countries. This would produce a framework in which a firm participates in GVCs both backwards
and forward. It is also straightforward to reinterpret the sources of inputs in the Antràs et al.
(2017) framework as regions rather than countries, so that the model can be applied to studying
the formation of domestic production networks, as in the work of Bernard and Moxnes (2018) and
Furusawa et al. (2017). As outlined in the next section, some authors have also used extensions of
this framework to analyze how firms select into sourcing from particular suppliers rather than from
particular locations (see Dhyne et al., 2020, for instance). Later in this survey, we will also review
work ­ Antràs (2016) and Chor and Ma (2020), in particular ­ that develops incomplete-contracting
extensions of the Antràs et al. (2017) framework, which permit an analysis of the extent to which
backward GVC participation entails intrafirm or arm's-length intermediate input imports.69 Hoang
  69
     Relatedly, Carluccio and Bas (2015) use a variant of the framework to study the role of worker bargaining power
in shaping the offshoring decisions of French firms.



                                                                64
(2020) has recently studied a dynamic version of the model in which the fixed costs of sourcing
are sunk in nature, which leads to hysteresis in backward GVC participation, and she devises a
partial identification approach to provide bounds on those sunk costs. Huang (2017) studies the
implications of the model for how concentrated is importing in certain sources, and how that shapes
the response of firm profitability to source-specific shocks (SARS in his empirical application), while
Farrokhi (2020) applies the model to the crude oil industry to study the choice of suppliers refineries
select and how much they buy from each. In recent work, Lu (2019) and Wang (2021) have also
built on the framework to study the interdependencies between the sourcing decisions of firms and
the profitability of innovation and automation, respectively. Finally, Laugesen (2018) and Fan
et al. (2019) both study comparative statics in the version of the model with tradeable final goods,
allowing the industry price index to adjust, while Fan et al. (2021) investigate the effects of input
trade liberalization on the product mix of multi-product exporting firms.

5.1.3      Two-Sided Matching Frameworks

The micro approaches developed so far consider environments in which firms make operational
decisions that lead them to select into export destinations or input sources. We next overview
a body of work that instead considers frameworks in which firms match with other firms rather
than matching with "countries". We will first summarize the work of Bernard et al. (2018), which
constitutes a simple variant of the model of forward GVC participation in Section 5.1.1. We will next
outline Bernard et al. (2018)'s extension of the Antràs et al. (2017) model of backward participation.
We will finally quickly overview an alternative body of work that has explored the formation of
GVCs using tools borrowed from network theory (cf. Jackson, 2010).

Models with Deterministic Matching Bernard et al. (2018) consider a framework that shares
many features with the model of forward GVC participation developed in Section 5.1.1. As in
that framework, there is a final-good sector, where a continuum of producers assembles consumer
goods with heterogeneous productivity levels under increasing returns to scale and monopolistic
competition, and an intermediate input sector that produces inputs with labor, also with increasing
returns and under a monopolistically competitive market structure. Intermediate inputs are tradeable
but shipping them across borders entails incurring both iceberg trade costs as well as fixed costs,
which are paid by the exporter. The main innovation of Bernard et al. (2018)'s framework is that
they interpret these exporting fixed costs as relationship-specific in nature, and thus they need to be
incurred whenever attempting to reach out to a new costumer, even when a firm is already servicing
other costumers in the same destination market.70 More specifically, the profits an intermediate
                                         I obtains when selling shipping inputs to a final-good
input producer from i with productivity zi
                                         F is given by
producer in country j with productivity zj
  70
       In Section 5.3, we will review a body of work that interprets some of these investments as reflecting search costs.




                                                            65
                                                         1-
                                              I w /z I
                                              ij
                          I   I F                i i
                          ij zi , zj =                           PjI zj
                                                                      F     F
                                                                        Mj zj       X
                                                                              - wj fj ,
                                              PjI    F
                                                    zj

where PjI denotes the price index for inputs ­ and Mj zj
                                                       F                 the corresponding demand ­ associated
with a final-good producer. These objects in turn depend on the extensive margin decisions of
all intermediate input producers, which significantly complicate the analysis of the equilibrium.
Nevertheless, because more productive final-good firms will tend to be larger and demand more
inputs, a larger set of suppliers will optimally select into selling to them, and this will in turn reduce
the price index faced by final-good producers and further boost their input demand. Bernard et al.
(2018) solve for firm behavior and also for the industry equilibrium of the model whenever labor
productivities upstream and downstream follow Pareto distributions. Among other results, Bernard
et al. (2018) show that their framework predicts that both the distributions of buyers per exporter
and of exporters per buyer are characterized by many firms with few connections and a few firms
with many connections. Intuitively, large and productive suppliers will select into selling not just to
large and productive final-good producers, but also to smaller and less productive buyers. Similarly,
large and productive buyers will have many exporters (even less efficient ones) willing to sell to them.
As already mentioned in section 3.2, Bernard et al. (2018) show that this assortative matching
pattern is consistent with evidence from Norwegian transaction-level customs data from 2004­2012.
They further show that the "buyer margin" of international trade explains a large fraction of the
variation in aggregate trade. Finally, they also aggregate the model at the industry level, and show
that it retains many of the properties of models of firm heterogeneity with CES preferences and a
Pareto distribution of productivity, such as the Chaney (2008) model.71
   We next outline a model of backward GVC participation which generates firm-to-firm transactions
through the selection into importing decisions of final-good producers. The model is inspired by the
theoretical framework in the working paper version of Dhyne et al. (2020), which in turn extends
the framework in Antràs et al. (2017).72 The main innovation is to interpret the fixed costs of
sourcing as applying at the supplier level rather than at the country (or location) level. More
specifically, suppose that final good producers can source inputs from particular suppliers in various
                                                         M units of labor, where i and k are the
countries only after incurring a fixed cost equal to wi fik
countries of the final-good producer and supplier respectively. Adding suppliers to the final-good
firm's sourcing strategy is profitable because it lowers the price index of intermediate inputs in their
cost function. Although, one could microfound via Eaton-Kortum-style assumptions why an increase
in competition among suppliers reduces costs, it is simpler to just assume that the inputs produced
by different suppliers are differentiated, regardless of the country in which they are produced. If the
elasticity of substitution across suppliers' inputs is constant and given by (1 + ) /, this produces a
  71
       Related work considering the "buyer margin" of trade includes Arkolakis (2010) and Carballo et al. (2018).
  72
       See Bilgin (2020) for an alternative approach extending Antràs et al. (2017) to a firm-to-firm trade setting.




                                                            66
profit function for the final-good producer of the following type,
                                                                         (-1)(1- )/
                      -1                                             -
  F
  i  F
    zi    F
       = zi                (wi )-(-1)                 I
                                                     zk      I
                                                        (v ) ik wk                     Bi - wi              M
                                                                                                           fik ,
                                           kJ v Zk                                               kJ v Zk

       I (v ) is a parameter governing labor productivity of supplier v in country k , and where
where zk
the other parameters are as defined in our rendition of the Antràs et al. (2017) framework. Given
this profit function, it is straightforward to see that the bulk of the results in Antràs et al. (2017)
                                                                               F ) will optimally
will continue to hold here. More productive final-good producers (with higher zi
invest in (weakly) larger sourcing capabilities, and if ( - 1) (1 -  ) > , they will have sourcing
strategies that involve a larger set of suppliers, with their marginal supplier being less efficient than
the marginal supplier of a less productive final-good producer. By the same token, more efficient
suppliers will be `selected' by a larger share of final-good producers, and the marginal final-good
producer will be less productive, the more productive is the supplier. These patterns very much
resonate with the `negative' assortative matching patterns produced by the Bernard et al. (2018)
framework and unveiled in the empirical literature, as described in Section 3.2.
    Although the two frameworks that we have outlined above feature firm-to-firm matching and
trade, relationships are initiated by investments from only one party in the transaction. We are
not aware of more `symmetric' models of the type outlined above ­ with product differentiation,
monopolistic competition and firm heterogeneity­ in which both upstream and downstream (or
both sellers and buyers) incur fixed costs to deterministically initiate relationships, although some
models of search and matching, reviewed later in Section 5.3.3, often have that feature.73

Models with Stochastic Matching Moving beyond analyses of how bilateral pairs of trade
relationships are deterministically created, there is a parallel literature that has adopted tools from
the network theory literature to develop stochastic models of how firm-to-firm production networks
are formed. Technology and market structure are quite distinct in many of these papers, but they
all share the feature that pairs of producers are formed by `chance', although the rate at which pairs
form is sometimes driven by fundamental factors. An example of this type of model is the work
of Eaton et al. (2018), who build on the tools from Eaton and Kortum (2002) to develop a model
in which final-good producers get randomly matched with heterogeneous suppliers. Final-good
producers have full bargaining power, so each input (or task) is bought at its unit cost, and only
from the least-cost supplier of each input. When a final-good producer can produce an input (or
perform a task) more cheaply than any other supplier, that task is not outsourced and is instead
part of the firm's value added (value added and inputs are perfect substitutes in their setting, unlike
all models we have reviewed so far). Eaton et al. (2018) ingeniously choose functional forms and
productivity distributions to obtain a neat characterization of the general equilibrium of the model,
which allows them to shed light on features of the labor share in French manufacturing, and how it
  73
    To be clear, it is not obvious that allowing firms to select both into backward and forward GVC participation
would invalidate any of the insights described above.


                                                       67
is shaped by trade integration.
    Another related work is Oberfield (2018), who also provides a theory of the formation of firm-
to-firm links in which random matching plays a key role. Oberfield (2018) consider a setting in
which firms produce output combining labor with an input provided by another firm, according
to a Cobb-Douglas production function. The productivity with which labor and the input are
combined is buyer-seller specific (or match -specific) and characterized by a Pareto distribution
with shape parameter . Furthermore, each final-good producer (or buyer) chooses the best match
among a pool of potential suppliers, with the number of available potential suppliers characterized
by a Poisson distribution. For the case of a closed economy in which all producers' output can,
in principle, be used as an input by any other firm, Oberfield (2018) shows that this formulation
delivers a Fréchet distribution labor productivity, just as in Eaton and Kortum (2002).74 A key
feature of Oberfield's framework is that particularly productive suppliers are likely to be employed by
many firms, who in turn become more productive themselves by employing these highly productive
suppliers. This feedback loop very much resonates with the mechanics of the Bernard et al. (2018)
model described above. As Oberfield (2018) shows, an implication of these complementarities is
that his model generates large differences in productivity and size across firms, and particularly so
when the elasticity of output with respect to intermediate inputs is high.
    Both the Eaton et al. (2018) and Oberfield (2018) frameworks are static in nature, but a growing
number of papers have considered dynamic environments in which firm-to-firm links are shaped
by randomness, but in which the stock of those links evolves over time. A pioneering study in a
trade context is the work of Chaney (2014), who considers a model in which producers accumulate
a set of customers or buyers over time. This process of link formation takes two forms. First, a
firm meets new partners at random but in a way that is biased toward the location of the firm,
with local matches more frequent than distant ones. Second, once a firm has acquired a network of
distant contacts, it also acquires new customers as if it was producing from those locations. Chaney
(2014) describes the dynamic evolution of firm-to-firm links, and shows that it is in line with several
features of granular French firm-level export data. For instance, his framework predicts and the
evidence confirms that the average squared distance of exports is a power function of firm size, and
that the dynamic process of match formation generates path-dependence in a firm's export growth,
along the lines of the empirical findings of Morales et al. (2019). In a follow-up paper, Chaney
(2018) shows that a similar process of network formation can explain why trade flows tend to decline
with distance with close to a unit elasticity.
    Lim (2018) proposes an alternative framework for the dynamics of network formation. He first
outlines a framework that is analogous to the model of exporting (or forward GVC participation)
in Bernard et al. (2018) with two exceptions. First, he considers production technologies that
feature the same degree of substitution between labor and inputs as across inputs, and second, as
   74
     As mentioned in Section 4.2 (see footnote 61), Antràs and de Gortari (2020) show that in a multi-country
environment with an arbitrary but finite number of stages, provided that the distribution of productivity in the initial
stage (n = 1) is Fréchet distributed, this approach delivers a distribution for final-good prices that is also Fréchet
distributed.



                                                          68
in Oberfield (2018), he assumes that firms' output can be indistinguishably sold to consumers or
to other firms as inputs (so firms are neither exclusive final-good producers nor exclusive input
producers). In order to be able to sell to other firms, firms need to incur fixed costs, and as in
the frameworks above, larger and more productive firms will have more firm-to-firm links, both
because they can better amortize the fixed costs of generating links, but also because other firms
will find it profitable to pay the cost to set up links with them. Despite the complex nature of the
model, Lim (2018) provides a neat characterization of its equilibrium in a closed economy. He then
introduces dynamics of link formation by assuming that both firms' fundamentals (demand shifters
and core productivity) as well as the costs of maintaining relationships follow a first-order Markov
process. These features allow Lim (2018) to study the effects of business cycles on productivity,
and the contribution of the entry and exit of firm-to-firm links for economic fluctuations. In more
recent work, Huneeus (2018) presents an open-economy extension of the model in Lim (2018), which
permits a study of the rich implications of international trade shocks ­ which are salient in his
Chilean application ­ and how these shocks percolate along domestic production networks.
   Overall, the body of work reviewed in this section is attempting to shift the focus from models in
which firms make decisions about participating in GVCs in isolation, to environments in which firms'
decisions and the shocks they face interact with each other, thus shaping the dynamics of economic
activity and of aggregate trade flows in ways that are much richer than in environments without
firm-to-firm links. The benefit of this approach is that it should result in more reliable quantitative
and structural work, but this comes at the cost of a much greater complexity in analyzing and
estimating these models.

5.2     Designing GVCs: The Lead-Firm Problem
Having outlined a number of decentralized approaches, we now turn attention to lead-firm approaches
to the design of GVCs. The material in this section is motivated by the facts described in Section 3
indicating that world trade flows are crucially shaped by the operational decisions of a relatively
small number of large firms. These `superstar' firms do not only make exporting and importing
decisions, but more generally, they design strategies to deliver their branded products to foreign
consumers at the lowest possible cost. This leads them to seek suitable suppliers for the various
stages in their value chains, and it also leads them to set up assembly plants in various countries to
minimize the cost at which they make their goods available to distant consumers. In this section,
we will outline a few variants of this lead-firm problem.

5.2.1    Multi-Stage Production

We begin by developing a simple model of firm behavior that formalizes the problem faced by a lead
firm choosing the location of the various production stages involved in producing a consumer good.
The good is produced combining N stages that need to be performed sequentially, and there are
J countries in which consumers derive utility from consuming the good and in which the various
stages can be produced. The last stage of production can be interpreted as final assembly and is

                                                  69
indexed by N . As in previous sections, we will often denote the set of countries {1, ..., J } by J and
the set of production stages {1, ..., N } by N . At each stage n > 1, production combines a local
composite factor with the good finished up to the previous stage n - 1. Production in the initial
stage n = 1 only uses the local composite factor.
   Although the main insights of this section extend to more general specifications of technology,
we will follow Antràs and de Gortari (2020) and focus throughout on Cobb-Douglas technologies at
each stage. More precisely, we denote the unit cost of production of stage n in country (n) as

                               1                     n                                         1-n
             pn(n) ( ) =               an(n) cn(n)       pn(-1
                                                            n-1) ( )         (n-1) (n)                , for all n  N ,                 (47)
                           z   (n)


where   = { (1) , (2) , ..., (N )} is the path of production, z                          (n)   is a country-specific total factor
productivity (TFP) term (common for all stages),                    an(n)    is the unit composite-factor requirement at
stage n in country (n),        cn(n)   is the cost of the composite factor used at stage n in country (n),
n  (0, 1) denotes the cost share of the composite factor at stage n, and                                   (n-1) (n)   are iceberg trade
costs associated with shipping goods from (n - 1) to (n). Because the initial stage of production
uses solely the local composite factor, we set 1 = 1.
   Note that equation (47) also applies to the final assembly stage N , and a good completed in
 (N ) after following the path            is available in any country j at a cost pF        N
                                                                                   j ( ) = p (N ) ( )                          (N )j   (we
use the superscript F to denote finished goods). For each country j  J , the goal of the firm is
then to choose the optimal path of production                  j   =     j   (1) ,   j   (2) , ...,   j   (N )  J N that minimizes
the cost pF
          j ( ) of providing the good to consumers in that country j . The remainder of this section
will seek to characterize the solution to this problem. The questions we will attempt to answer are:
what forces shape the optimal assignment of stages to countries, and how do they exactly do so?

Free Trade: Comparative Advantage To begin, consider a simple variant of equation (47) in
which we set all trade costs to 0, so ij = 1 for all i, j  J , and in which z                                (n)   = 1, so productivity
differences are purely shaped by the productivity of the composite factor at stage n. Iterating (47),
the optimal path of production solves:

                                                                              N
                                                                                                      n n
                           j
                               = arg min pF
                                          j ( ) = arg min                            an(n) cn(n)                                       (48)
                                        J N                        J N
                                                                             n=1

where
                                                           N
                                                 n                  (1 - m ) ,                                                         (49)
                                                         m=n+1

                                                N
and where we use the convention                 m=N +1 (1   - m ) = 1. In equation (48), while n is the cost
share of the stage-n composite factor in stage-n production, n n is the cost share of this same
                                                                                                      N
stage-n composite factor in the whole global value chain (note that                                   n=1 n n       = 1).
   As is clear from equation (48), we can break the cost-minimization problem into a sequence
of N independent cost-minimization problems in which the optimal location of stage n is simply


                                                               70
given by       j   (n) = arg mini an(n) cn(n) , and is thus independent of the country of consumption j . It
then becomes evident that the assignment of stages to countries is independent of the positioning of
stages in the value chain and depends solely on standard relative production cost considerations,
as in standard neoclassical trade theory. For instance, if the local composite factor is labor, there
are a continuum N of stages, there are only two countries, and all firms in a given country share
the same technology, the general equilibrium of the model becomes completely isomorphic to the
celebrated Ricardian model of trade in Dornbusch et al. (1977), and thus the assignment of stages
to countries is shaped by comparative advantage. Similarly, if an(n) = 1 for all n and (n), but
the local composite factor combines capital and labor with different capital intensities in different
stages, then the framework becomes related to the multi-stage neoclassical model in Dixit and
Grossman (1982), and again whether countries specialize upstream or downstream depends on the
interaction of their physical capital abundance and the factor intensity of various stages, regardless
of the positioning of stages in the value chain.

Free Trade: Absolute Advantage To introduce a role for sequentiality, we now turn to a
variant of (47) inspired by the work of Costinot et al. (2013), who in turn build on the insights from
Kremer (1993). In particular, we now set an(n) = 1 and cn(n) = c                     (n)   for all n  N and j  J , but we
allow TFP z          (n)   to vary across countries. Standard trade theory would suggest that in the absence
of comparative advantage differences across countries, the pattern of trade is indeterminate. Low
TFP countries will face higher costs on account of their less efficient technologies, but in general
equilibrium, their factor costs will adjust to equalize production costs across countries. Nevertheless,
with sequential production matters are far less clear. In particular, iterating (47), the optimal path
of production solves:

                                                                   N
                                                                                     -n               n n
                              j
                                  = arg min pF
                                             j ( ) = arg min              z    (n)          c   (n)                   (50)
                                        J N                J N
                                                                   n=1

where n is defined in equation (49). As in our case above, we can again break the cost-minimization
                                                                                -1/n
stage by stage, and simply solve              j   (n) = arg mini     z                 c          . Note then that whether
                                                                         (n)               (n)
absolute TFP differences disproportionately affect upstream or downstream stages depends crucially
on whether value-added intensity n rises or falls along GVCs. Costinot et al. (2013) develop a
framework in which n effectively falls along the value chain, and thus conclude that absolute
productivity differences across countries shape the specialization of countries in GVCs, with more
efficient countries specializing in downstream stages of production. Although we will not solve
for the general-equilibrium of the model, it should be clear that if we focus on the case in which
c   (n)   =w   (n)   (so the composite factor is just labor), there are a continuum of stages and only two
countries, the model reduces to the Dornbusch et al. (1977) framework with a monotonic relative
efficiency schedule that confers comparative advantage in downstream stages to high-TFP, rich
countries.



                                                            71
Costly Trade We now consider an environment with costly trade, following the approach in
Antràs and de Gortari (2020). For simplicity, we set z    (n)   = an(n) = 1 for all n  N and j  J , and
iterating (47), the lead-firm problem reduces to:

                                             N                      N -1
                                                          n n                             n
          j
              = arg min pF
                         j ( ) = arg min          cn(n)         ×             (n) (n+1)       ×   (N )j   (51)
                    J N              J N
                                            n=1                     n=1

where n is again given in (49). Antràs and de Gortari (2020) emphasize two features of this
problem. First, for general bilateral trade costs, a lead firm can no longer perform cost minimization
independently stage by stage, and instead it needs to optimize over the whole path of production.
Intuitively, the location   (n) minimizing production costs cn(n) might not be part of a firm's
optimal path if the optimal locations for stages n - 1 and n + 1 are sufficiently far from (n). A
direct implication of this result is that the presence of arbitrary trade costs turns a problem of
dimensionality N × J into J much more complex problems of dimensionality J N each. As Antràs and
de Gortari (2020) and Tyazhelnikov (2019) show, however, as long as technologies feature constant
returns to scale, the lead firm can break the problem into a series of stage- and country-specific
optimal sourcing problems, and then solve the problem via forward induction (starting in the most
upstream stage), thereby solving the problem for all possible destinations j with just J × N × J
computations.
   A second noteworthy aspect of the minimand in equation (51) is that the trade-cost elasticity of
the unit cost of serving consumers in country j increases along the value chain. More specifically,
note from equation (49) that, because n > 0 for all n, we have 1 < 2 < ... < N = 1. The
reason for this compounding effect of trade costs stems from the fact that the costs of transporting
goods are (naturally) modeled as being proportional to the gross value of the good being transacted.
Thus, as the value of the good rises along the value chain, so does the amount of resources used
to transport the goods across locations. An implication of this compounding effect is that, in
choosing their optimal path of production, firms will be more concerned about reducing trade
costs in relatively downstream stages than in relatively upstream stages. Does this imply that
more central countries that incur lower costs when importing and exporting should specialize in
downstream stages? The answer to this question depends on the general equilibrium of the model,
and if value-added intensity n rose sufficiently fast along the value chain, the fact that more
central countries tend to command higher wages, might break the link between downstreamness
and centrality, similarly to the countervailing general-equilibrium force in Costinot et al. (2013).
Nevertheless, Antràs and de Gortari (2020) derive conditions under which a perfect correlation
between centrality and downstreamness holds for any path of n , and they also provide exhaustive
numerical analyses showing the robustness of the result in more general environments. Furthermore,
building on the upstreamness measure in Antràs et al. (2012), and standard measures of centrality,
they provide evidence for the existence of this relationship in the data.
   We next briefly outline other work that has studied the optimal location of sequential production
processes in the presence of trade costs. We have already mentioned above the work of Tyazhelnikov


                                                  72
(2019), which was developed independently from Antràs and de Gortari (2020). The work of Fally
and Hillberry (2018) also incorporates trade costs, though in a more rudimentary manner, and is
largely focused on delineating firm boundaries, so we will return to it in Section 5.3. Much more
relevant is the earlier work of Harms et al. (2012) and Baldwin and Venables (2013) who both
study two-country models in which the presence of costly trade in environments in which relative
production costs (i.e., comparative advantage) does not rise or fall monotonically along production
chains can generate interesting patterns of collocation, by which countries may end up capturing
segments of value chains in which they are not particularly productive, but which take place soon
before or soon after other stages in which they are disproportionately more productive.

Scale Economies Our discussion above has focused on the case in which technologies feature
constant returns to scale. When solving for a lead-firm problem this is far from an innocuous
assumption, especially in the presence of costly trade. It is fair to say that the literature has
struggled to find a tractable way to incorporate increasing returns to scale and trade costs in models
of sequential GVCs. We next illustrate some of the complications that have hindered progress and
also report on some preliminary progress.
   To build intuition, let us first consider a case with no trade costs and no TFP differences across
countries. To model increasing returns to scale in the simplest possible manner, suppose that
marginal costs continue to be independent of scale and given by the Cobb-Douglas technology in
(47), but now assume that in order to activate country j  J as a candidate location to produce
stage n, the lead firm needs to incur a fixed cost equal to fij in terms of labor in the home country
i of the lead firm. It should be clear that conditional on a subset of activated countries Ji  J ,
what one might call the lead firm's GVC strategy, the problem is analogous to that outlined in
equation (48) except that the lead firm considers a smaller set of candidate location. Conditional
on the profits obtained under alternative GVC strategies, the firm will then choose the strategy
that delivers it the highest profit flow. In deciding whether to add a location, the firm will trade
off the achieved marginal cost savings (and associated higher operating profits) with the upfront
fixed cost. This trade off is quite similar to the one studied by Antràs et al. (2017) and overviewed
in Section 5.1.2 above. In fact, if one assumes that the firm faces an isoleastic demand function,
and the productivity terms 1/an(n) are drawn from a Fréchet distribution (independently across
locations and inputs), Fi (z ) = exp{-Ti z - }, the resulting profit function for a given GVC strategy
is given by
                                                       (-1)/
                        F
                        i  F
                          zi =               Tk (ck )-         B i - wi         fik ,
                                       kJi                                kJi

where Bi is a residual demand term. It should be clear that this profit function is identical to that in
                    F = 1,  I = 1 for all i, j , and  = 0. The choice of the set of locations the lead
equation (46) when zi      ij
firm activates can thus be studied using the exact same tools as developed in Antràs et al. (2017)
(assuming, of course, that the set of activated countries is decided prior to the start of production).
   The case with trade costs is, however, much harder to study. Intuitively in such a case, the lead


                                                  73
firm problem cannot be solved independently for each destination market j , because whether a
location       constitutes a cost-minimizing location for stage n in a particular chain ending in j will
be a function of the scale of this production node, and the latter is shaped by the overall level of
production flowing through this node (potentially involving chains ending in destination markets
other than j ). As a result, dynamic programming ceases to be a powerful tool to simplify the problem
(see de Gortari, 2020, for more details, and for an attempt to circumvent these complications).
      Another approach to illustrate the complications that arise from the interaction of multi-stage
production, trade costs and scale economies is to study a stylized general equilibrium model in
which all firms produce a homogeneous good that requires N stages that can be produced in any of
J = N countries. Furthermore, assume the same sequential cost function as in (47), but now assume
                               -
z   (n)   = 1 and an(n) = (Ln
                            i)   , where  captures the role of external economies. Antràs and de Gortari
(2016) study this environment and assume that  is large enough to ensure a complete specialization
equilibrium in which each stage is produced in exactly one country. Assuming logarithmic preferences
and solving for the assignment of stages to countries that maximizes utilitarian world welfare, Antràs
and de Gortari (2016) show that this problem solves

                                                             N                       N -1
                    = { (1) , (2) , ..., (N )} = arg min           ln    (N )i   +          n ln    (n) (n+1) ,   (52)
                                                             i=1                     n=1

where n is defined in (49). Intuitively, the optimal sequencing of production will simply seek to
minimize the trade costs associated with the production process traveling through each of the J
countries, `visiting' each country exactly one time, and then returning to all countries in the form of a
finished product. Antràs and de Gortari (2016) draw a connection between the optimization problem
in (52) and the minimal distance Hamiltonian path problem in graph theory, or the associated
travelling salesman problem (TSP) in combinatorial optimization. It is well known that both of
these problems are NP-hard as they entail picking an optimal sequencing out of the N ! possible
permutations of countries in the value chain, and dynamic programming techniques are ineffective
in reducing the dimensionality of those problems.75

5.2.2        Horizontal and Export-Platform FDI

Although models combining global production strategies, increasing returns to scale, and trade costs
are hard to work with, there is a specific version of those models which has been extensively studied
in the literature. This corresponds to the a variant of the models studied above in which N = 1, so
only final goods are produced, and this is done with local factors of production. Unlike in models of
exporting, however, lead firms are not constrained from producing only in the origin country (e.g.,
the country were they paid the fixed cost of entry). They can instead set up foreign assembly plants
to service foreign consumers at a lower marginal cost. These strategies clearly connect with the
    75
     There is however a key difference between the problem in (52) and the TSP: due to the compounding effect of
trade costs, the optimal assignment will put a larger weight on reducing trade costs at relatively downstream stages
than at stages further upstream, a result reminiscent to the one in Antràs and de Gortari (2020).



                                                        74
voluminous literature on horizontal FDI and export-platform FDI, which was overviewed in Chapter
2 of the 4th volume of this Handbook (see Antràs and Yeaple, 2014, in particular, Section 6.1).
Because some of the papers in this literature neatly connect with many firm-level models of GVCs
reviewed above, it is however worth briefly reviewing some of their key contributions and insights.
   Following the lead of Tintelnot (2017), we envision a two-stage problem in which a lead firm
based in country i first activates a set of locations Ji  J after incurring a fixed cost equal to wi fik
when activating country k , and then decides from which assembly plant in Ji to sell to consumers
in all potential destinations j . The second stage is well captured by the more general problem in
equation (51) when setting N = 1, which reduces to

                             j
                                 = arg min pF
                                            j
                                                             j
                                                                  = arg min { j a c } .                    (53)
                                        j (N )J
                                                  i                       Ji


when N = 1 (where we have dropped n subscripts for simplicity). In words, consumers from j will be
serviced from a plant located in the country           j   (N )  Ji that minimizes the delivery cost of the good
 j a c . In order to discern how many assembly plants the firm should set up and where they will
be located, one needs a structure to transition from the problem in to a profit function. As in many
of the papers reviewed above, Tintelnot (2017) assumes that the firm faces an isoelastic demand
function, and the productivities 1/a are drawn from a Fréchet distribution (that is independent
across locations). The main new trick that Tintelnot (2017) develops is to assume that firms produce
a continuum of consumer goods, which together with the Fréchet assumption, delivers gravity-style
equations representing the bilateral sales of all the firm's plants. More specifically, the share of the
firm's sales in market j originating from assembly plants in country k is given by:

                                                           Tk (kj ck )-
                                        µikj =                            -
                                                                               ,                           (54)
                                                             Tk k j ck
                                                      k Ki


where Ki is the set of countries or locations where the firm has assembly plants, and where the
other parameters are as defined in previous models. Furthermore, one can express the firm's profits
conditional on an assembly strategy Ki as
                                                                       (-1)/

                     i (Ki ) =          Bj             Tk (kj ck )-                - wi         fik ,      (55)
                                  j J       kKi                                           kKi


where  is a constant, and Bi is a residual demand term. For the price index associated with
the bundle of varieties produced by the firm to be bounded, Tintelnot (2017) shows that one
needs to impose  - 1 < . This parametric restriction implies that the model features `market
cannibalization' effects: a firm may find it optimal to set up a plant in country k to reduce the costs
of selling goods to consumers in country k and nearby countries, but such a decision necessarily
reduces the marginal benefit of setting up plants in other countries k = k . Using the terminology in
Antràs et al. (2017), the firm's assembly strategy features substitutability (or decreasing differences)


                                                             75
in the entry decisions in alternative markets. Thus, although choosing an assembly strategy amounts
to choosing a set among 2J possible sets, the problem can be in principle be solved using the
algorithm suggested in Arkolakis and Eckert (2017). In his empirical application, which focused on
the horizontal and export-platform strategies of German multinationals, Tintelnot (2017) instead
restricted the analysis to a case in which J = 12, so he could solve the problem by brute force.
   In recent work, Antràs et al. (2020) develop a multi-country model in which firms choose not
only the locations of their various assembly plants, as in the horizontal FDI and export-platform
literature, but also the countries from which all those plants import inputs, as in the global sourcing
literature. The model in Antràs et al. (2020) constitutes a marriage of the Tintelnot (2017) model
of export-platform FDI and the global sourcing framework in Antràs et al. (2017). Their framework
delivers simple gravity-style formulas for both firm-level bilateral shipments of consumer goods from
any country where a firm assembles finished goods to all other countries in the world, as well as
firm-level bilateral purchases of intermediate inputs from countries in a firm's sourcing strategy to
each country in which that same firm assembles final goods. Crucially, their framework identifies a
natural complementarity between these two decisions ­ as hinted in prior work by Yeaple (2003) and
Grossman et al. (2006) ­ and thus delivers novel implications for the role of geography in shaping
the global production strategies of firms. Intuitively, a richer sourcing strategy reduces marginal
costs, increases optimal firm scale, and thus makes a richer assembly strategy more appealing (or its
associated fixed costs easier to amortize). Similarly, a richer assembly strategy increases overall firm
sales and thus makes a more expansive sourcing strategy more appealing (or its associated fixed
costs easier to amortize). Empirically, Antràs et al. (2020) merge US Census domestic and trade
data with the US Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) comprehensive surveys on multinational
activity to document a series of novel facts regarding the global assembly and global sourcing
strategies of US-based firms, and they develop new tools to estimate their model structurally and to
perform counterfactual exercises that illustrate the rich implications of changes in trade costs on
global production patterns. More specifically, due to the coexistence of sources of substitutability
(market cannibalization) and complementarity in the model, the problem of determining of a firm's
extensive margin decisions does not feature the type of "single-crossing" properties that typically
rationalize the use of iterative algorithms to reduce the dimensionality of the problem, as in Jia
(2008), Antràs et al. (2017) or Arkolakis and Eckert (2017). To make progress on this issue and
render feasible a structural estimation of our model, Antràs et al. (2020) develop a probabilistic
approach to solve the firm's extensive margins of global sourcing and global assembly, which smooths
out the firm's problem and allows them to characterize its solution by studying and computationally
approximating the first-order conditions of this problem via Monte Carlo integration.
   We have thus far described recent contributions that tightly connect with other theoretical work
described in this Chapter, but it is worth closing this section with a brief description of other recent
work on the horizontal or export-platform FDI dimensions of the GVC strategies of lead firms.
   First, and as already described in Antràs and Yeaple (2014), Arkolakis et al. (2018) develop a
multi-country model in which lead firms decide which country i to enter in, and from which country


                                                  76
k to service consumers in each country j . As in the work of Tintelnot (2017), this appears to be a
complex combinatorial problem. Arkolakis et al. (2018) achieve tractability by abstracting away
from fixed costs of setting up assembly plants, and only modelling fixed costs of marketing goods in
country j regardless of the origin of production k . This basically turns the problem of figuring out
the source of goods k as one that minimizes marginal costs, as in the work of Eaton and Kortum
(2002). Yet the presence of marketing costs implies that individual firms may only produce in and
sell to a subset of countries. By making suitable assumptions about the distribution of productivity
across goods and countries, Arkolakis et al. (2018) further show that their framework delivers simple
expressions for bilateral trade flows across countries, some of which reflect standard exporting, while
the rest reflect export-platform sales.
   Arkolakis et al. (2018)'s framework also incorporates iceberg-style costs associated with firms
assembling goods in countries other than their country of incorporation. This added cost can
be interpreted as a reduced-form way to capture the costs of importing inputs (Ramondo and
Rodríguez-Clare, 2013) or knowledge (Keller and Yeaple, 2013) from the headquarters, or perhaps
the costs of adapting production to a foreign and unfamiliar environment. An alternative cost of
multinational activity features prominently in the recent work of Head and Mayer (2019), who
argue that firms also incur adaptation costs when marketing goods in countries distinct from their
origin country, regardless of where those goods are produced. They argue that this is an especially
important feature of the car industry, and they estimate an industry equilibrium model in which
car makers decide on the optimal sourcing of their car models taking into account where their
headquarters are located, where they have assembly plants (which are fixed in their model), and
where consumers are. Another novel feature of their framework is the inclusion of external economies
of scale, which they argue are also a key feature of the industry under study.

5.2.3   Taking Stock

In sum, a growing literature is developing tools to better capture the complex operational decisions
of large multinational firms organizing GVCs. Progress in this branch of the literature has been
hampered by data availability and by computational complexity.
   On the data front, testing models of the decisions of lead firms requires obtaining data on
the operations of firms in more than one country, and thus standard data sources used by trade
economists, such as customs data or industrial census datasets are not suitable for this goal.
Nevertheless, progress has been made by either exploiting survey data on the outward operations of
multinational firms, and also by industry-specific studies relying on more granular data for specific
sectors, such as the car industry data in Head and Mayer (2019).
   On the computational front, and as we have made clear above, lead firm problems face highly
complex decisions when designing their supply chains. The economics literature has largely been
focused on finding suitable environments in which these decisions can be qualitatively characterized
or computationally simplified, but it is hard to envision at this point that this agenda will lead to
successful unified quantitative models of the decisions of lead firms. Our sense is that, sooner or later,


                                                   77
this literature will need to close the gap with the parallel literature in supply chain management
in the Operations Research field, which has long adopted heuristic methods to guide the optimal
design of supply chains (see Vidal and Goetschalckx, 1997, for a review).

5.3   Organizing Relational GVCs
Although the research reviewed in the last few sections has provided valuable novel insights regarding
the emergence and implications of GVCs, modeling global production sharing as simply an increase
in the extent to which intermediate inputs are exported or imported (or to which multinationals set
up foreign export platforms) misses important distinctive characteristics of the recent rise of GVCs.
Three of these distinctive features are particularly important.
   First, finding suitable suppliers of parts and components or suitable buyers of one's products is
costly, or in economic lingo, there are search frictions. As a result, the fixed costs of exporting and
importing we have been referring to in previous sections, are better understood as sunk costs, which
naturally create a "stickiness" among participants in a GVC.
   Second, GVC participants often undertake numerous relationship-specific investments (such as
purchasing specialized equipment or customizing products) which would obtain a much-depressed
return were GVC links to be broken. The need to customize inputs adds to search frictions in
creating a `lock-in' effect that further contributes to tie together the different agents in a GVC.
   Third, the prevalence of lock-in effects within GVCs is made particularly relevant by the limited
contractual security governing transactions within these chains. There are in turn two reasons why
GVC participants perceive contractual insecurity. On the one hand, GVCs often involve transactions
for which a strong legal environment is particularly important to bind producers together and
to preclude technological leakage. On the other hand, GVCs often flow into countries with weak
contracting institutions that do not offer the same contractual safeguards that typically accompany
similar exchanges occurring in rich countries. As a result, GVC participants are often left to
employ repeated interactions among them to build a governance that provides implicit contract
enforcement. As in the case of matching frictions and relationship-specificity, this force contributes
to the "stickiness" of GVC links. In sum, GVC relationships matter, and thus this branch of this
literature has come to be referred to as studying relational GVCs.
   In this section, we will briefly overview theoretical work that has attempted to shed light on the
workings of relational GVCs. We will first study the role of relationship-specificity and contractual
frictions in shaping the location and firm-boundary decisions in GVCs. We will in turn do so in
two steps. First, we will follow Chor and Ma (2020) and consider a spider-like model of backward
GVC participation à la Antràs et al. (2017) expanded to include contractual frictions and firm
boundary decisions. Next, we will build on Antràs and Chor (2013) and Alfaro et al. (2019) and
perform an analogous exercise for snake-like sequential production processes. We will close this
section with a succinct account of additional work highlighting the role of search frictions and of
relational contracting in shaping GVCs.
   Before diving in, we should stress that we focus on recent developments in this branch of the


                                                  78
literature. For earlier work on contractual frictions and firm boundary choices in international trade
contexts, we refer readers to Chapter 2 of Volume 4 of this Handbook (see Antràs and Yeaple, 2014,
in particular, Section 7).

5.3.1        Contractual Frictions and Firm Boundaries in Spiders

Let us return to the model of backward GVC participation developed in section 5.1.2. Remember
that the framework features a final-good sector with CES preferences over differentiated varieties
and an intermediate-input sector that provides differentiated input varieties to the final-good
sector, which combines them with labor in production according to equation (38). The bundle
of intermediate inputs is also characterized by a CES aggregator, as in equation (39). The final
good-sector features increasing returns to scale technologies and is monopolistically competitive,
while the upstream sector produces under constant returns to scale with productivity levels drawn
from a Fréchet distribution. Final-good varieties are nontradable, but intermediate inputs can be
                                                          I.
traded across borders with associated iceberg trade costs ij
    Chor and Ma (2020) embeds a property-rights model of firm boundaries à la Antràs (2003)
and Antràs and Helpman (2004) into this framework.76 More specifically, the following new
assumptions are made. First, each input variety                   is produced combining headquarter services and
a manufacturing input provided by the supplier according to a Cobb-Douglas technology:

                            s
                           yij (,         I
                                     ) = zij (,        ) (hij (,      )) (mij (,   ))1- ,                          (56)

where  reflects the headquarter-intensity of input production. Although hij (,                            ) is provided
by the final-good producer located in i, Chor and Ma (2020) assume, following Antràs (2003),
that hij (,       ) is produced in country j using factors of production in that country. Second, both
headquarter services and the supplier input are relationship-specific in the sense that they are each
customized as inputs for the final-good producers' consumption variety. Third, certain aspects of
the production of both headquarter services and of input manufacturing cannot be specified in a
fully enforceable manner in an initial contract between the final-good producer and the supplier.
A simple way to model this, following Acemoglu et al. (2007) and Antràs and Helpman (2008), is
to assume that only a fraction µh
                                ij of the tasks that go into producing headquarter services and
a fraction µm
            ij of the tasks that go into producing manufacturing inputs are contractible. With a
symmetric Cobb-Douglas technology across tasks, this amounts to rewriting technology in (56) as

                                        µh                   1-µh                      µm                 1-µm    1-
  s        I
                           hc                 hn                         mc                  mn
                                         ij                     ij                      ij                   ij
 yi ( ) = zij (,      )     ij (,   )          ij (,     )                ij (,    )          ij (,   )                ,

where hc
       ij (,       ) and mc
                          ij (,     ) are the symmetric investments in contractible tasks, and hc
                                                                                                ij (,                      )
and    mc
        ij   (,   ) are the analogous investments in non-contractible tasks. Finally, because some
investments are not contractible ex-ante, one needs to specify how the terms of exchange will be
  76
     To be precise, Chor and Ma (2020)'s framework incorporates multiple upstream sectors, but we only model one
here for simplicity.


                                                             79
determined ex-post, once all investments have been incurred.77 As is standard in the literature,
Chor and Ma (2020) characterize this ex-post bargaining using the Nash Bargaining solution and
assume symmetric information between headquarters and the various suppliers. In that bargaining,
the final-good producers walks away with a share ij of the surplus from the relationship, with this
surplus in turn related to the contribution of all the other suppliers into production. The share ij
may be shaped by primitive bargaining power or relationship specificity asymmetries (see Antràs,
2016; Eppinger and Kukharskyy, 2020), but crucially and following the property-rights approach, it
is also shaped by firm boundary decisions. When the supplier is integrated, the final-good producer
                V of surplus that is higher than the share  O it obtains when the supplier is a
obtains a share ij                                         ij
stand-alone firm.
    The Chor and Ma (2020) model is much richer than the underlying Antràs et al. (2017) framework,
but it is simpler in an important sense: Chor and Ma (2020) abstract from fixed costs of importing,
and thus firms source inputs from all countries in the world. Nevertheless, firms' sourcing strategies
are richer in the sense that the firm has 2J potential sources for each input, corresponding to the J
countries and two organizational forms (vertical integration versus outsourcing). To capture the
intuitive notion that the productivity of integrated and independent suppliers in a given country
                                                                              I (,
j should be correlated, Chor and Ma (2020) assume that the productivity term zij                             ) in (56)
is drawn independently for each  and                from a "nested-Fréchet" distribution with cumulative
distribution function (cdf):

      V               V     O             O              O     O
  Pr z1j (,       )  z1j , z1j (,     )  z1 j , . . . , ZJjO  zJjO
                                                                     J                                       1-i
                                                                                      - 1-           - 1-
                                                                                 V              O        
                                                       = exp -             Ti   zij      i
                                                                                             + zij       i
                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                     i=1


where Tik > 0, k > 1 and 0 < i < 1 for each source country i. The parameters i govern the
correlation in the productivity draws obtained by stand-alone and integrated suppliers, with i = 1
implying an identical productivity, and i = 0 for all countries i corresponding to the special case
where the 2J draws are each from independent Fréchet distributions with cdf: exp -Ti (zij )- .
This specification delivers a closed-form expression for sourcing shares that has an intuitive nested
logit form: The share of inputs obtained from country i under (say) integration is equal to the share
sourced from country i, multiplied by the share sourced under integration conditional on having
chosen country i. Furthermore, these shares are not only shaped by standard parameters, such as
levels of technology, trade costs and wages, but also by institutional or contractual parameters, such
as the degrees of contractibility µh       m                                  V      O
                                   ij and µij , and the bargaining parameters ij and ij .
    The fact that Chor and Ma (2020) ignore the extensive margin of which source countries and
organizations to activate allows them to neatly characterize the general equilibrium of the model,
and compare it to recent quantitative models in the field. For instance, the framework delivers an
  77
    The initial contract specifies binding investment levels for all contractible tasks, as well as a lump-sum transfer
between the agents.



                                                          80
expression for the welfare gains from trade that is akin (in the limit case where all inputs are fully
contractible) to that in Arkolakis et al. (2012). They also show that their framework is amenable
to the use of the hat-algebra approach to counterfactuals in Dekle et al. (2008) and Caliendo and
Parro (2015), but crucially, their framework suggests that whether trade shares take the form of
intrafirm or arm's-length imports is consequential for welfare. Chor and Ma (2020) are then able
to perform counterfactuals that evaluate the welfare consequences of improving the contractual
environment, as well as studying the way in which the magnitude of the gains from trade interacts
with the level of contracting institutions.
   Although we have highlighted the work of Chor and Ma (2020), it is worth closing this section
outlining recent work that has similarly explored how contractual frictions shape the sourcing
decisions of firms, and how those decisions in turn shape the consequences of trade integration or of
changes in the contractual environment. Many of the early contributions to this literature ­ which
focused on low-dimensional models ­ are overviewed in Antràs and Yeaple (2014) and Antràs (2016).
The work of Boehm (2020) and Boehm and Oberfield (2020) is much closer in spirit to the work of
Chor and Ma (2020) in that they also provide welfare assessments of contracting frictions, with
Boehm (2020) in particular doing so in a full multi-country, multi-sector general equilibrium setting.
That said, contracting frictions in these papers are modeled based on transactions-cost theory, in
situations in which the firm-supplier relationship features a one-sided (rather than bilateral) holdup
problem.

5.3.2   Contractual Frictions and Firm Boundaries in Snakes

We next turn to a parallel set of studies of how contractual frictions shape the location and
organization of GVCs, but this time we focus on purely sequential production process. We begin
overviewing the work of Antràs and Chor (2013) and Alfaro et al. (2019) who develop and test the
implications of a property-rights model of sequential production.
   The setting is similar to the models described in Sections 4.2 and 5.2.1, except that production
stages are characterized as a continuum. More specifically, Antràs and Chor (2013) focus on the
problem of a final-good producer facing an isoelastic demand for its product, that is seeking to
optimally organize a sequential manufacturing process that requires the completion of a unit measure
of production stages. These stages are indexed by i  [0, 1], with a larger i corresponding to stages
further downstream and thus closer to the finished product. Denote by x(i) the value of the services
of intermediate inputs that the supplier of stage i delivers to the firm. Final-good production is
then given by:
                                                       1                     1/
                             F         F                   s      
                            y ( ) =   zi   ( )             y (,   ) I ( )d        ,                     (57)
                                                   0
       F ( ) is a productivity parameter,   (0, 1) is a parameter that captures the (symmetric)
where zi
degree of substitutability among the stage inputs (as in equation (38)), and I ( ) is an indicator
function that takes a value of 1 if input        is produced after all inputs         <   have been produced,
and a value of 0 otherwise. It is this last indicator function I ( ) that makes the production


                                                           81
technology inherently sequential.
   The contractual aspects of the model are in many ways analogous to those discussed above in
the Chor and Ma (2020) framework. The different stage inputs are provided by suppliers, who
each undertake relationship-specific investments to make their components compatible with those of
other suppliers along the value chain. The setting is one of incomplete contracting, in the sense
that contracts contingent on whether components are compatible or not cannot be enforced by
third parties. As a result, the division of surplus between the firm and each supplier is governed by
bargaining, after a stage has been completed and the firm has had a chance to inspect the input.
At that point, the firm and the supplier negotiate over the division of the incremental contribution
to total revenue generated by supplier i, independently from the bilateral negotiations that take
place at other stages (see Antràs and Chor, 2013, for alternative formulations of the bargaining
protocol). In the initial stage of the model, the firm must decide which input suppliers (if any)
to own along the value chain. As in the property-rights theory, the integration of suppliers does
not change the space of contracts available to the firm and its suppliers, but it affects the relative
ex-post bargaining power of these agents. Vertical integration confers the final-good producer higher
bargaining power than outsourcing.
   In order to solve for the subgame perfect equilibrium of the above game, Antràs and Chor (2013)
note that the quasi-rents over which the firm and the supplier at position                in the value chain
negotiate are given by the incremental contribution to total revenue generated by supplier                 at
that stage, which in turn are given by:
                                                             1- -1
                         r (,           F
                                  ) =  zi ( )       (r(,    ))       (y s (,     )) ,                    (58)

where r(,     ) is the revenue secured by the final-good producer up to stage               . As highlighted
by Antràs and Chor (2013), whenever  > 1/ (1 - ), the investment choices of suppliers are
sequential complements in the sense that higher investment levels by prior suppliers increase the
marginal return of supplier      's own investment y s (,    ). Conversely, if  < 1/ (1 - ), investment
choices are sequential substitutes because high values of upstream investments reduce the marginal
return to investing in y s (,    ). Because the supplier at position           chooses y s (,   ) to maximize
(1 -  (,    ))) r (,   ) - c(,    )y s (,   ), where c(,    ) is the marginal cost of investment, equation
(58) illustrates the trickle-down effect that upstream investment inefficiencies can have on downstream
stages.
   Exploiting the recursive structure of the model, Antràs and Chor (2013) characterize the optimal
division of surplus along the chain. The key result in their paper is that the relative size of the input
and final-good elasticities of substitution, respectively  = 1/ (1 - ) and  , governs whether the
incentive for the final-good producer to retain a larger surplus share increases or decreases along the
value chain. Intuitively, when  is high relative to  , investments are sequential complements, and
high upstream values of  (,        ) are particularly costly since they reduce the incentives to invest
not only of these early suppliers but also of all suppliers downstream. Conversely, when  is small
relative to  , investments are sequential substitutes, and low values of  (,             ) in upstream stages

                                                    82
are now relatively detrimental, since they reduce the incentives to invest for downstream suppliers,
who are already underinvesting to begin with.
   Alfaro et al. (2019) develop several extensions of the Antràs and Chor (2013) model that are
relevant for their firm-level empirical analysis. First, they introduce asymmetries across inputs
and map them to variation across inputs in the degree of contractibility. Second, they incorporate
heterogeneity across final good producers in their core productivity, while introducing fixed costs of
integrating suppliers, as in Antràs and Helpman (2004). They then show how such productivity
differences influence the number of stages that are integrated, and hence the propensity of the firm
to integrate upstream relative to downstream stages. Finally, they consider a scenario in which
integration is infeasible for certain segments of the value chain, for example, due to exogenous
technological or regulatory factors, and demonstrate that the model's predictions continue to describe
firm boundary choices for those inputs over which integration is feasible.
   Although Antràs and Chor (2013) and Alfaro et al. (2019) abstract from the study of location
choices, their results have potentially interesting implications for the choice between domestic and
foreign sourcing whenever these sourcing strategies are associated with different levels of contract
enforcement. To see this, consider the case in which contracting in domestic transactions is complete,
while foreign sourcing is associated with incomplete contracting (as in Antràs, 2005). The results in
Antràs and Chor (2013) then suggest that, in the sequential complements case ( >  ), foreign
sourcing is particularly unappealing in upstream stages. Thus, if domestic and foreign sourcing
coexist along the value chain, then only relatively downstream inputs will be offshored. Conversely,
in the sequential substitutes case, ( <  ) one would expect relatively upstream stages to be
offshored. In sum, the model predicts that the `upstreamness' of an input should be a relevant
determinant of the extent to which it is procured from foreign suppliers, with the sign of that
dependence being crucially shaped by the relative size of  and  .
   In largely contemporaneous work, Fally and Hillberry (2018) developed an alternative framework
illustrating the consequences of contractual frictions for the location and organization of GVCs.
Their framework in turn builds on the insightful transaction-cost model in Kikuchi et al. (2018). In
that framework, production of a final good requires (again) that a continuum of stages or tasks
be executed in a pre-determined order. A set of identical firms can produce any set of tasks with
decreasing returns with respect to the measure of tasks produced, which fosters specialization across
firms. To put a check on specialization and generate firms that produce a measurable set of tasks,
Kikuchi et al. (2018) assume that firm-to-firm transactions involve a cost that is proportional to
the value and price of the good at the time of delivery. Kikuchi et al. (2018) provide a sharp
characterization of this problem, in part using recursive methods. For reasons analogous to those in
Costinot et al. (2013) and Antràs and de Gortari (2020), the resulting allocation has relatively small
firms in the upstream stages of production, with firm size growing monotonically as one moves to
more and more downstream stages. The authors claim that the model can match the size distribution
of firms and they further provide a set of comparative statics with respect to transaction costs, and
parameters of the cost function. Fally and Hillberry (2018) extend this setup to an international


                                                 83
setting with costly trade, and develop implications for within-chain comparative advantage. Fally
and Hillberry (2018) demonstrate that their framework delivers a positive relationship between a
country-industry pair's upstreamness measure and its gross-output-to-value-added ratio, and they
provide empirical evidence consistent with it.

5.3.3    Search Frictions

Beyond frictions associated with incomplete contracting, the literature on the international orga-
nization of production has also stressed the role of search frictions in shaping the emergence and
sustainability of GVC links. The standard way to model these frictions is by assuming that the
type of fixed-cost investments firms incur to match with GVC partners, as modelled in Sections
5.1.1, 5.1.2 and 5.1.3, only deliver matches with a probability governed by the relative mass of firms
searching for matches in both sides of the market. The work of Grossman and Helpman (2005)
constitute an early contribution to this literature in a simple two-country general equilibrium model,
while in more recent work, Eaton et al. (2014), Allen (2014), Krolikowski and McCallum (2018) and
Lenoir et al. (2019) adopt a similar approach in more complex, multi-country quantifiable models.78
    The introduction of search frictions enriches the set of predictions emanating from models of
firm-level GVC participation. Without delving into the technical details of these models, we would
highlight four main new sets of insights. First, other things equal, it is clear that search frictions
reduce the attractiveness of engaging in GVC activity, and might lead some firms to opt out of
it when they would have found it profitable to participate in the absence of these frictions. This
in turn carries consequences for the welfare responses to trade shocks and for the trade elasticity,
relative to models without search frictions (see Krolikowski and McCallum, 2018). Second, in the
presence of increasing returns in the matching function, this line of models can generate multiple
equilibria and waves of GVC participation, as the entry of some firms may generate a positive
spillovers on the entry of other firms (see McLaren, 2000; Grossman and Helpman, 2002). Third,
because the fixed costs associated with matching with other producers are sunk in nature, this line
of models also tends to feature hysteresis in the margins of trade (see Eaton et al., 2014), which
in turn has implications for how the geography of GVCs responds to shocks, such as the current
COVID-19 pandemic (see Antràs, 2020). Fourth, this hysteresis can also be interpreted as a form of
lock-in effect, which binds buyer-seller pairs together, and thus aggravates the type of contractual
frictions outlined in Sections 5.3.1 and 5.3.2.
    A natural way to reduce search frictions in finding suitable GVC partners is to rely on specialized
intermediaries. It is thus not surprising that recent work on intermediation in international trade
has also developed frameworks in which search frictions are prominent, as in the work of Antràs
and Costinot (2011), Dasgupta and Mondria (2018), or Startz (2016).

   78
     See also McLaren (2000) and Grossman and Helpman (2002) for even earlier contributions with search frictions.
Other authors refer to the costs of matching as search costs ­ see Monarch (2020) or Antràs et al. (2020)­ but in this
section we focus attention on settings in which the probability of a match is a function of the sets of agents searching.



                                                          84
5.3.4   Relational Contracting

As we have argued in Sections 5.3.1 and 5.3.2, the relational nature of GVCs highlights the role
of institutional quality as a significant determinant of GVC participation. Nevertheless, the same
forces that make relational GVCs rely intensively on institutional quality, such as the lock-in effects
created by relationship-specific investments and by search frictions, also make GVC links particularly
"sticky", which fosters the emergence of reputational mechanisms of cooperation which might partly
substitute for the absence of formal contracting.
   An extreme version of this type of relational contracting arises when parties involved in a GVC
altogether by-pass the market mechanism and decide to transact within firm boundaries, as in
the work outlined in Sections 5.3.1 and 5.3.2. Nevertheless, the internalization of transactions in
a GVC is just one of the many organizational responses to the contractual vagaries associated
with cross-border transactions. In an influential study in the management literature, Gereffi et al.
(2005) elaborate on a much more extensive taxonomy of potential governance forms within GVCs,
and various researchers have built on their work to shed light on the relative prevalence of these
governance forms through a number of interesting case studies (see Van Biesebroeck and Schmitt,
2020, for a recent example in the economics literature).
   Because trade economists typically favor modes of governance that can be identified in the data
across various industries, the literature in international trade has largely focus on exploring the
emergence and consequences of relational contracting. This is perceived as an intermediate option
between vertically integrated GVC links and spot market transactions with suppliers. We reviewed
the burgeoning empirical trade literature on relational contracting in Section 3.3. Here, we simply
outline some of the theoretical insights from that literature.
   It is useful to begin by identify two broad approaches to modeling how relational contracting
shapes GVC participation and trade flows. The first approach, which one might call the `adverse
selection' approach, considers environments in which certain GVC participants ­ say buyers ­ come
in two fixed types: honest and dishonest. Honest buyers always honor contracts (say paying for
the delivered goods), even when the contractual environment is weak and cannot always impose
penalties on misbehavior. On the other hand, dishonest agents misbehave when given a chance,
which in these models occurs with certain probability. In this environment, repeated contracting
allows sellers to better learn and identify whether buyers are honest or dishonest. More precisely,
starting from a prior, sellers update their belief of the buyer being honest as long as no misbehavior
is observed in equilibrium. Yet, when misbehavior is observed, sellers immediate infer they are
dealing with a dishonest buyer, and optimally discontinue the relationship. This line of models is
developed in Antràs and Foley (2015) and Araujo et al. (2016), and it has been further developed
and taken to the data by Monarch and Schmidt-Eisenlohr (2017), a paper we discussed in some
detail in section 3.3. A distinguishing feature of these line of models are that they naturally generate
an increasing volume of trade as relationship age increases, with the rate of growth in firm-to-firm
trade being larger, the weaker the contractual environment.
   A second line of models, which we can refer to as `moral hazard' approaches are more in line with


                                                  85
the models of contractual frictions reviewed in sections 5.3.1 and 5.3.2. These frameworks build on
the relational contracting literature (see MacLeod and Malcomson, 1989; Levin, 2003; Board, 2011),
in which agents undertake noncontractible investments, and in which repeated interactions may
allow them to sustain cooperation under the threat of reversion to a non-cooperative equilibrium.
This literature is largely concerned with characterizing the range of parameter values for which
cooperation can be sustained. A particularly noteworthy contribution is the work of Defever et al.
(2016) who study a model of global sourcing (or backward GVC participation) very much in the spirit
of the double-sided hold-up problem in Antràs (2003), Antràs and Helpman (2004) and Chor and
Ma (2020) (see Section 5.3.1). An intuitive insight from these models is that relational contracting is
more likely to be used whenever agents are relatively patient, in which case the costs of reverting to
a non-cooperative equilibrium are higher. Less trivially, these frameworks also illustrate how weak
contracting, by depressing the payoffs under non-cooperation, renders relational cooperation more
beneficial. In this sense, formal and informal contracting appear to be substitutes. An unappealing
(or counterfactual) implication of these line of frameworks ­ at least in their most stripped-down
form ­ is that they tend to general first-best investment levels and trade volumes from the onset
of a relationship. To remedy this, some authors such as Macchiavello and Morjaria (2015), have
considered environments that blend the adverse selection and moral hazard approaches.79
     In closing, it is also worth mentioning some theoretical work, building on Baker et al. (2002),
that has developed frameworks in which firms not only choose between engaging in spot versus
relational contracting, but also consider the possibility of internalizing transactions, as in the work
reviewed in Sections 5.3.1 and 5.3.2. Notable contributions to this literature include the work of
Kukharskyy (2016) and Kamal and Tang (2014).


6        Trade Policy in the Age of GVCs
We would argue that, relative to the work on the measurement and modeling of GVCs, our
profession's understanding of the policy implications of the rise of GVCs is much less fully developed.
How does the use of traditional instruments of trade policy ­ tariffs, quantitative restrictions, or
regulatory standards ­ affect the volume of trade and social welfare in a world of GVCs relative to a
world where trade is exclusively in final goods? How does the rise of GVCs affect our understanding
of what constitutes optimal trade policy? Answers to these questions are particularly relevant in
current times, when trade policy discussions are as salient as they have been in the last fifty years.
     We will structure the discussion along the following main themes. First, in sections 6.1, 6.2, and
6.3, we review work studying the implications and optimal design of trade policy in competitive
environments featuring final-good trade as well as intermediate-input trade. Second, in Section 6.4,
we study the role of political-economy forces in shaping the structure of protection in upstream and
downstream markets. Third, we extend the analysis to richer frameworks, such as frameworks with
differentiated domestic and foreign value added in production (section 6.5), general-equilibrium
    79
    See Gil (2011) for a study of the interplay between formal and informal contracting in the context of the movie
industry.


                                                        86
Ricardian models featuring product differentiation in upstream and downstream markets (section
6.6), models featuring imperfect competition (section 6.7), and models of relational GVCs (section
6.8).
    Although we will connect at times with selected empirical papers, the focus of this section is
admittedly theoretical in nature. In recent years, a number of interesting empirical papers have
been developed to study the implications of trade protection for the geography of GVCs. Conconi
et al. (2018) use rich data to study the implications of NAFTA's "Rules of Origin" for intermediate
input trade, and show that these RoO led to a sizable decrease in imports of intermediate goods into
Mexico from third countries relative to imports from the U.S. and Canada. Relatedly, Vandenbussche
and Viegelahn (2018) document that following the imposition of antidumping duties, Indian firms
reduce their use of protected inputs on average by 25­40%, relative to other inputs. Bown et al.
(2020) study the impact of U.S. antidumping duties against Chinese imports during the period
1988-2016 (and also during the recent U.S.-China trade war), and find that they had a significantly
negative impact on employment in downstream industries, with no counterbalancing positive effect
in protected industries. Similar results were obtained by Barattieri and Cacciatore (2020) for
the period 1994-2015, and by Flaaen and Pierce (2019) when focusing on the Trump tariffs (and
subsequent foreign retaliatory tariffs) instituted since 2018. Using a shift-share design based on
pre-period shares constructed with detailed U.S. firm-level data from 2016, Handley et al. (2020)
similarly report a negative association between firm-level export growth and the extent to which a
firm's input bundle in 2016 included inputs that eventually faced higher tariffs during the 2018-19
tariff war.80 These recent studies were bolstered by the fact that the recent Trump tariffs, unlike
most previous protectionist episodes, disproportionately affect intermediate inputs. In particular,
Bown and Zhang (2019) calculate that approximately 60 percent of the Trump tariffs through 2018
were on inputs, and affected nearly 20 percent of all US imports of intermediate inputs.

6.1     Effective Rate of Protection and Tariff Escalation
As in the rest of this survey, our focus is largely on work carried out (roughly) in the last ten years,
but it is worth beginning this section with an overview of some leading themes on the older trade
policy literature that are very much related to intermediate input trade and to global value chains.
    Consider first the literature on effective rates of protection, which is exemplified by the seminal
work of Corden (1966). This literature is concerned with the implications of intermediate input
trade for the incidence of import tariffs. More precisely, Corden (1966)'s definition of the effective
rate of protection is "the percentage increase in value added per unit in an economic activity which
is made possible by the tariff structure relative to the situation in the absence of tariffs. (p. 222)"
To formally study this concept, consider a simple partial-equilibrium environment in which final
output in a given industry is produced with local value added and with a bundle of intermediate
inputs, as in many of the models studied in previous sections. It is assumed that local value added
   80
      Other notable studies of the implications of the tariffs introduced by the Trump administration include the work
of Amiti et al. (2019), Fajgelbaum et al. (2020), and Flaaen et al. (2020).



                                                         87
subsumes any usage of local intermediate inputs, so the bundle of intermediate inputs is imported
from the rest of the world.81 Assuming zero profits, we have

                                                  pF = vav + pI aI ,

where pF is the price of the final good, av and aI are the unit value-added and input-bundle
requirements, and v and pI are the price for value added and the input bundle.
    Suppose that the country under study is a small open-economy, so in an untaxed equilibrium, we
have that pF and pI correspond to the world prices for these inputs. Now, consider the implications
of levying ad-valorem import tariffs tF on the final good, and tI on the input bundle. Given the
small-country assumption, the price of the final good will increase to pF = tF pF , while the price of
the input bundle, will rise to pI = tI pI . Naturally, such protection will benefit local value added in
that sector, which can see its remuneration rise. But, by how much? Holding av and aI constant, it
is straightforward to see that v can increase by

                                             v                   pI aI
                                               = tF + (tF - tI )       .                                           (59)
                                             v                   vav

The effective rate of protection is thus higher than tF provided that tF > tI , and is also increasing
in the importance of inputs in production. As an example, if imported inputs are untaxed, and the
ratio of value added to gross output is 1/2, as roughly observed in the data, the effective rate of
protection is twice that implied by the tariff on final goods. Furthermore, it is straightforward to
extend formula (59) to the case of multiple intermediate inputs indexed by s, facing heterogeneous
tariffs levels
                                          v                                 ps as
                                            = tF +             (tF - ts )         .                                (60)
                                          v                s                vav
    Around the time Corden was developing these results, several authors put these and related
formulas to use and showed that effective rates of protection were indeed much higher than those
implied by final-good tariffs. Among others, Balassa (1965) provided evidence for relatively advanced
economies (United States, United Kingdom, the European Common Market, Sweden and Japan)
in 1962, while Balassa (1971) complemented this evidence with calculations for a few developing
economies (Brazil, Chile, Mexico, West Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippines, and Norway), which
resulted in even higher (and, in some cases, remarkably high) effective rates of protection.82
    As is clear from equations (59) and (60), the wedge between nominal and effective rates of
protection is a reflection of the fact that tariffs applied on final goods are typically higher than those
applied on intermediate inputs. This phenomenon is often referred to as `tariff escalation' and it has
been documented in a large number studies, from the early work by Travis (1964) and Balassa (1965),
   81
      This implicitly assumes that local inputs, if any, are produced using only local value added, which is inconsistent
with roundabout models, such as Caliendo and Parro (2015).
   82
      There is also an extensive theoretical literature on the robustness of the simple equations (59) and (60) to
alternative environments. See Ethier (1977) for a particularly critical overview, and Anderson (1998) for a lucid
rejoinder.



                                                           88
to the more recent calculations by Bown and Crowley (2016) and Shapiro (2020). To illustrate this
phenomenon, Figure 7 depicts applied bilateral tariffs on final goods versus intermediate inputs for
37 countries, as computed by Shapiro (2020), where the distinction between a final good and an
input is drawn based on the UN BEC end-use classification. As is clear from the figure, all but one
of the scatter points are above the 45-degree line, and in many cases by a wide margin. Shapiro
(2020) also finds a smoother negative correlation between tariffs and the upstreamness of a sector,
as measured by Antràs et al. (2012).

                                                                          Figure 7: Tariff Escalation

                                                 0.3




                                                0.25
  Unweighted Bilateral Tariffs on Final Goods




                                                 0.2




                                                0.15




                                                 0.1




                                                0.05




                                                  0
                                                       0   0.05              0.1              0.15             0.2      0.25       0.3

                                                                  Unweighted Bilateral Tariffs on Intermediate Inputs




                                    The existence of a clear pattern of tariff escalation explains why effective rates of protection, as
measured in equations (59) and (60), appear larger than nominal rates of protection on final goods.
This still leaves open the question of what is the policy relevance of this finding. Are high effective
rates of protection bad for economic welfare? Is tariff escalation consistent with the tariffs on final
goods and on inputs that a social planner would set? The next sections will attempt to provide
tentative answers to these questions.




                                                                                         89
6.2    Baseline: A Simple Roundabout Model
We begin by analyzing optimal trade policy in a partial-equilibrium, constant-returns-to-scale,
perfectly competitive roundabout environment with input-output links. The framework builds on
those in Cadot et al. (2004) and Gawande et al. (2012) ­ which themselves extend the classical
Grossman and Helpman (1994) `protection for sale model' ­ but we relax the assumption of the
country under study being a small open economy, and for now we do not model political economy
biases in the setting of policies.
    We consider a two-country environment with a Home country, the focus of the analysis, and a
Foreign one, which sometimes we refer to as the Rest of the World (RoW). The Home country is
populated by a continuum of measure 1 of individuals with identical quasi-linear preferences:

                                                            S
                                           U (c) = c0 +           us (cs ),
                                                            s=1

where c0 denotes consumption of the outside numéraire good, which is costlessly traded and not
subject to tariffs. Within each `outside' sector s, Home and Foreign goods are assumed to be perfect
substitutes. Provided that income is large enough, we can characterize the demand side of the
model via simple sectoral demand functions that are only a function of each sector's price

                                      cs = ds (ps )    for s = 1, 2, ..., S,

given that the outside good eliminates all income effects, and preferences are separable across sectors.
Consumer surplus in sector s is in turn given by Ss (ps ) = us (cs (ps )) - ps cs (ps ). Preferences are
analogous in the Foreign country, leading to a similarly downward-sloping demand for goods in
sectors s = 1, 2, ..., S .
    On the supply side, the numéraire good is produced one-to-one with labor, which pins down the
wage rate to 1 in all countries. Non-numéraire goods are produced combining labor, sector-specific
capital, and the intermediate inputs consisting of output from all other sectors of the economy. To
simplify matters, and following Cadot et al. (2004) and Gawande et al. (2012), we assume that
inputs are used in fixed proportions, so we can write the rent function s (ps ) for the capital specific
to sector s as
                                                       S
                             s (p1,... , pS ) = ps -            ars pr xs (ks , s ) -   s,                (61)
                                                       r=1

where xs is output in sector s, ars is the fixed requirement of units of good r used as inputs in
producing good s, ks is the fixed amount of sector-specific capital in sector s, and         s   is the amount
of labor hired in sector s.
    Due to the quasi-linearity of preferences, we can write Home welfare associated with a given




                                                       90
vector p = (p1,... , pS ) of domestic prices and a given vector p = p         
                                                                     1,... , pS of foreign prices as


                    S                    S                  S
                                                                                                   S
 W (p, p ) = 1 +          s ( p) +             Ss (ps ) +         (ps - ps ) cs (ps ) +                  asr xr (p) - xs (p) , (62)
                                                                                                   r=1
                    s=1                  s=1                s=1

where the last term in parenthesis is Home's imports in sector s, or

                                                                    S
                                      ms (p)  cs (ps ) +                  asr xr (p) - xs (p) .
                                                                    r=1


Welfare in the Foreign country can be expressed in an analogous manner.
   We next consider the effects of Home levying a vector of trade taxes t = (t1,... , tS ) that generate
a wedge between domestic and world prices. Notice that tariff levels (and associated price wedges
ps - ps ) are the same regardless of whether the good is being imported as a final good or as an
intermediate input. Maximizing W (p, p ) with respect to ts yields

   S     S                                            S
             t (p) Sr (pr )                      pr     pr  p
                  +                          ×      +      - r                      × mr (p)
  r=1   t=1
             pr     pr                           ts r=1 ts  ts
                                                                                      S                  S
                                                                                                             mr (p) pt
                                                                                  +         (pr - pr)              ×    = 0.
                                                                                      r=1                t=1
                                                                                                             pt      ts

Noting that Sr (pr ) /pr = -cr (pr ), and that

                                         S
                                             t (p)                            S
                                                   = xr (p) -                       art xt (p) ,
                                        t=1
                                             pr                               t=1


we can simplify the above expression to

                              S                S             S
                                  p                             mr (p) pt
                          -        r
                                     mr (p) +     (pr - pr)           ×    = 0.
                              r=1
                                  ts          r=1           t=1
                                                                pt      ts

Next noting that goods market clearing imposes ms (p) = -m    
                                                          r (p ), we can further simplify this to:

                                  S              S              S
                                   pr                              m        
                                                                    r (p ) pt
                                      mr (p ) =     (pr - pr )                .                                               (63)
                               r=1
                                   ts           r=1            t=1
                                                                    p  t   ts

   If one were to ignore cross-price effects on import volumes, this formula would reduce to the
familiar equation
                                                                        1
                                                        ts - 1 =                                                              (64)
                                                                        s,X

where
                                                            m     
                                                             s (p )   p
                                                  s,X =
                                                                        s
                                                                                                                              (65)
                                                             p  s   m     
                                                                     s (p )

is the sectoral (partial-equilibrium) foreign export supply elasticity. Under this inverse elasticity


                                                                   91
formula in equation (64), whether optimal tariffs are higher or lower in different sectors would
depend solely on this elasticity, regardless of other characteristics of these sectors (i.e., whether they
are relatively upstream or downstream in GVCs).
    Nevertheless, with vertical linkages across countries, there will naturally be cross-price effects on
the supply side, which will generate cross-price effects on net import volumes, even when one shuts
down cross-price effects on the demand side, as we have done with our assumption of separable
quasi-linear preferences. We can of course still re-define (63) as

                                    (dp) (m (p ))T = (p - p ) (dm )T ,

which then equates tariffs with a `general-equilibrium' export supply elasticity. In practice, however,
this is not an elasticity that is straightforward to estimate, so this general formula provides little
guidance in assessing whether the observed structure of protection is in line with the one maximizing
social welfare. To make progress on this issue, we next turn to a special case of this more general
model.

6.3    Tariffs on Final Goods and on Inputs in Competitive Economies
Let us consider the same environment as before, but assume now that there are only two sectors,
other than the outside good sector 0. Sector F produces a good that is only consumed as a final
good, while sector I produces a good that is only used as an input in production.83 This simplified
setting allows one to gain some insights on how intermediate input trade affects optimal final-good
tariffs, and also what determines the optimal structure of protection in intermediate input sectors.
    In terms of the model above, this is simply a special case with S = {F, I }, SI (pI ) = 0, and rent
functions

                                    F (pF , pI ) = (pF - apI ) xF -          F

                                         I (pI ) = pI xI -        I.


Applying the formula in (63), and simplifying the system under the assumption that pr /ts = 0
for s, r  {F, I }, we obtain

                                                        1     m       
                                                                 I (p )
                            1 = (tF - 1) F,X + (tI - 1)                                                        (66)
                                                     m     
                                                       F (p )   p  F
                                           1         
                                                mF (p )
                            1 = (tF - 1)                + (tI - 1)  I,X ,                                      (67)
                                        mI (p )  p I

where         
      F,X and I,X are the sectoral foreign export supply elasticities.
    As is clear from these expressions, the presence of vertical linkages introduces a deviation or
wedge relative to the standard formula linking sectoral optimal tariffs to sectoral inverse foreign
  83
     Other work studying optimal tariffs on final goods and inputs in neoclassical environments includes the work of
Ruffin (1969), Casas (1973), and Das (1983).


                                                        92
export supply elasticities. What is the nature and sign of this wedge? To shed light on this, we first
note that m                                                         
           F (p ) = cF (p ) - xF (p ) and mI (p ) = axF (p ) - xI (p ) imply

                                   m    
                                    I (p )        xF (p )
                                               = a        0
                                    p F            p F
                                   m    
                                    F p )
                                      (           x (p )
                                               = - F       0.
                                    p I            pI

Intuitively, other things equal, an increase in the world price in sector F increases input demand
in the RoW, thus increasing the RoW's net imports of inputs. Similarly, an increase in the world
input price decreases the return to final-good production, decreasing RoW final-good output, and
thus increasing the net imports of final goods.
   Having signed these cross-effects, we can now return to equations (66) and (67) and note that the
manner in which vertical linkages affect optimal tariffs depends on subtle aspects of the environment.
To see this, note that if the Home country is importing goods F and I , then m    
                                                                              F (p ) < 0 and
m                                                                  
 I (p ) < 0, and we necessarily have tF - 1 > 1/F,X and tI - 1 > 1/I,X . The intuition is as
follows: a final-good tariff provides the standard terms-of-trade gain, but in addition, by lowering
the world price of the final good, it reduces the demand for intermediate inputs. This in turn
reduces the world price of intermediate inputs, which affords an additional terms-of-trade gain,
given that Home also imports inputs. Similarly, levying an import tariff on inputs not only affords
the standard terms-of-trade gain, but the reduction in the world price of inputs, leads to an increase
in the production of final-goods abroad, which reduces the world price of final goods as well, leading
to an additional terms-of-trade gain when the Home country also imports final goods.
   In sum, when Home imports both goods, vertical linkages lead to higher final-good tariffs
and higher input tariffs than if these sectors were setting optimal tariffs based on the standard
inverse-elasticity formula. Whether the wedge is higher or lower for final goods or for intermediates
is less clear, however. With our assumption that inputs are used in fixed proportions, it turns out
that m                       
      I (p ) /pF = mF (p ) /pI , and the model generates tariff escalation whenever (i) inverse
export supply elasticities are (weakly) higher for final goods than for inputs, and (ii) net imports of
intermediate inputs are higher than net imports of final goods.
   The above results rely, however, on Home importing both final-goods and inputs in the industry
under study. If, for instance, Home is a net exporter of inputs, we have m    
                                                                          I (p ) > 0, and thus, as
long as tF > 1, equation (67) implies that we must have (tI - 1)                      
                                                                 I,X < 1, and because I,X < 0, this
implies 0 > tI - 1 > 1/I,X . Thus, Home sets a lower export tax on inputs than it would do under
the standard formula. Now, from equation (66), tI < 1 and m                              
                                                           F (p ) < 0 imply (tF - 1) < 1/F,X ,
and thus Home also sets a lower import tariff on final goods whenever Home is a net exporter of
inputs. The intuition is as follows: by levying an import tariff on final goods, Home reduces the
world price of final goods, thereby reducing the demand for inputs in the RoW. This puts downward
pressure on the world price of inputs, which constitutes a terms-of-trade loss for Home.
   Following analogous steps, one can show that Home will also set a lower export tax on final



                                                  93
goods and a lower import tariff on inputs whenever Home exports final goods and imports inputs.
And, finally, when Home is a net exporter of both goods, it will choose to set higher export taxes
on both goods than it would under the standard inverse elasticity formula.
   The bottom line of all this discussion is that even in a simple world with just two goods and an
outside sector, how vertical linkages affect the level of optimal tariffs very much depends on the
pattern of trade.

6.4    Political Economy, Lobbying Competition and Tariff Escalation
We next revert back to the roundabout model with general input-output links and consider the
role of political economy forces in shaping the structure of protection in a world of GVCs. As
microfounded in the work of Grossman and Helpman (1994), we posit that policy makers choose
tariffs to maximize a `policy support function' of the type

                                                            S
                                          W (p, p ) +             s ( p) ,
                                                            s=1

where W (p, p ) is social welfare in equation (62), and  > 0 is an additional weight put on producer
surplus. This latter term reflects the notion that concentration in the ownership of the sector-specific
types of capital used in production allows producers to solve the collective action problem inherent
in lobbying for protection, while consumers remain unorganized and ineffective in fighting producers'
demands for protection. To isolate the role of political forces, we follow Grossman and Helpman
(1994), Cadot et al. (2004), and Gawande et al. (2012), and assume that Home is a small-open
economy. Under this assumption, and regardless of the structure on input-output links, a social
planner would choose free trade in all sectors, as is clear from equation (63), where ps = ps for all s
whenever pr /ts = 0 for all r and s.
   In the presence of these political-economy forces, the system of first-order conditions characteriz-
ing optimal tariffs becomes

                         S                                           S
                                          mr (p) ps                      t   ps
                              (pr - pr)         ×    +                          = 0.
                        r=1
                                          ps      ts                t=1
                                                                        ps   ts

Invoking the rent function in (61), we can further reduce this to

                              S                                S
                                               mr (p)
                                   (pr - pr)          +  xs -     asr xr      = 0.                 (68)
                             r=1
                                               ps             t=1

The interpretation of the two terms in equation (68) is as follows. The first term is analogous to the
last term in the general expression (63), but it is somewhat simpler because one need not worry about
tariff revenue effects working through changes in prices in other sectors. The second term is more
novel and reflects the competition between sector-specific interests. As in Grossman and Helpman
(1994), other things equal, sectors with higher output levels (relative to import volumes) will achieve


                                                       94
higher protection, but note that this effect is attenuated by the usage of these sector's output in
other sectors. Intuitively, the more a sector's output is used as an input in other sectors, the higher
will be the cost of protection in that sector for other sectors in the economy. Because these other
sectors have a voice in the political process (or, more broadly, in the process of tariff formation), this
counterlobbying will tend to reduce the level of protection. As indicated by Cadot et al. (2004), this
implies that, other things equal, relatively downstream sectors that sell predominantly to consumers
should achieve higher levels of protection than relatively upstream sectors that sell predominantly
to other sectors. The authors view this prediction as providing a rationale for the phenomenon of
tariff escalation, which as described in Section 6.1, has been widely documented in the literature.
    This result can be precisely formalized as follows. Suppose that the policy maker envisions
levying a tariff in only one sector s, so pr = pr for all r = s. Then equation (68) simplifies to


                                        ts - 1     xs - S
                                                        t=1 asr xr
                                               =                   ,
                                           ts    s,M    ms

and thus tariffs are larger the larger is , the lower the import demand elasticity s,M = - (ms /ps ) (ps /ms ),
and the larger the ratio of final-good sales relative to total imports in the sector (rather than the
standard import penetration ratio, as in the literature without input-output links).
    When the policy maker chooses positive protection in various sectors, matters become more
complicated due to the second-best effect of tariffs working through tariff revenue. More specifically,
when raising a tariff ts , output xr in sectors using xs as an input will be depressed, which will tend
to increase imports in those sectors and generate higher tariff revenue, a force that works against
the model producing tariff escalation.84 Indeed, this is precisely the mechanism that leads Gawande
and Bandyopadhyay (2000) and McCalman (2004) to derive a positive effect of upstream tariffs
on downstream tariffs in models in which lobbying is only carried out by downstream producers.
These same authors, as well as Erbahar and Zi (2017) more recently, provide empirical evidence
supporting the relevance of this cascading trade protection.
    Despite these conflicting effects, Cadot et al. (2004) perform numerical simulations of a variant
of this model, and they show that the cross-industry tariff revenue term in (68) is quantitatively
small, and thus the model delivers implications consistent with data. Further empirical evidence
consistent with a model of lobby competition with upstream and downstream sectors is provided
in Gawande et al. (2012). Using tariff, trade and input-output data from 42 countries at different
levels of development, Gawande et al. (2012) show that country- and sector-specific tariffs are
decreasing in the extent to which that country-sector's output is used as an input in other sectors.
Furthermore, taking into account counterlobbying forces, leads to estimates of  that are higher than
when estimating models without such counterlobbying, such as Grossman and Helpman (1994)'s
`protection for sale' model (see Goldberg and Maggi, 1999). Intuitively, the standard model can only
justify low tariffs via a low weight placed on lobbying contributions (which maps to  above), and
   84
      One way to shut down these effects ­ implicitly invoked by Gawande et al. (2012)­ is to assume that technology
combines sector-specific capital and labor in fixed proportions. In such case, sectoral output is fixed and independent
of input or output prices in any sector.


                                                          95
thus a higher weight on social welfare. Meanwhile, the model with input-output links is consistent
with a higher value of  leading to lower tariffs on account of counterlobbying forces, and thus the
implied benevolence of the policy maker is diminished.

6.5    Value-Added Approach
We next consider an environment inspired by the work of Blanchard et al. (2016). Although this is
not essential for some of the results below, we stick to the competitive model developed in Section
6.3. The main novelty is that we now consider an environment in which production of final goods in
each country combines labor, sector-specific capital, and an input that is only produced in the other
country. From the point of view of the Home country, Blanchard et al. (2016) refer to the imported
input as `Foreign Value Added" (or FVA) used in Home production, and to the exported input as
`Domestic Value Added' (or DVA) in Foreign production.
   Under these assumptions, the sector-specific capital at Home and in Foreign now earn

                            F (pF , pIF or ) = pF xF - pIF or xIF or -       F

                           F   (p     
                                 F , pIDom )   =   p   
                                                    F xF   -   p      
                                                                IDom xIDom   -   
                                                                                 F,


where xIF or is the Foreign input used in Home production, and xIDom is the Home input used
in Foreign, and the corresponding prices for these inputs are pIF or and pIDom , respectively. For
simplicity, we follow Blanchard et al. (2016) in assuming that these inputs are in fixed supply and
remain untaxed, so the income obtained from selling these inputs is a pure rent given by

                                     I (p                
                                         IDom ) = pIDom xIDom

                                      I (pIF or ) = pIF or xIF or .


Welfare at Home is now given by

      W (p, p ) = 1 + F (pF , pIF or ) + I (p                           
                                             IDom ) + SF (pF ) + (pF - pF ) (cF (pF ) - xF (pF )) ,


where p = (pF , pIF or ) and p = (p     
                                   F , pIDom ). Note that because inputs are in fixed supply, changes
in the price of the Foreign input have no effect on Home's final-good production, and thus we can
write xF (pF ).
   We next consider the effects of levying an import tariff tF on the final good. Differentiating
W (p, p ) with respect to tF and invoking mF (p) = -mF (p) to simplify, delivers


                                1         pIF or xIF or         p      
                                                                 IDom xIDom   
                    tF - 1 =         1-                  F or -             × Dom ,                   (69)
                               F,X          p F m F                p m
                                                                     F F


where                                                                                     
      F,X is the standard export supply elasticity defined in equation (65), and F or and Dom are




                                                    96
positive terms.85
   Equation (69) makes it clear that there are two terms that generate a wedge between the optimal
final-good tariffs in a standard model without input trade, and in this model featuring foreign
value added in domestic production, and domestic value added in foreign production. These terms
capture the intuitive nature that levying tariffs is more costly when (i) part of the rents obtained
from that protection accrue to foreigners in the form of higher input prices pIF or , and when (ii) the
fall in the Foreign final-good price caused by the tariff reduces the rents that domestic value added
obtains abroad (by reducing pIDom ). In sum, optimal final-good tariffs are predicted to be lower,
the higher the foreign value added in domestic production (the term pIF or xIF or in (69)), and the
higher is the domestic value added in foreign production (the term p      
                                                                    IDom xIDom in (69)). Blanchard
et al. (2016) explore various extensions of this framework that incorporate multiple sectors, political
economy biases, preferences featuring income effects, and elastic supply of inputs. Their two key
results continue to hold in those environments, though the expressions for optimal tariffs become
significantly more complicated.
   Blanchard et al. (2016) also explore the empirical validity of their theoretical predictions. To do
so, they combine data on world input-output links from the WIOD, tariff data from World Bank's
WITS website, as well as data on temporary trade barriers from Chad Bown's Temporary Trade
Barriers Database (Bown, 2014). They find evidence in support of these two key predictions both
when looking at how countries discriminate across trading partners by lowering protection through
bilateral tariff preferences, and also when countries discriminate by raising protection through the
adoption of temporary trade barriers, particularly against China.
   It is also worth noting that the work of Blanchard et al. (2016) very much relates to prior insights
from the work of Blanchard (2007), who showed that optimal tariffs tend to be lower in environments
with foreign direct investment and international ownership, in which a country's factors deployed
abroad suffer negative consequences from changes in terms of trade induced by tariffs. Another
related work is Blanchard (2010), who studies the role of multilateral trade agreements in a world
in which foreign investment leads to muted incentives for terms-of-trade manipulation.

6.6      Product Differentiation and General Equilibrium
So far, we have restricted the analysis to partial-equilibrium environments in which wages are
pinned down by an outside sector and in which goods are homogeneous. This creates a bit of
disconnect with modern macro models of GVCs, which as we have seen in Section 4, tend to be
general-equilibrium in nature and generate bilateral gross exports and imports within sectors.
   We next build on the recent work of Beshkar and Lashkaripour (2020), who consider optimal tariffs
in a general equilibrium environment with roundabout production in which goods are differentiated
by their country of production. Although their underlying economic model is significantly more
general (see below), it is useful to focus attention on a discussion of their main results for the case in
  85                              (pIF or /tF )(tF /pIF or )              -(p                
                                                                             IDom /tF )(tF /pIDom )
       More specifically, F or     -(p     /tF )(tF /p
                                                               and Dom       -(p  /tF )(tF /p
                                                                                                      .
                                        F             F)                        F            F)




                                                                 97
which their model reduces to the Caliendo and Parro (2015) framework. This amounts to assuming
that (i) labor is the only factor of production, (ii) preferences are Cobb-Douglas across sectors, and
CES across differentiated varieties within sectors, and (iii) technology is Cobb-Douglas in labor and
the bundle of inputs in various sectors, with the latter being a CES aggregator of the differentiated
inputs.
    Building on the tools developed by Costinot et al. (2015), Beshkar and Lashkaripour (2020)
solve for optimal trade taxes at the sectoral level, with the same tax levels applying regardless of the
end use (i.e., final good or input) of the good being traded. Because, under product differentiation,
countries will both export and imports varieties within sectors, Beshkar and Lashkaripour (2020)
begin by considering a setting in which a government sets both optimal import tariffs tM
                                                                                       s and
optimal export taxes tX
                      s against the Rest of the World. These optimal trade taxes are given by:


                                1 + tM
                                     s
                                                ¯
                                            = 1+t                                                                      (70)
                                                            1+    s f
                                                                    s
                                 1 + tX
                                      s     =                     s
                                                                      f            ¯ -1
                                                                                 1+t                                   (71)
                                                      s
                                                    s f     -           sr r
                                                        f         r=1 f f h

      ¯ is an arbitrary constant, s is the trade elasticity in sector s, f
where t                                                                  s is the share of spending by
                                                                           f
                                                                                 rs is the (constant)
the Rest of the World on their own goods in sector s (defined in equation (16)), f
share of production costs spent on intermediate inputs from sector s by industry-r producers in the
                       r is the share of output from the Rest of the World that is sold at Home
Rest of the World, and f h
     s s / X s s + X s s
(or Xh                                using the notation developed in Section 4.1).
       fh   h fh    f ff
    Several observations are in order regarding the optimal import and export taxes in equations (70)
and (71). First, Lerner symmetry applies in this framework, and thus the level of optimal import
                                                                               ¯). Second, and in
and export taxes is only determined up to a common multiplicative shifter (1 + t
line with the results in Costinot et al. (2015), the presence of input-output linkages does not undo
the fact that in Ricardian economies, optimal input tariffs are uniform across sectors. Intuitively,
the main goal of import tariffs in this environment is to improve the countries terms of trade, and
because all sector's technology is linear in labor, this implies that the incentive to mark-down
imports is common in all sectors.86 On the other hand, optimal export taxes are heterogeneous
across sectors. The reason for this is that the main goal of export taxes is to exploit Home's market
power in the differentiated varieties it produces. This leads to a markup (e.g., an export tax)
that is negatively related to the trade elasticity s and to the own trade share f
                                                                                s in the Rest of
                                                                                  f
the World, but that is positively related to the extent to which a sector's output is sold to final
               sr ), rather than being exported as an input and then reimported embedded in
consumers (low f
                                       r ). The negative impact of  s  s on the optimal export
foreign goods (as captured by the term f h                            ff
tariff is well-understood, and is associated with the well-known formula developed by Gros (1987).
The other effects are unique to the presence of intersectoral linkages in the model. In a nutshell,
the use of export taxes will be curtailed in situations in which the higher export prices will be
   86
     Beshkar and Lashkaripour (2020) consider an extension of their framework that incorporates sector-specific
capital, and variation across sectors in the output elasticity of the specific capital generates variation in import tariffs.



                                                             98
passed-through back to Home consumers, when the goods being exported are largely inputs that
are re-imported. As a result, Beshkar and Lashkaripour (2020) conclude that optimal export taxes
are lower in upstream sectors than in downstream sectors, and they are also lower in a world of
GVCs than in a world without vertical linkages across sectors.
    Beshkar and Lashkaripour (2020) also consider the relevant case in which export taxes are ruled
out.87 In that case, import tariffs cease to be uniform across sectors, as they serve a second-best
role in exploiting Home's market power in their export sectors. Consistently with the logic above,
however, the incentive to levy import tariffs is higher in relatively upstream sectors, because the
cost of the tariff is partly passed on to Foreign consumers in the form of higher input prices. As a
result, their framework delivers a form of tariff de-escalation that is inconsistent with the observed
negative correlation between import tariffs and upstreamness observed in the real world. This may
be interpreted as indicating that the type of political economy effects emphasized by Cadot et al.
(2004) and Gawande et al. (2012) are key for rationalizing tariff escalation practices. An alternative
explanation, however, is that the pattern of optimal tariffs may look quite different under different
market structures. We next turn to further explore the latter possibility.

6.7    Imperfect Competition
It is well understood that the study of trade policy outside the paradigm of perfectly competitive
models is complicated by the fact that the nature and even the sign of optimal trade taxes is sensitive
to details of how imperfect competition is modeled (see Eaton and Grossman, 1986). At the same
time, the trade literature has largely converged to a particular approach to modeling imperfect
competition ­ along the lines of Krugman (1980) ­ so it seems natural to explore optimal trade
policy in versions of that environment that incorporate intermediate input trade. As in Krugman
(1980), the focus is on an environment with CES preferences within sectors, increasing returns to
scale technologies featuring constant marginal costs, and monopolistically competitive environments.
    In carrying out this analysis, one could in principle follow a partial equilibrium approach or a
general equilibrium approach, very much in line with the dichotomy outlined above in perfectly
competitive environments. The partial equilibrium approach to the study of trade policy in
monopolistically competitive environments originates in the work of Venables (1987), where the
focus is solely on trade in final goods. The framework in Venables (1987) eliminates terms of trade
effects working through wages by specifying an outside sector that pins down wages in all countries.
The focus is instead on how trade taxes (and import tariffs, in particular) can enhance welfare
by relocating (final-good) firm entry into one's own country, something that may prove beneficial
for consumers ­ despite higher prices for imported goods ­ due to the presence of trade costs.88
The general equilibrium approach to optimal trade policy with monopolistic competition ­ best
exemplified by the work of Gros (1987) ­ instead re-focuses attention on terms-of-trade effects, and
  87
     Export taxes are rarely used in practice, and some countries, such as the United States, explictly ban them (see
U.S. Constitution, Article 1, Section 9, Clause 5).
  88
     Ossa (2011) further developed Venables (1987)'s analysis and built a theory of trade agreements based on it.



                                                         99
emphasizes that small-open economies may have market power whenever the goods they import
and export are differentiated. In terms of relocation effects, these are entirely eliminated in the
one-sector model in Gros (1987).
    A nascent literature is currently exploring variants of these models that feature intermediate
input trade, and highlights the novel forces that arise in that case. Two recent examples are Caliendo
et al. (2021) and Antràs et al. (2021), who both consider multi-sector Ricardian economies featuring
general equilibrium terms-of-trade forces, but also Venables-style production relocation effects.
    The simplest version of Caliendo et al. (2021)'s framework considers an environment analogous to
that in Gros (1987) but with production being roundabout in nature. With imperfect competition,
producers charge a markup over their marginal cost when selling intermediate inputs. Because,
when selling to consumers, firms also charge a markup over marginal cost, the model features a
double-marginalization inefficiency, that is absent in models without input trade. This inefficiency
can be undone with targeted domestic subsidies, but in their absence, Caliendo et al. (2021) show
that there is a second-best rationale for setting import tariffs that are lower than without roundabout
production. The authors interpret this result as suggesting that the rise of GVCs and intermediate
input trade puts downward pressure on the incentives of countries to unilaterally set tariffs on
their trading partners. Caliendo et al. (2021) further extend their framework to include a second,
nontradable sector, as well as firm heterogeneity à la Melitz (2003) and Chaney (2008). They
demonstrate that despite the novel features that arise in that extension (such as the presence of
relocation effects), their qualitative results still hold (and are even reinforced) in that expanded
environment. In a quantitative exercise involving 186 countries, they also show that the magnitude
of these mechanisms is sizeable, leading to a median optimal tariff of 10%, as compared to 27% in
the absence of roundabout production.
    Another recent contribution to this burgeoning literature is the work of Antràs et al. (2021).
Rather than introducing intermediate input trade via roundabout production, these authors instead
consider a two-sector version of the Krugman (1980) framework, with a novel intermediate-input
sector which provides a bundle of differentiated input varieties to a Krugman-like final-good sector
producing differentiated consumer varieties combining labor and a bundle of intermediate input
varieties. The other assumptions of the model (a unique primitive factor of production, CES
aggregators, increasing-returns-to-scale technologies, and monopolistic competition in both sectors)
are all identical to those in Krugman (1980). This framework features the same type of double
marginalization inefficiency highlighted by Caliendo et al. (2021), but the focus in Antràs et al.
(2021) is instead to compare the differential incentives to levy import tariffs on final goods versus
intermediate inputs. The equations characterizing these optimal tariffs are involved, but Antràs
et al. (2021) develop tools to characterize the various mechanisms (terms of trade effects, production
relocation effects, etc.) through which tariffs on final goods and inputs affect the general equilibrium
of the model and welfare.89 Their main result is that the optimal tariff is positive for both final
   89
     In particular, they evaluate the first-order effect of increases in downstream and upstream tariffs starting from an
equilibrium with zero tariffs. They also explore the size of optimal tariffs in both sectors by calibrating the model and
performing quantitative exercises.


                                                          100
goods and for inputs, but the optimal tariff is higher for final goods than for inputs. Furthermore,
the optimal tariff on inputs is quantitatively very small when domestic subsidies are available to
undo the double marginalization inefficiency, while the optimal tariff on final goods remains high.
Antràs et al. (2021) interpret their results as a potential rationale for observed tariff escalation
practices.90

6.8    Trade Policy and Relational GVCs
We finally overview work that has studied the implications and design of trade policy in environments
with the distinguishing features of relational GVCs, namely, search frictions, customized production,
and incomplete contracting. Do these features introduce novel reasons for trade policy intervention?
And do they create new problems of global policy cooperation motivating international agreements
with novel features?
    To study these questions, we begin by considering a simple framework inspired by the work of
Antràs and Staiger (2012a). We consider a three-country world with two "small" countries, Home
and Foreign, and a large Rest of the World (RoW). This large RoW pins down the untaxed world
price of a single homogeneous final good, which is used as the numéraire. Production of the final
good requires a customized input x, and technology is summarized by a production function y (x),
with y (0) = 0, y (x) > 0, y (x) < 0, limx0 y (x) = +, and limx y (x) = 0. Home only
produces final goods, while Foreign only produces intermediate inputs. The marginal cost of input
production in Foreign (measured in terms of the numéraire) is constant and, through choice of
the units in which inputs are measured, it is normalized to 1. This implies that the efficient level
of input production xE absent any market imperfections, trade taxes or trade other barriers is
implicitly characterized by y       xE = 1.
    It is assumed, however, that international contracts between suppliers and final-good producers
are incomplete, and so the terms of trade between input suppliers and final good producers are
determined by bargaining ex post after investments in input supply has already been sunk. For now,
this is the only market friction we introduce. In particular, there is a unit measure of final-good
producers at Home, and a unit measure of input producers in Foreign, and they are costlessly
matched in pair. We shall consider environments with search frictions below.
    We assume that each country can set trade taxes or subsidies on both the input and the final
good. Because Foreign will never find it optimal to tax the final good, we can focus on the final-good
tariff tH                                                            H      F
        F at Home, defined in specific terms, and the input tariffs tx and tx set by Home and Foreign,
also in specific terms. How do these instruments shape international exchanges? To explore this,
note that domestic price of the final good at Home will be 1 + tH
                                                                F , while the input tariffs will increase
the marginal cost of delivering inputs from 1 to 1 + tH    F
                                                      x + tx . Recalling that the cost x of producing
x units is sunk at the time the producer and supplier reach an agreement, the surplus these agents
   90
      Antràs et al. (2021) also find that relocation effects are quantitatively as important for the determination of
tariffs as standard terms-of-trade effects.




                                                        101
bargain over is given by

                                   S x, tH    H F       H          H    F
                                         F , tx , tx = tF y (x) - tx + tx x.                                        (72)

We take the extreme view that inputs are completely customized to final-good producers, and that
final-good producers have no recourse to a secondary market, so that the breakup of a bargaining
pair would result in a zero outside option for both producer and supplier. It would be straightforward
to relax this assumption along the lines of Ornelas and Turner (2008) or Antràs and Staiger (2012a).
In the bargaining, we assume that final-good producers obtain a share  of the surplus S (·) in
equation (72), while suppliers obtain the remaining share 1 -  . Before they reach the bargaining
stage, suppliers will then set a level of investment x
                                                     ~ that solves

                                           H
                               (1 -  ) 1 + 1    x) = 1 + (1 -  ) tH
                                             y (~                      F
                                                                  x + tx ,                                          (73)

which implicitly defines x H , tH , tF ). It is clear from (73) that x
                         ~(1                                                            H and decreasing
                                                                     ~ is increasing in 1
                                x    x
              H and  F . Intuitively, incomplete contracting leads to rent-sharing between the
in the sum of x     x
producer and supplier, and the latter's incentives to invest tend to be higher whenever the surplus
                                        H is higher and when  H and  F is lower. Antràs and
from investment is higher, that is when 1                    x      x
Staiger (2012a) show that the positive dependence of x    H and the negative dependence of x
                                                     ~ on 1                                ~
   H and  F hold for a variety of extensions of their framework featuring search frictions (see
on x     x
below), partial specificity, a secondary market for inputs, the existence of domestic input suppliers,
two-sided hold up problems, and vertical integration, among others.
    The result that input taxes ­ that is Home import tariffs on inputs or Foreign export taxes on
inputs ­ reduce suppliers' investments is one of the key results in Ornelas and Turner (2008). They
leverage this result and argue that trade liberalization, by reducing the hold-up problem faced by
suppliers leads to increases in trade flows that are above and beyond the standard increases in trade
volumes predicted by models without contractual frictions.91
    Although it is clear that final-good tariffs ameliorate the hold up problem while input tariffs
aggravate it, it is not clear from equation (73) which trade policies will be socially efficient, and
which ones will be unilaterally optimal from the point of view of the Home and Foreign governments.
To answer these questions, one needs to take into account the effect of these policies on consumer
surplus, producer surplus and tax revenue in each of the two countries. Antràs and Staiger (2012a)
carry out such an analysis. They first show that show that an appropriate choice of input trade
subsidies, combined with free trade in final goods, can fully resolve the international hold-up problem
and allow countries to attain the first-best. This is actually pretty straightforward to infer from
                                 H = 0 and tH + tF = -/ (1 -  ), results in y (~
equation (73). Note that setting 1                                             x) = 1, and
                                            x    x
     ~ = xE . In sum, an appropriately chosen combination of input subsidies (provided by Home,
thus x
Foreign or both) is sufficient to resolve the hold-up problem, leaving no role for final-good tariffs to
   91
     Ornelas and Turner (2012) instead develop a framework in which input tariffs may ammeliorate the hold-up
problem of domestic suppliers. Intuitively, by raising the domestic price for a generic version of the goods they produce,
an input can strengthen the bargaining power of suppliers and lead them to invest more.


                                                          102
affect social welfare (remember that both Home and Foreign are small-open economies).
    Antràs and Staiger (2012a) next show that the Nash equilibrium policy choices of governments
do not coincide with the internationally efficient policies, and they identify two dimensions of
international inefficiency that arise under Nash policies. A first dimension is an inefficiently low
input trade volume. Intuitively, input trade policy serves a dual role in this environment. On the
one hand, as indicated above, subsidies to the exchange of intermediate inputs can help restore the
volume of input trade toward its efficient level. On the other hand, input trade taxes can be used to
redistribute surplus across countries, thereby shifting some of the cost of intervention on to trading
partners.92 A second dimension of inefficiency relates to the incentive of the Home government to
also distort trade in the final good away from its free-trade level in order to reduce the domestic
final good price and further shift bargaining surplus from foreign input suppliers to home final good
producers.
    Antràs and Staiger (2012a) then study the role of trade agreements in closing the gap between
socially efficient and Nash equilibrium trade policy choices. Their key result is that the "shallow"
focus on negotiations over market access advocated by the traditional terms-of-trade theory, is not
effective in their setting. Instead, in the presence of bilaterally negotiated prices, effective trade
agreements and the institutions that support them will have to evolve, from a market access focus
toward a focus on deep integration, and from a reliance on simple and broadly-applied rules such
as reciprocity and non-discrimination toward a collection of more-individualized agreements that
can better reflect member-specific idiosyncratic needs. These lessons very much resonate with the
empirical results of Orefice and Rocha (2014) and Laget et al. (2020), documenting a relationship
between the increased prevalence of deep integration (as measured by the number of policy areas
covered in preferential trade agreements) and the rise of GVCs.93
    Despite the above emphasis on hold-up inefficiencies, Antràs and Staiger (2012b) clarified that
the key aspect of the Antràs and Staiger (2012a) framework that delivers the need for "deeper"
agreement is the fact that prices in international exchanges are not fully disciplined by market
clearing conditions, and are instead bargained over. They further demonstrate that their main
insights emerge in a much simpler framework without ex-ante investments but with search frictions
in the matching between buyers and sellers. These matching frictions generate a lock-in effect that
again leads to bargaining in international exchanges, with the resulting prices again not being fully
disciplined by market clearing conditions.
    The interplay between search frictions and trade policy takes a prominent role in the recent
work by Grossman and Helpman (2020). Their framework shares some features with the work of
Ornelas and Turner (2008), Antràs and Staiger (2012a) and Antràs and Staiger (2012b), but it
is much richer in many dimensions, and it focuses on a different set of issues. The main goal of
   92
      For instance, although an export tax may reduce the incentive of foreign suppliers to invest, these suppliers will
be able to pass part of the cost of the tax on to Home final-good producers in their ex-post bargaining.
   93
      Deep integration is often associated with provisions related to `behind-the-border' trade barriers such as
competition policy, labor market regulation, consumer protection, environmental laws, movement of capital, or
intellectual property rights protection.



                                                         103
Grossman and Helpman (2020) is to study how input tariffs affect (i) the incentives of final-good
producers to search for suppliers in various countries, and (ii) the bargaining between final-good
producers and their various suppliers. In their framework, final-good producers assemble a bundle
of intermediate inputs, and thus need to match with a continuum of suppliers. The productivity of
these suppliers is in turn heterogeneous, but final-good producers do not learn that productivity
until they are matched with a supplier. Because search costs are sunk in nature and the productivity
of alternative matches is unknown, existing GVC relationships tend to be sticky in the model. As a
result, relatively small unanticipated tariff changes do not lead to relocation of production, though
in this case the tariffs can still cause contract renegotiations within existing matches due to the
altered outside options of buyers in the presence of the tariffs. Large tariffs can overcome this
stickiness and lead to the destruction of existing matches and the creation of new ones, either in the
domestic economy or in other foreign countries.94 The effects of input tariffs are ambiguous in their
model and depend on various primitive parameters in rich ways, but numerical simulations of their
model suggest that input tariffs are generally welfare reducing.


7        Conclusion and Future Directions
Over the past few decades, production processes have become increasingly more complex in the
world economy. Any finished good now typically embodies value added from multiple countries of
origin, with this value added often crossing multiple borders en route to its point of consumption, in
production arrangements that have come to be referred to as "global value chains". In this article,
we have surveyed recent developments and contributions by economists, particularly in the field of
international trade, towards deepening our understanding of global value chains. At the same time,
we have sought to identify various directions for continued research effort.
     On the empirical side, we have reviewed efforts to measure GVCs as a "macro" phenomenon.
Work on this front has advanced in recent years with improvements in World Input-Output Tables
(WIOTs) and the development of value added accounting methodologies. This has been accompanied
by a parallel large body of empirical work on firms in international trade; more specifically, this has
uncovered useful facts at the "micro" level on selection into participation in GVCs, the formation of
buyer-supplier links, and the relational nature of these ties.
     On the theory side, we have attempted to organize the various modeling frameworks that
address the phenomenon of global production. This includes "macro" models that incorporate
rich input-output linkages across countries and industries, either in the form of a "roundabout"
production setup or in more sequential production chains. Such models have provided valuable
quantitative insights on the aggregate consequences of GVCs, relative to a world in which such
input-output linkages are absent. On the other hand, a rich vein of "micro" models has shone the
spotlight on the firm-level drivers of forward and backward participation in GVCs, as well as the
relational aspects of these GVC links. Last but not least, we have surveyed a nascent body of work
    94
    Grossman and Helpman (2020) also provide suggestive evidence of these relocation effects following the recent
imposition of tariffs (many of them on inputs) by President Trump's administration.


                                                      104
seeking to understand the trade policy implications of a world with active trade in intermediate
inputs within GVCs.




                                              105
References
Acemoglu, D., P. Antràs, and E. Helpman (2007). Contracts and technology adoption. American Economic
  Review 97 (3), 916­943.

Adao, R., P. Carrillo, A. Costinot, D. Donaldson, and D. Pomeranz (2020). International trade and earnings
  inequality: A new factor content approach. NBER Working Paper No. 28263.

Aichele, R., G. Felbermayr, and I. Heiland (2016). Going deep: The trade and welfare effects of TTIP revised.
  Ifo-Working Paper 219 .

Aichele, R. and I. Heiland (2018). Where is the value added? trade liberalization and production networks.
  Journal of International Economics 115, 130­144.

Alexander, P. (2017). Vertical specialisation and gains from trade. Bank of Canada.

Alfaro, L., P. Antràs, D. Chor, and P. Conconi (2019). Internalizing Global Value Chains: A Firm-Level
  Analysis. Journal of Political Economy 127 (2), 508­559.

Alfaro-Urena, A., I. Manelici, and J. P. Vasquez (2020). The Effects of Joining Multinational Supply Chains:
  New Evidence from Firm-to-Firm Linkages. Mimeo.

Allen, T. (2014). Information frictions in trade. Econometrica 82 (6), 2041­2083.

Altomonte, C., L. Bonacorsi, and I. Colantone (2018). Trade and Growth in the Age of Global Value Chains.
  Mimeo Bocconi University.

Amador, J. and F. Di Mauro (2015). The age of global value chains. VOX CEPR's Policy Portal .

Amiti, M., S. H. Kong, and D. Weinstein (2020). The Effect of the U.S.-China Trade War on U.S. Investment.
 NBER Working Paper No. 27114.

Amiti, M. and J. Konings (2007). Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity: Evidence
 from Indonesia. American Economic Review 97 (5), 1611­1638.

Amiti, M., S. J. Redding, and D. E. Weinstein (2019). The impact of the 2018 tariffs on prices and welfare.
 Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (4), 187­210.

Anderson, J. E. (1998). Effective protection redux. Journal of international economics 44 (1), 21­44.

Antràs, P. (2003). Firms, contracts, and trade structure. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4).

Antràs, P. (2005). Incomplete contracts and the product cycle. American economic review 95 (4), 1054­1073.

Antràs, P. (2016). Global Production: A Contracting Perspective. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Antràs, P. (2020). Conceptual aspects of global value chains. World Bank Economic Review , forthcoming.

Antràs, P. (2020). De-Globalisation? Global Value Chains in the Post-COVID-19 Age. NBER Working Paper
  No. 28115.

Antràs, P. and D. Chor (2013). Organizing the Global Value Chain. Econometrica 81 (6), 2127­2204.


                                                    106
Antràs, P. and D. Chor (2019). On the Measurement of Upstreamness and Downstreamness in Global Value
  Chains. In L. Y. Ing and M. Yu (Eds.), World Trade Evolution: Growth, Productivity and Employment,
  Chapter 5, pp. 126­194. Routledge.

Antràs, P., D. Chor, T. Fally, and R. Hillberry (2012). Measuring the Upstreamness of Production and Trade
  Flows. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 102 (3), 412­416.

Antràs, P. and A. Costinot (2011). Intermediated trade. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (3),
  1319­1374.

Antràs, P. and A. de Gortari (2016). Global value chains, external economies to scale and the traveling
  salesman problem. unpublished notes.

Antràs, P. and A. de Gortari (2020). On the Geography of Global Value Chains. Econometrica 84 (4),
  1553­1598.

Antràs, P., E. Fadeev, T. Fort, and F. Tintelnot (2020). Global sourcing and multinational activity: A unified
  approach. Working Paper, Harvard University.

Antràs, P., E. Fadeev, A. Gutiérrez, T. Fort, and F. Tintelnot (2021). Import tariffs and global sourcing.
  Working Paper, Harvard University.

Antràs, P. and C. F. Foley (2015). Poultry in motion: A study of international trade finance practices.
 Journal of Political Economy 123 (4), 853­901.

Antràs, P., T. Fort, and F. Tintelnot (2017). The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory and Evidence from
  U.S. Firms. American Economic Review 107 (9), 2514­2564.

Antràs, P., L. Garicano, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2006). Offshoring in a knowledge economy. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 121 (1), 31­77.

Antràs, P. and E. Helpman (2004). Global sourcing. Journal of political Economy 112 (3), 552­580.

Antràs, P. and E. Helpman (2008). Contractual frictions and global sourcing. In E. Helpman, T. Verdier,
  and D. Marin (Eds.), The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, Chapter 1, pp. 9­54. Cambridge,
  MA: Harvard University Press.

Antràs, P. and R. Staiger (2012a). Offshoring and the Role of Trade Agreements. American Economic
  Review 102 (7), 3140­3183.

Antràs, P. and R. W. Staiger (2012b). Trade Agreements and the Nature of Price Determination. American
  Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 102 (3), 470­476.

Antràs, P. and S. R. Yeaple (2014). Multinational firms and the structure of international trade. In Handbook
  of International Economics, Volume 4, pp. 55­130. Elsevier.

Araujo, L., G. Mion, and E. Ornelas (2016). Institutions and export dynamics. Journal of International
  Economics 98, 2­20.

Arkolakis, C. (2010). Market penetration costs and the new consumers margin in international trade. Journal
  of Political Economy 118 (6), 1151­1199.


                                                     107
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2012). New trade models, same old gains. American
  Economic Review 102 (1), 94­130.

Arkolakis, C. and F. Eckert (2017). Combinatorial Discrete Choice. Working Paper .

Arkolakis, C., N. Ramondo, A. Rodríguez-Clare, and S. Yeaple (2018). Innovation and Production in the
  Global Economy. American Economic Review 108 (8), 2128­73.

Atalay, E., A. Hortaçsu, J. Roberts, and C. Syverson (2011). Network Structure of Production. PNAS 108 (13),
  5199­5202.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, and G. Hanson (2013). The China Syndrome: Local Labor Effects of Import Competition
  in the United States. American Economic Review 103 (6), 2121 ­ 2168.

Bagwell, K., R. W. Staiger, and A. Yurukoglu (2018). Quantitative Analysis of Multi-Party Tariff Negotiations.
  NBER Working Paper No. 24273.

Baker, G., R. Gibbons, and K. J. Murphy (2002). Relational Contracts and the Theory of the Firm. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 117 (1), 39­84.

Balassa, B. (1965). Tariff protection in industrial countries: an evaluation. Journal of Political Economy 73 (6),
  573­594.

Balassa, B. (1971). The Structure of Protection in Developing Countries. John Hopkins Press.

Baldwin, R. (2016). The Great Convergence. Harvard University Press.

Baldwin, R. and A. Venables (2013). Spiders and Snakes: Offshoring and Agglomeration in the Global
  Economy. Journal of International Economics 90 (2), 245­254.

Baqaee, D. and E. Farhi (2019). Networks, barriers, and trade. NBER Working Paper No. 26108.

Barattieri, A. and M. Cacciatore (2020). Self-harming trade policy? protectionism and production networks.
  NBER Working Paper No. 27630.

Barrot, J.-N. and J. Sauvagnat (2016). Input Specificity and the Propagation of Idiosyncratic Shocks in
  Production Networks. Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3), 1543­1592.

Bas, M. (2012). Input-trade Liberalization and Firm Export Decisions: Evidence from Argentina. Journal of
  International Economics 97 (2), 481­493.

Bas, M. and V. Strauss-Kahn (2014). Does Importing More Inputs Raise Exports? Firm-level Evidence from
  France. Review of World Economics 150, 241­275.

Bems, R. and R. C. Johnson (2017). Demand for Value Added and Value-Added Exchange Rates. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9 (4), 45­90.

Bems, R. and A. K. Kikkawa (2021). Measuring Trade in Value Added with Firm-level Data. Journal of
  International Economics forthcoming, forthcoming.

Benguria, F. (2021). The Matching and Sorting of Exporting and Importing Firms: Theory and Evidence.
  Journal of International Economics forthcoming.


                                                      108
Bernard, A., E. Bøler, and S. Dhingra (2019). Firm-to-Firm Connections in Colombian Imports. In L. Y.
  Ing and M. Yu (Eds.), World Trade Evolution: Growth, Productivity and Employment, Chapter 10, pp.
  333­365. Routledge.

Bernard, A., E. Dhyne, G. Magerman, K. Manova, and A. Moxnes (2019). The origins of firm heterogeneity:
  A production network approach. NBER Working Paper No. 25441.

Bernard, A. B. and J. B. Jensen (1999). Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, Effect, or Both? Journal
  of International Economics 47 (1), 1­25.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2007). Firms in International Trade. Journal
  of Economic Perspectives 21 (3), 105­130.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. R. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2018). Global firms. Journal of Economic
  Literature 56 (2), 565­619.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, and P. K. Schott (2009). Importers, Exporters and Multinationals: A Portrait
  of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods. In T. Dunne, J. B. Jensen, and M. J. Roberts (Eds.), Producer
  Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data , Chapter 14, pp. 513­552. University of Chicago Press.

Bernard, A. B. and A. Moxnes (2018). Networks and trade. Annual Review of Economics 10, 65­85.

Bernard, A. B., A. Moxnes, and Y. U. Saito (2019). Production networks, geography, and firm performance.
  Journal of Political Economy 127 (2), 639­688.

Bernard, A. B., A. Moxnes, and K. H. Ulltveit-Moe (2018). Two-Sided Heterogeneity and Trade. Review of
  Economics and Statistics 100 (3), 424­439.

Bernard, A. B., S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2010). Multiple-Product Firms and Product Switching.
  American Economic Review 100 (1), 70­97.

Bernard, A. B., S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2011). Multiproduct firms and trade liberalization. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 126 (13), 1271­1318.

Besedes, T. and T. J. Prusa (2006a). Ins, Outs, and the Duration of Trade. Canadian Journal of Statistics 39 (1),
  266­295.

Besedes, T. and T. J. Prusa (2006b). Product Differentiation and the Duration of US Import Trade. Canadian
  Journal of Statistics 70 (2), 339­358.

Besedes, T. and T. J. Prusa (2011). The Role of Extensive and Intensive Margins and Export Growth.
  Journal of International Economics 96 (2), 371­379.

Beshkar, M. and A. Lashkaripour (2020). The Cost of Dissolving the WTO: The Role of Global Value Chains.
  mimeo Indiana University.

Bilgin, N. M. (2020). Endogenous production networks and learning-by-networking. mimeo Bocconi University.

Blanchard, E. J. (2007). Foreign Direct Investment, Endogenous Tariffs, and Preferential Trade Agreements.
  B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy - Advances 7 (1), Article 54.



                                                      109
Blanchard, E. J. (2010). Reevaluating the Role of Trade Agreements: Does Investment Globalization Make
  the WTO Obsolete? Journal of International Economics 82(1), 63­72.

Blanchard, E. J., C. P. Bown, and R. C. Johnson (2016). Global supply chains and trade policy. NBER
  Working Paper 21883.

Blaum, J., C. Lelarge, and M. Peters (2018). The Gains from Input Trade with Heterogeneous Importers.
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 10 (4), 77­127.

Blaum, J., C. Lelarge, and M. Peters (2019). Firm Size, Quality Bias and Import Demand. Journal of
  International Economics 120, 59­83.

Blum, B. S., S. Claro, and I. Horstmann (2010). Facts and Figures on Intermediated Trade. American
  Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 100 (2), 419­423.

Board, S. (2011). Relational contracts and the value of loyalty. American Economic Review 101 (7), 3349­67.

Boehm, C. E., A. Flaaen, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2019). Input Linkages and the Transmission of Shocks:
  Firm Level Evidence from the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake. Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (1), 60­75.

Boehm, J. (2020). The Impact of Contract Enforcement Costs on Value Chains and Aggregate Productivity.
  Review of Economics and Statistics forthcoming, forthcoming.

Boehm, J., S. Dhingra, and J. Morrow (2018). Product Diversification in Indian Manufacturing. In W. Kohler
  and E. Yalcin (Eds.), Developments in Global Sourcing, Chapter 13, pp. 337­350. MIT Press.

Boehm, J. and E. Oberfield (2020). Misallocation in the Market for Inputs: Enforcement and the Organization
  of Production. Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (4), 2007­2058.

Bolatto, S., A. Naghavi, G. Ottaviano, and K. Z. Kejzar (2018). Intangible Assets and the Organization of
  Global Supply Chains. Mimeo.

Bøler, E. A., A. Moxnes, and K. H. Ulltveit-Moe (2015). R&D, International Sourcing, and the Joint Impact
  on Firm Performance. American Economic Review 105 (12), 3704­3739.

Bonadio, B., Z. Huo, A. A. Levchenko, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2020). Global supply chains in the pandemic.
  NBER Working Paper 27224.

Borin, A. and M. Mancini (2019). Measuring What Matters in Global Value Chains and Value-Added Trade.
  World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 8804.

Bown, C., P. Conconi, A. Erbahar, and L. Trimarchi (2020). Trade Protection Along Supply Chains. mimeo.

Bown, C. and M. Crowley (2016). Chapter 1 - the empirical landscape of trade policy. Volume 1 of Handbook
  of Commercial Policy, pp. 3 ­ 108. North-Holland.

Bown, C. and E. Zhang (2019, February). Measuring trump's 2018 trade protection: Five takeaways. Peterson
  Institute Trade and Investment Policy Watch .

Bown, C. P. (2014). Temporary Trade Barriers Database. http://econ.worldbank.org/ttbd/.




                                                   110
Brugués, F. (2020). Take the Goods and Run: Contracting Frictions and Market Power in Supply Chains.
  Brown University mimeo.

Burress, D. (1994). Homeomorphism between leontief and cobb-douglas input-output models. Economics
  Letters 44 (1-2), 49­53.

Caceres, C., D. A. Cerdeiro, and R. Mano (2019). Trade wars and trade deals: Estimated effects using a
  multi-sector model. International Monetary Fund.

Cadot, O., J. De Melo, and M. Olarreaga (2004). Lobbying, counterlobbying, and the structure of tariff
  protection in poor and rich countries. The World Bank Economic Review 18 (3), 345­366.

Cajal-Grossi, J., R. Macchiavello, and G. Noguera (2020). Buyers' Sourcing Strategies and Suppliers' Markups
  in Bangladeshi Garments. LSE mimeo.

Caliendo, L., M. Dvorkin, and F. Parro (2019). Trade and labor market dynamics: General equilibrium
  analysis of the China trade shock. Econometrica 87 (3), 741­835.

Caliendo, L., R. C. Feenstra, J. Romalis, and A. M. Taylor (2021). A second-best argument for low optimal
  tariffs. NBER Working Paper 28380.

Caliendo, L. and F. Parro (2015). Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA. Review of Economic
  Studies 82 (1), 1­44.

Caliendo, L., F. Parro, E. Rossi-Hansberg, and P.-D. Sarte (2018). The impact of regional and sectoral
  productivity changes on the US economy. The Review of economic studies 85 (4), 2042­2096.

Caliendo, L., F. Parro, and A. Tsyvinski (2017). Distortions and the structure of the world economy. NBER
  Working Paper 23332.

Carballo, J., G. I. Ottaviano, and C. V. Martincus (2018). The buyer margins of firms' exports. Journal of
  International Economics 112, 33­49.

Carluccio, J. and M. Bas (2015). The impact of worker bargaining power on the organization of global firms.
  Journal of International Economics 96 (1), 162­181.

Carrico, C., E. Corong, and D. van der Mensbrugghe (2020). The GTAP 10A Multi-Region Input Output
 (MRIO) Data Base. Mimeo.

Carvalho, V. M., M. Nirei, Y. U. Saito, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2020). Supply Chain Disruptions: Evidence
  from the Great East Japan Earthquake. Quarterly Journal of Economics , forthcoming.

Casas, F. R. (1973). Optimal effective protection in general equilibrium. The American Economic Review 63 (4),
  714­716.

Caselli, F., M. Koren, M. Lisicky, and S. Tenreyro (2020). Diversification through trade. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 135 (1), 449­502.

Castellani, D., F. Serti, and C. Tomasi (2010). Firms in International Trade: Importers' and Exporters'
  Heterogeneity in Italian Manufacturing Industry. World Economy 33 (3), 424­457.



                                                    111
Chaney, T. (2008). Distorted gravity: the intensive and extensive margins of international trade. American
  Economic Review 98 (4), 1707­21.

Chaney, T. (2014). The network structure of international trade. American Economic Review 104 (11),
  3600­3634.

Chaney, T. (2018). The gravity equation in international trade: An explanation. Journal of Political
  Economy 126 (1), 150­177.

Charbonneau, K. B. and A. Landry (2018). The trade war in numbers. Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper.

Charoenwong, B., M. Han, and J. Wu (2021). Not Coming Home: Trade and Economic Policy Uncertainty
  in American Supply Chain Networks. mimeo.

Chor, D. (2019). Modeling global value chains: approaches and insights from economics. In Handbook on
 Global Value Chains. Edward Elgar Publishing.

Chor, D. and L. Ma (2020). Contracting frictions in global sourcing: Implications for welfare. Technical
  Report, Dartmouth November.

Chor, D., K. Manova, and Z. Yu (2020). Growing Like China: Firm Performance and Global Production
  Line Position. NBER Working Paper No. 27795.

Clerides, S., S. Lach, and J. R. Tybout (1998). Is Learning by Exporting Important? Micro-Dynamic
  Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco. Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (3), 903­947.

Colantone, I. and R. Crinò (2014). New Imported Inputs, New Domestic Products. Journal of International
  Economics 92, 147­165.

Conconi, P., M. García-Santana, L. Puccio, and R. Venturini (2018). From final goods to inputs: the
  protectionist effect of rules of origin. American Economic Review 108 (8), 2335­65.

Corden, W. M. (1966). The structure of a tariff system and the effective protective rate. Journal of Political
  Economy 74 (3), 221­237.

Costinot, A., D. Donaldson, J. Vogel, and I. Werning (2015). Comparative advantage and optimal trade
  policy. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (2), 659­702.

Costinot, A. and A. Rodríguez-Clare (2014). Trade theory with numbers: Quantifying the consequences of
  globalization. In G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogoff (Eds.), Handbook of International Economics,
  Volume 4, Chapter 4. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Costinot, A., J. Vogel, and S. Wang (2013). An Elementary Theory of Global Supply Chains. Review of
  Economic Studies 80 (1), 109­144.

Das, S. P. (1983). Optimum tariffs on final and intermediate goods. International Economic Review , 493­508.

Dasgupta, K. and J. Mondria (2018). Inattentive importers. Journal of International Economics 112, 150­165.

Davis, D. R. and D. E. Weinstein (2001). An Account of Global Factor Trade. American Economic Review 91,
  1423­1453.


                                                     112
de Gortari, A. (2019). Disentangling Global Value Chains. NBER Working Paper No. 25868.

de Gortari, A. (2020). Global Value Chains and Increasing Returns. Working Paper, Dartmouth College.

de Loecker, J. (2007). Do Exports Generate Higher Productivity? Evidence from Slovenia. Journal of
  International Economics 73 (1), 69­98.

De Soyres, F., A. Mulabdic, S. Murray, N. Rocha, and M. Ruta (2018). How much will the Belt and Road
  Initiative reduce trade costs? The World Bank.

Dedrick, J., K. L. Kraemer, and G. Linden (2010). Who Profits from Innovation in Global Value Chains? A
  Study of the iPod and Notebook PCs. Industrial and Corporate Change 19 (1), 81­116.

Defever, F., C. Fischer, and J. Suedekum (2016). Relational contracts and supplier turnover in the global
  economy. Journal of International Economics 103, 147­165.

Dekle, R., J. Eaton, and S. Kortum (2008). Global rebalancing with gravity: Measuring the burden of
  adjustment. IMF Staff Papers 55 (3), 511­540.

del Prete, D. and A. Rungi (2017). Organizing the Global Value Chain: A Firm-Level Test. Journal of
  International Economics 109, 16­30.

Demir, B., A. C. Fieler, D. Y. Xu, and K. K. Yang (2021). O-Ring Production Networks. mimeo.

Dhingra, S., H. Huang, G. Ottaviano, J. Paulo Pessoa, T. Sampson, and J. Van Reenen (2017). The costs
  and benefits of leaving the eu: trade effects. Economic Policy 32 (92), 651­705.

Dhyne, E., K. Kikkawa, M. Mogstad, and F. Tintelnot (2020). Trade and domestic production networks.
 Review of Economic Studies .

Di Giovanni, J., A. A. Levchenko, and J. Zhang (2014). The global welfare impact of China: Trade integration
  and technological change. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6 (3), 153­83.

Dietzenbacher, E., B. Los, R. Stehrer, M. P. Timmer, and G. J. de Vries (2013). The Construction of World
  Input-Output Tables in the WIOD Project. Review of International Economics 25 (1), 71­98.

Dietzenbacher, E., I. R. Luna, and N. S. Bosma (2005). Using Average Propogration Lengths to Identify
  Production Chains in the Andalusian Economy. Estudios de Economia Aplicada 23 (2), 405­422.

Dingel, J. I. and F. Tintelnot (2020). Spatial economics for granular settings. NBER Working Paper No.
  27287.

Dixit, A. K. and G. M. Grossman (1982). Trade and protection with multistage production. The Review of
  Economic Studies 49 (4), 583­594.

Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and P. A. Samuelson (1977). Comparative advantage, trade, and payments in a
  ricardian model with a continuum of goods. The American Economic Review 67 (5), 823­839.

Eaton, J., M. Eslava, C. Krizan, M. Kugler, and J. Tybout (2014). A search and learning model of export
  dynamics. mimeo Pennsylvania State University.




                                                    113
Eaton, J. and G. M. Grossman (1986). Optimal trade and industrial policy under oligopoly. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 101 (2), 383­406.

Eaton, J., D. Jinkins, J. Tybout, and D. Xu (2016). Two-sided search in international markets. mimeo
  Pennsylvania State University.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002). Technology, Geography, and Trade. Econometrica 70 (5), 1741­1780.

Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz (2018). Firm-to-firm trade: Imports, exports, and the labor market.
  mimeo Yale University.

Eppinger, P., G. Felbermayr, O. Krebs, and B. Kukharskyy (2020). Covid-19 shocking global value chains.
  CESifo Working Paper No. 8572.

Eppinger, P. and B. Kukharskyy (2020). Contracting institutions and firm integration around the world.
 Working paper, University of Täubingen and City University of New York .

Erbahar, A. and Y. Zi (2017). Cascading trade protection: Evidence from the us. Journal of International
  Economics 108, 274­299.

Ethier, W. (1977). The theory of effective protection in general equilibrium: Effective-rate analogues of
  nominal rates. Canadian Journal of Economics , 233­245.

Fajgelbaum, P. D., P. K. Goldberg, P. J. Kennedy, and A. K. Khandelwal (2020). The return to protectionism.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (1), 1­55.

Fally, T. (2012). On the Fragmentation of Production in the U.S. mimeo, University of Berkeley.

Fally, T. and R. Hillberry (2018). A Coasian Model of International Production Chains. Journal of
  International Economics 114, 299­315.

Fally, T. and J. Sayre (2018). Commodity trade matters. NBER Working Paper 24965.

Fan, H., E. L.-C. Lai, and H. S. Qi (2019). Trade liberalization and firms' export performance in China:
  Theory and evidence. Journal of Comparative Economics 47 (3), 640­668.

Fan, H., T. A. Luong, E. Lai, and L. Zhang (2021). Import liberalization and export product mix. Canadian
  Journal of Economics .

Farrokhi, F. (2020). Global sourcing in oil markets. Journal of International Economics 125, 103323.

Feenstra, R. (1998). Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Production in the Global Economy. Journal
  of Economic Perspectives 12 (4), 31­50.

Feenstra, R. C. and G. H. Hanson (1996). Foreign Investment, Outsourcing and Relative Wages. In R. C.
  Feenstra, G. M. Grossman, and D. A. Irwin (Eds.), Political Economy of Trade Policy: Essays in Honor
  of Jagdish Bhagwati, Chapter , pp. 89­127. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Feng, L., Z. Li, and D. L. Swenson (2016). The Connection between Imported Intermediate Inputs and
  Exports: Evidence from Chinese Firms. Journal of International Economics 101, 86­101.




                                                   114
Fernandes, A., H. L. Kee, and D. Winkler (2020). Determinants of Global Value Chain Participation:
  Cross-Country Evidence. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 9197.

Flaaen, A., A. Hortaçsu, and F. Tintelnot (2020). The Production Relocation and Price Effects of U.S. Trade
  Policy: The Case of Washing Machiness. American Economic Review 110 (7), 2103­2127.

Flaaen, A. and J. Pierce (2019). Disentangling the Effects of the 2018-2019 Tariffs on a Globally Connected
  US Manufacturing Sector. Finance and Economics Discussion Series Working Paper No. 086.

Furusawa, T., T. Inui, K. Ito, and H. Tang (2017). Global sourcing and domestic production networks.
  CESifo Working Paper Series No. 6658.

Furusawa, T. and Y. Sugita (2020). The welfare effect of foreign productivity and quality growth: A
  quantitative analysis.

Gawande, B. K., P. Krishna, and M. Olarreaga (2012). Lobbying competition over trade policy. International
  Economic Review 53 (1), 115­132.

Gawande, K. and U. Bandyopadhyay (2000). Is protection for sale? evidence on the grossman-helpman
  theory of endogenous protection. Review of Economics and statistics 82 (1), 139­152.

Gereffi, G. (1994). The Organization of Buyer-Driven Global Commodity Chains: How U.S. Retailers Shape
  Overseas Production Networks. In G. Gereffi and M. Korzeniewicz (Eds.), Commodity Chains and Global
 Capitalism, Chapter 5, pp. 95­122. Praeger Publishers.

Gereffi, G. (1999). International Trade and Industrial Upgrading in the Apparel Commodity Chain. Journal
  of International Economics 48 (1), 37­70.

Gereffi, G., J. Humphery, and T. J. Sturgeon (2005). The Governance of Global Value Chains. Review of
  International Political Economy 12 (1), 78­104.

Gereffi, G., S. Ponte, and G. Raj-Reichert (2019). Handbook on Global Value Chains. Edward Elgar Publishing.

Ghosh, A. (1958). Input-Output Approach to an Allocation System. Economica 25 (97), 58­64.

Gil, R. (2011). The Interplay of Formal and Relational Contracts: Evidence from Movies. The Journal of
  Law, Economics, and Organization 29 (3), 681­710.

Giri, R., K.-M. Yi, and H. Yilmazkuday (2021). Gains from trade: Does sectoral heterogeneity matter?
  Journal of International Economics , 103429.

Goldberg, P. K., A. K. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova (2010). Imported Intermediate Inputs and
  Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (4), 1727­1767.

Goldberg, P. K. and G. Maggi (1999). Protection for Sale: An Empirical Investigation. American Economic
  Review 89 (5), 1135­1155.

Gopinath, G. and B. Neiman (2014). Trade Adjustment and Productivity in Large Crises. American Economic
  Review 104 (3), 793­831.

Gros, D. (1987). A note on the optimal tariff, retaliation and the welfare loss from tariff wars in a framework
  with intra-industry trade. Journal of international Economics 23 (3-4), 357­367.


                                                     115
Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (1994). Protection for Sale. American Economic Review 84 (4), 833­850.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (2002). Integration versus Outsourcing in Industry Equilibrium. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 117 (1), 85­120.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (2005). Outsourcing in a Global Economy. Review of Economic
  Studies 72 (1), 135­159.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (2020). When Tariffs Disturb Global Supply Chains. NBER Working
  Paper No. 27722.

Grossman, G. M., E. Helpman, and A. Szeidl (2006). Optimal integration strategies for the multinational
  firm. Journal of International Economics 70 (1), 216­238.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2008). Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring. American
  Economic Review 98 (5), 1978­1997.

Halpern, L., M. Koren, and A. Szeidl (2015). Imported Inputs and Productivity. American Economic
  Review 105 (12), 3660­3703.

Handley, K., F. Kamal, and R. Monarch (2020). Import Tariffs, Falling Export Growth: When Modern
  Supply Chains Meet Old-Style Protectionism. NBER Working Paper No. 26611.

Harms, P., O. Lorz, and D. Urban (2012). Offshoring along the Production Chain. Canadian Journal of
  Economics 45 (1), 93­106.

Hausmann, R. and C. Hidalgo (2014). The Atlas of Economic Complexity: Mapping Paths to Prosperity.
  MIT Press.

Head, K. and T. Mayer (2019). Brands in motion: How frictions shape multinational production. American
  Economic Review 109 (9), 3073­3124.

Helpman, E., M. Melitz, and Y. Rubinstein (2008). Estimating trade flows: Trading partners and trading
  volumes. The quarterly journal of economics 123 (2), 441­487.

Hertel, T. (2013). Global applied general equilibrium analysis using the gtap framework. In P. B. Dixon and
  D. W. Jorgenson (Eds.), Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling, Volume 1, pp. 815­876.

Hillberry, R. and D. Hummels (2013). Trade elasticity parameters for a computable general equilibrium
  model. In P. B. Dixon and D. W. Jorgenson (Eds.), Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling,
  Volume 1, pp. 1213­1269.

Hoang, T. (2020). The dynamics of global sourcing. mimeo Vanderbilt University.

Hofstede, G., G. J. Hofstede, and M. Minkov (2010). Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind.
  McGraw-Hill.

Huang, H. (2017). Germs, roads and trade: Theory and evidence on the value of diversification in global
  sourcing. mimeo London School of Economics.

Huang, Y., C. Lin, S. Liu, and H. Tang (2020). Trade Networks and Firm Value: Evidence from the US-China
  Trade War. mimeo.


                                                   116
Hummels, D., J. Ishii, and K.-M. Yi (2001). The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in World
  Trade. Journal of International Economics 54 (1), 75­96.

Hummels, D., D. Rapoport, and K.-M. Yi (1998). Vertical Specialization and the Changing Nature of World
  Trade. Economic Policy Review 4 (2), 79­99.

Huneeus, F. (2018). Production network dynamics and the propagation of shocks.

Imbs, J. and L. Pauwels (2020). High Order Openness. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 14653.

IMF (2016). Global Trade: What's Behind the Slowdown? IMF World Economic Outlook.

Ito, T. and R. Baldwin (2021). The Smile Curve: Evolving Sources of Value Added in Manufacturing.
  Canadian Journal of Economics , forthcoming.

Ito, T., L. Rotunno, and P.-L. Vézina (2017). Heckscher­Ohlin: Evidence from Virtual Trade in Value Added.
   Review of International Economics 25 (3), 427­446.

Jackson, M. O. (2010). Social and economic networks. Princeton University Press.

Jia, P. (2008). What Happens When Wal-Mart Comes to Town: An Empirical Analysis of the Discount
   Retailing Industry. Econometrica 76 (6), 1263­1316.

Johnson, R. C. (2018). Measuring Global Value Chains. Annual Review of Economics 10 (1), 207­236.

Johnson, R. C. and A. Moxnes (2019). GVCs and Trade Elasticities with Multistage Production. NBER
  Working Paper No. 26018.

Johnson, R. C. and G. Noguera (2012). Accounting for Intermediates: Production Sharing and Trade in
  Value Added. Journal of International Economics 86 (2), 224­236.

Johnson, R. C. and G. Noguera (2017). A Portrait of Trade in Value Added over Four Decades. Review of
  Economics and Statistics 99 (5), 896­911.

Jones, L. P. (1976). The Measurement of Hirschmanian Linkages. Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (2),
  323­333.

Jones, R. W. and J. P. Neary (1984). The positive theory of international trade. Handbook of international
  economics 1, 1­62.

Ju, J., H. Ma, Z. Wang, and X. Zhu (2020). Trade wars and industrial policy along the global value chains.

Kalemli-Özcan, S., S.-J. Kim, H. S. Shin, B. E. Sørensen, and S. Yeilta (2014). Financial Shocks in
  Production Chains. mimeo.

Kamal, F. and H. Tang (2014). Relational contracts in global sourcing: Evidence from the US. mimeo John
  Hopkins SAIS.

Kasahara, H. and B. Lapham (2013). Productivity and the Decision to Import and Export: Theory and
  Evidence. Journal of International Economics 89 (2), 297­316.

Kasahara, H. and J. Rodrigue (2008). Does the Use of Imported Intermediates Increase Productivity?
  Plant-level Evidence. Journal of Development Economics 87 (1), 106­118.


                                                   117
Kashiwagi, Y., Y. Todo, and P. Matous (2021). Propagation of Economic Shocks through Global Supply
  Chains ­ Evidence from Hurricane Sandy. Review of International Economics , forthcoming.

Kee, H. L. and H. Tang (2016). Domestic Value Added in Exports: Theory and Firm Evidence from China.
  American Economic Review 106 (6), 1402­1436.

Kehoe, T. J. (2005). An evaluation of the performance of applied general equilibrium models on the impact
  of nafta. In Frontiers in Applied General Equilibrium Modeling: In Honor of Herbert Scarf, pp. 378­401.
  Cambridge University Press.

Kehoe, T. J., P. S. Pujolas, and J. Rossbach (2017). Quantitative trade models: Developments and challenges.
  Annual Review of Economics 9, 295­325.

Keller, W. and S. R. Yeaple (2013). The gravity of knowledge. American Economic Review 103 (4), 1414­44.

Kikuchi, T., K. Nishimura, and J. Stachurski (2018). Span of Control, Transaction Costs and the Structure
  of Production Chains. Theoretical Economics 13 (2), 729­760.

Kim, S.-J. and H. S. Shin (2012). Sustaining Production Chains through Financial Linkages. American
  Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 102 (3), 402­406.

Koopman, R., Z. Wang, and S.-J. Wei (2012). Estimating Domestic Content in Exports When Processing
  Trade is Pervasive. Journal of Development Economics 99 (1), 178­189.

Koopman, R., Z. Wang, and S.-J. Wei (2014). Tracing Value-Added and Double Counting in Gross Exports.
  American Economic Review 104 (2), 459­494.

Kramarz, F., J. Martin, and I. Mejean (2020). Volatility in the Small and in the Large: The Lack of
  Diversification in International Trade. Journal of International Economics 122, 103276.

Kremer, M. (1993). The o-ring theory of economic development. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (3),
  551­575.

Krolikowski, P. M. and A. H. McCallum (2018). Goods-market frictions and international trade.

Krugman, P. (1980). Scale economies, product differentiation, and the pattern of trade. American Economic
  Review 70 (5), 950­959.

Krugman, P. (1995). Increasing returns, imperfect competition and the positive theory of international trade.
  Handbook of International Economics 3, 1243­1277.

Kugler, M. and E. Verhoogen (2009). Plants and Imported Inputs: New Facts and an Interpretation. American
  Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 99 (2), 501­507.

Kukharskyy, B. (2016). Relational contracts and global sourcing. Journal of International Economics 101,
 123­147.

Laget, E., A. Osnago, N. Rocha, and M. Ruta (2020, September). Deep Trade Agreements and Global Value
  Chains. Review of Industrial Organization 57 (2), 379­410.

Laugesen, A. (2018). Extensive Margins of Offshoring and Exporting. In W. Kohler and E. Yalcin (Eds.),
  Developments in Global Sourcing, Chapter 12, pp. 321. MIT Press.


                                                    118
Lee, E. and K.-M. Yi (2018). Global Value Chains and Inequality with Endogenous Labor Supply. Journal
  of International Economics 115, 223­241.

Lenoir, C., J. Martin, and I. Mejean (2019). Search frictions in international good markets.

Lenzen, M., D. Moran, K. Kanemoto, and A. Geschke (2013). Building EORA: A Global Multi-Region
  Input-Output Database at High Country and Sector Resolution. Economic Research Systems 25 (1), 20­49.

Leontief, W. (1986). Input-Output Economics (second ed.). Oxford University Press.

Levchenko, A. A. and J. Zhang (2016). The evolution of comparative advantage: Measurement and welfare
  implications. Journal of Monetary Economics 78, 96­111.

Levin, J. (2003). Relational incentive contracts. American Economic Review 93 (3), 835­857.

Li, X., X. Liu, and Y. Wang (2015). A Model of China's State Capitalism. mimeo.

Lim, K. (2018). Endogenous production networks and the business cycle. Work. Pap.

Liu, E. (2019). Industrial Policies in Production Networks. Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (4), 1883­1948.

Los, B., M. P. Timmer, and G. J. de Vries (2016). Tracing Value-Added and Double Counting in Gross
  Exports: Comment. American Economic Review 106 (7), 1958­1966.

Los, B. and M. P. Timmers (2018). Measuring Bilateral Exports of Value Added: A Unified Framework.
  NBER Working Paper No. 24896.

Lu, D. (2010). Exceptional Exporter Performance? Evidence from Chinese Manufacturing Firms. mimeo
  University of Rochester.

Lu, W. (2019). Globalization, innovation, and firm dynamics. mimeo Xiamen University.

Macchiavello, R. and P. Miquel-Florensa (2018). Vertical Integration and Inter-Firm Relationships: Evidence
 from the Costa Rica Coffee Chain. LSE Mimeo.

Macchiavello, R. and A. Morjaria (2015). The Value of Relationships: Evidence from a Supply Shock to
 Kenyan Rose Exports. American Economic Review 105 (9), 2911­2945.

Macchiavello, R. and A. Morjaria (2020). Competition and Relational Contracts in the Rwanda Coffee Chain.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics , forthcoming.

MacLeod, W. B. and J. M. Malcomson (1989). Implicit contracts, incentive compatibility, and involuntary
 unemployment. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , 447­480.

Martin, J., I. Mejean, and M. Parenti (2020). Relationship Stickiness, International Trade, and Economic
 Uncertainty. Mimeo.

McCalman, P. (2004). Protection for sale and trade liberalization: An empirical investigation. Review of
 International Economics 12 (1), 81­94.

McLaren, J. (2000). Globalization and vertical structure. American Economic Review 90 (5), 1239­1254.



                                                    119
Melitz, M. (2003). The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity.
 Econometrica 71 (6), 1695­1725.

Melitz, M. J. and S. J. Redding (2014a). Heterogeneous firms and trade. In G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and
 K. Rogoff (Eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Volume 4, Chapter 1. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Melitz, M. J. and S. J. Redding (2014b). Missing gains from trade? American Economic Review 104 (5),
 317­21.

Meng, B., Y. Zhang, and S. Inomata (2013). Compilation and Applications of Ide-Jetro's International
 Input-Output Tables. Economic Research Systems 25 (1), 122­142.

Miller, R. E. and P. D. Blair (2009). Input-Output Analysis: Foundations and Extensions (second ed.).
  Cambridge University Press.

Miller, R. E. and U. Temurshoev (2017). Output Upstreamness and Input Downstreamness of Indus-
  tries/Countries in World Production. International Regional Science Review 40 (5), 443­475.

Miyauchi, Y. (2019). Matching and Agglomeration: Theory and Evidence from Japanese Firm-to-Firm Trade.
  mimeo Boston University.

Monarch, R. (2020). It's Not You, It's Me: Prices, Quality and Switching in US-China Trade Relationships.
 Review of Economics and Statistics forthcoming.

Monarch, R. and F. Kamal (2018). Identifying Foreign Suppliers in U.S. Import Data. Review of International
 Economics 26 (1), 117­139.

Monarch, R. and T. Schmidt-Eisenlohr (2017). Learning and the value of trade relationships. FRB
 International Finance Discussion Paper (1218).

Morales, E., G. Sheu, and A. Zahler (2019). Extended gravity. The Review of Economic Studies 86 (6),
 2668­2712.

Morrow, P. M. and D. Trefler (2017). Endowments, skill-biased technology, and factor prices: A unified
 approach to trade. NBER Working Paper No. 24078.

Muûls, M. and M. Pisu (2009). Imports and Exports at the Level of the Frm: Evidence from Belgium. World
 Economy 32 (5), 692­734.

Nagengast, A. J. and R. Stehrer (2016). Accounting for the Differences Between Gross and Value Added
  Trade Balances. The World Economy 39 (9), 1276­1306.

Nunn, N. (2007). Relationship-Specificity, Incomplete Contracts and the Pattern of Trade. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 122 (2), 569­600.

Oberfield, E. (2018). A theory of input­output architecture. Econometrica 86 (2), 559­589.

Olabisi, M. (2020). Input-Output Linkages and Sectoral Volatility. Economica 87 (347), 713­746.

Orefice, G. and N. Rocha (2014). Deep integration and production networks: an empirical analysis. The
 World Economy 37 (1), 106­136.


                                                   120
Ornelas, E. and J. L. Turner (2008). Trade liberalization, outsourcing, and the hold-up problem. Journal of
  International Economics 74 (1), 225­241.

Ornelas, E. and J. L. Turner (2012). Protection and international sourcing. The Economic Journal 122 (559),
  26­63.

Ossa, R. (2011). A `New Trade' Theory of GATT/WTO Negotiations. Journal of Political Economy 119 (1),
  122­152.

Ossa, R. (2015). Why trade matters after all. Journal of International Economics 97 (2), 266­277.

Patel, N., Z. Wang, and S.-J. Wei (2019). Global Value Chains and Effective Exchange Rates at the
  Country-Sector Level. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 51 (S1), 7­42.

Puzzello, L. (2012). A Proportionality Assumption and Measurement Biases in the Factor Content of Trade.
  Journal of International Economics 87, 105­111.

Ramondo, N. and A. Rodríguez-Clare (2013). Trade, multinational production, and the gains from openness.
  Journal of Political Economy 121 (2), 273­322.

Rauch, J. E. (1999). Networks versus Markets in International Trade. Journal of International Eco-
  nomics 48 (1), 7­35.

Reimer, J. J. (2006). Global Production Sharing and Trade in the Services of Factors. Journal of International
  Economics 68, 384­408.

Reshef, A. and G. Santoni (2019). Are Your Labor Shares Set in Beijing? The View Through the Lens of
  Global Value Chains. CEPII working paper No. 2019-16.

Rodríguez-Clare, A., M. Ulate, and J. P. Vásquez (2020). New-keynesian trade: Understanding the employment
  and welfare effects of trade shocks. NBER Working Paper No. 27905.

Romalis, J. (2004). Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade. American Economic
  Review 94 (1), 67­97.

Ruffin, R. J. (1969). Tariffs, intermediate goods, and domestic protection. The American Economic
  Review 59 (3), 261­269.

Rungi, A. and D. del Prete (2018). The Smile Curve at the Firm Level: Where Value is Added Along Supply
  Chains. Economic Letters 164, 38­42.

Sanyal, K. K. and R. W. Jones (1982). The theory of trade in middle products. The American Economic
  Review 72 (1), 16­31.

Sforza, A. and M. Steininger (2020). Globalization in the time of covid-19.

Shapiro, J. S. (2020). The Environmental Bias of Trade Policy. Quarterly Journal of Economics (forthcoming).

Startz, M. (2016). The value of face-to-face: Search and contracting problems in nigerian trade. Available at
  SSRN 3096685 .

Sugita, Y., K. Teshima, and E. Seira (2020). Assortative Matching of Exporters and Importers. mimeo.


                                                     121
Tang, H., F. Wang, and Z. Wang (2020). Domestic Segment of Global Value Chains in China under State
  Capitalism. Journal of Comparative Economics , forthcoming.

Timmer, M. P., E. Dietzenbacher, B. Los, R. Stehrer, and G. J. de Vries (2015). An Illustrated User Guide to
  the World Input-Output Database: The Case of Global Automotive Production. Review of International
  Economics 23 (3), 575­605.

Tintelnot, F. (2017). Global Production with Export Platforms. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (1),
  157­209.

Todo, Y., K. Nakajima, and P. Matous (2015). How Do Supply Chain Networks Affect the Resilience of Firms
  to Natural Disasters? Evidence from the Great East Japan Earthquake. Journal of Regional Science 55 (2),
  209­229.

Travis, W. P. (1964). The Theory of Trade and Protection. Number 121. Harvard University Press.

Trefler, D. and S. C. Zhu (2010). The Structure of Factor Content Predictions. Journal of International
  Economics 82, 195­207.

Tyazhelnikov, V. (2019). Production clustering and offshoring. University of Sidney .

Van Biesebroeck, J. and A. Schmitt (2020). Testing predictions on supplier governance from the global value
  chains literature.

Vandenbussche, H. and C. Viegelahn (2018). Input reallocation within multi-product firms. Journal of
  International Economics 114, 63­79.

Vanek, J. (1968). The Factor Proportions Theory: The N-Factor Case. Kyklos 21, 749­756.

Venables, A. J. (1987). Trade and trade policy with differentiated products: A chamberlinian-ricardian model.
  The Economic Journal 97 (387), 700­717.

Vidal, C. J. and M. Goetschalckx (1997). Strategic production-distribution models: A critical review with
  emphasis on global supply chain models. European Journal of Operational Research 98 (1), 1­18.

Walter, T. (2018). Trade and welfare effects of a potential free trade agreement between Japan and the
 United States.

Wang, J. (2021). Robot adoption, trade, and offshoring: A firm-level analysis.

Wang, X. and S. M. Disney (2016). The Bullwhip Effect: Progress, Trends and Directions. European Journal
 of Operational Research 250 (3), 691­701.

Wang, Z., S.-J. Wei, X. Yu, and K. Zhu (2017). Characterizing Global Value Chains: Production Length and
 Upstreamness. NBER Working Paper No. 23261.

Wang, Z., S.-J. Wei, and K. Zhu (2013). Quantifying International Production Sharing at the Bilateral and
 Sector Levels. NBER Working Paper No. 19677.

Wicht, L. (2019). The impact of trade tensions on Switzerland: A quantitative assessment. Aussen-
 wirtschaft 70 (01), 1­34.


                                                    122
Wicht, L. (2020). The margin of importing sectors in the gains from trade.

World Bank (2020). World Development Report: Trading for Development in the Age of Global Value Chains.
 World Bank Publications.

Yang, C. (2020). Location choices of multi-plant oligopolists: Theory and evidence from the cement industry.

Yang, G. (2018). Infrastructure and global value chain position: Evidence from China.

Yeaple, S. R. (2003). The complex integration strategies of multinationals and cross country dependencies in
  the structure of foreign direct investment. Journal of International Economics 60 (2), 293­314.

Yi, K.-M. (2003). Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade? Journal of Political
  Economy 111 (1), 52­102.

Yi, K.-M. (2010). Can Multi-Stage Production Explain the Home Bias in Trade? American Economic
  Review 100 (1), 364­393.

Zhou, Y. (2020). The US-China trade war and global value chains.




                                                    123
