                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           LICENSING LIFE-SAVING DRUGS FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
                  EVIDENCE FROM THE MEDICINES PATENT POOL

                                        Alberto Galasso
                                       Mark Schankerman

                                      Working Paper 28545
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28545


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




We thank Esteban Burrone and Amina Maillard for providing access to licensing data and for
helpful discussions about the Medicine Patent Pool. We are grateful to Saul Lach, William
Matcham, Tim Simcoe and seminar participants at the University of Toronto for helpful
comments. Harveen Sidhu provided excellent research assistance. We are grateful for financial
support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Alberto Galasso and Mark Schankerman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Licensing Life-Saving Drugs for Developing Countries: Evidence from the Medicines Patent
Pool
Alberto Galasso and Mark Schankerman
NBER Working Paper No. 28545
March 2021
JEL No. I18,O31,O34

                                        ABSTRACT

We study the effects of an institution that pools patents across geographical markets on the
licensing and adoption of life-saving drugs in low- and middle-income countries. Using data on
licensing and sales for HIV, hepatitis C and tuberculosis drugs, we show that there is an
immediate and large increase in licensing by generic firms when a patent is included in the
Medicines Patent Pool (MPP). The effect is heterogeneous across countries. The findings are
robust to identification strategies to deal with endogeneity of MPP patents and countries. The
impact on actual entry and sales, however, is much smaller than on licensing, which is due to
geographic bundling of licenses by the MPP. More broadly, the paper highlights the potential of
pools in promoting technology diffusion in developing countries.


Alberto Galasso
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
alberto.galasso@rotman.utoronto.ca

Mark Schankerman
Department of Economics, R.516
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UK
M.Schankerman@lse.ac.uk
1        Introduction

In 2008 the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved the use of Etravirine, an HIV anti-
retroviral drug designed for patients with established resistance to other drugs. Yet, by 2015,
Etravirine was available only in about 25 percent of the lower and upper middle-income coun-
tries in Central and Eastern Europe. This is not atypical ­other important HIV antiretrovirals
and drug cocktails, all of them on the Essential Drug List of the World Health Organisation
(WHO), have limited availability in these countries (Gokengin et al., 2018). Nor are such de-
lays limited to HIV drugs. Cockburn, Lanjouw and Schankerman (2016) show that global drug
di¤usion is very slow, especially in countries with relatively low income.
           Promoting rapid and a¤ordable access to essential drugs is a key health policy objec-
tive. One proposed approach is to use patent pools, which are voluntary arrangements where
patentees authorize the pool to license speci...c patents, typically as a bundle, to third parties.
Historically, patent pools have been widely used in conjunction with technology standards ­
e.g., in the electronic and information technology sectors ­where the focus is on licensing com-
plementary innovations. Such pools are designed to facilitate commercialisation of standard-
compliant products and follow-on innovation by lowering the transaction costs of licensing and
coordinating the use of complementary innovations (Merges 2001). More recently, a di¤erent
type of patent pool has been proposed in the biomedical ...eld, which focuses on promoting wider
geographic di¤usion of speci...c innovations rather than aggregating technologically-related in-
novations. Examples include vaccines for the SARS epidemic, neglected tropical diseases and
diagnostic testing (Van Zimmeren et al., 2011), and the COVID-19 patent pool recently pro-
posed by the WHO.1
           Advocates of geographic patent pools argue that they can be particularly bene...cial for
promoting the di¤usion of essential pharmaceutical products in small, low- and middle-income
countries, where market entry may be at best marginally pro...table. A specialized, centralized
licensing platform may reduce the transaction costs of writing, monitoring and enforcing patent
contracts between drug companies and generic manufactures, and thereby facilitate product
launches in poor countries. However, skeptics claim that these pools are essentially public re-
lations exercises, and that there is no evidence of real impact on access to medicines (Kennedy,
2015). They also argue that pharmaceutical companies can unilaterally facilitate di¤usion

    1
        For further discussion of this, and other policy options, see Gans (2020).




                                                           1
in low-income countries by not ...ling, or committing not to enforce, patents in those markets.
Other critics point out that the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)
agreement allows countries to facilitate access by generic manufacturers through exible pro-
visions, such as compulsory licensing. These di¤erent views in the policy debate highlight the
need for empirical research.
      There is very limited evidence on whether patent pools do, in practice, promote licens-
ing and product launches. For this purpose, one needs licensing information not only for pool
patents but also for a control group of patents before and after pool formation. This is typically
di¢ cult to obtain given the con...dentiality of licensing contracts. In this paper, we exploit a
rich dataset on licensing from the Medicines Patent Pool (MPP) that allows us to conduct such
empirical analysis. Established by the United Nations in 2010, the MPP is a voluntary licensing
institution with a mandate to promote access to a¤ordable and quality-assured treatments for
HIV, tuberculosis and hepatitis-C in low- and middle-income countries. The MPP negotiates
inclusion of patents in the pool with patent-holding pharmaceutical companies, and then li-
censes the patent rights to interested generic drug companies. MPP licenses are non-exclusive,
with low or zero royalty rates, and wide geographical scope. Since the MPP typically targets
markets that are likely to be of limited pro...tability for patent-holding pharmaceutical compa-
nies, the decision to allow products to enter the MPP, covering an agreed set of countries, is
often driven by corporate social responsibility objectives.
      We study how the Medicines Patent Pool a¤ects the licensing, launch and sales of drugs
in low- and middle-income countries. We begin with a simple model that compares licensing
and launch outcomes under two alternative arrangements, bilateral licensing by the patentee
and a pool with geographical bundling. The model generates two main results. First, a patent
pool with bundled licensing has an ambiguous e¤ect on the amount of licensing. In the absence
of the pool, the potential licensee bargains bilaterally with the upstream patentholder over the
patents it intends to commercialize, and launches a drug in a given country if the pro...ts from
doing so exceed the licensing and entry costs. In the presence of a pool, the potential licensee
faces lower transactions costs of licensing a patent for a given country, but is constrained to
license the patent in all the countries designated by the pool. Thus the geographic bundling may
increase total transaction costs and make it unpro...table for the licensee to license the bundle,
when it would have been pro...table to license the patent for a restricted set of countries. In
this case, the pool induces less overall licensing than bilateral licensing arrangements. Second,



                                                2
the model shows that mandatory bundled licensing by the pool reduces the correlation between
licensing and drug launch. This occurs because the ...rm is constrained to license a bundle of
patents which may include those covering markets for which a launch is unpro...table.
      Our empirical analysis is based on panel data covering 173 pharmaceutical products and
129 countries over the period 2005-2018. The product set encompasses medicines for HIV,
tuberculosis and hepatitis-C recognized as essential by the WHO. The countries in our sample
are those classi...ed by the World Bank as low- or middle-income and for which patent protection
was in place for at least one of the sample drugs. We obtain licensing information for each
product-country from the MPP. Crucially, the licensing information includes both MPP licenses
and non-MPP bilateral licenses between the upstream patentee and generic ...rms, and covers
both the medicines in the pool and other products in our sample. Moreover, licensing data are
available from 2005, ...ve years before the formation of the pool.
      Using di¤erence-in-di¤erences as the baseline speci...cation, we show that the likelihood of
observing patent licensing deals covering a product-country combination increases substantially
once the patents related to the product-country dyad are included in the MPP. The probability
of having at least one license to a generic ...rm increases more than ...ve-fold relative to non-
MPP product-countries. This ...nding is robust to a wide variety of alternative speci...cations
and controls.
      There are two key endogeneity concerns with the baseline speci...cation. The ...rst relates
to the selection of which products enter into the MPP through upstream negotiations between
the patentholder and the MPP. There may be unobservable factors that are correlated with
the inclusion of a medicine in the MPP and which also a¤ect di¤usion of the product across
countries. For example, the MPP may be interested in the most e¤ective drugs which, in turn,
would also be more attractive to generic licensees. The second endogeneity concern relates to
the geographical coverage of a given product in the MPP, which is determined by negotiations
with the upstream patentholder. Again, unobservable features of the product-country dyad
may make inclusion in the MPP less likely and, at the same time, a launch more likely. For
example, the patentholder may be more likely to strike a non-MPP bilateral deal with an
exclusive licensee when a geographic market is more attractive for whatever reason. While we
control for demographic characteristics in the empirical analysis, we cannot control for other
unobservable factors.
      We use two identi...cation strategies to address these concerns. To address endogeneity of



                                                3
MPP products, we exploit the list of medicines that the MPP aimed to license when the pool
was formed in 2010. This list includes about 80 products. Fewer than half of these medicines
eventually made it in the pool, but the MPP started a negotiation with the relevant patentees
for all of them. This information allows us to estimate the e¤ect of inclusion in the MPP
using as the control group those drugs for which bargaining with the pool started but failed.
This identi...cation strategy is closely related to the approach in Greenstone et al. (2010), who
estimate the e¤ect of large plant openings in a county using as a counterfactual counties that
were considered by the plant managers but not chosen. We show that the estimates of the
impact of the MPP using this approach are quantitatively similar to our baseline estimates.
      We address the endogeneity of country coverage in MPP licenses as follows. Discussions
with MPP executives, and o¢ cial publications, con...rm that the MPP focus on countries clas-
si...ed by the World Bank as low- and lower middle-income in their negotiations with upstream
drug companies. The main reason is that upper middle-income countries are seen by pharma-
ceutical companies as large commercial markets (such as Brazil and China), so this entire set
of countries often is not considered in the bargaining. Consistent with this, we ...nd a large
discontinuity in the likelihood of inclusion in the MPP for countries marginally above the upper
middle-income threshold relative to those marginally below it as measured in the year the drug
entered the MPP. Building on this result, we exploit the quasi-exogenous variations in country
incomes in the neighborhood of the upper middle-income cut-o¤ as an instrument in a fuzzy
regression discontinuity design. We show that our results with this identi...cation strategy are
similar to those from our baseline speci...cation.
      There are three key empirical ...ndings. First, inclusion in the pool is associated with
a ...ve-fold increase in the probability of licensing, as discussed above. Second, the e¤ect is
heterogeneous: we show that the increase in licensing due to the MPP is much larger for
small, non-sub-Saharan countries, and smaller in countries with large exposure to HIV. Large
countries with high HIV incidence are more attractive markets for pharmaceutical companies,
and bilateral deals are more likely to have been in place before the MPP. Thus, we expect that
joining the MPP would increase licensing less in such countries, and the evidence con...rms this.
We also show that the e¤ect of the pool is not driven by the products of a handful of large
pharmaceutical ...rms.
      Finally, using a dataset purchased from IQVIA, a leading provider of data on interna-
tional sales of pharmaceutical products, we show that inclusion in the patent pool has signi...cant



                                                 4
impacts on product market outcomes (drug launches, quantity sold and prices). At the same
time, the e¤ect is a combination of di¤erent responses by licensees and patentees. The MPP is
associated with higher entry rates (launches) of licensees, and this translates to higher quan-
tities of products and lower prices. However, we also ...nd that patentees are less active in
the country once a product enters the MPP. This may lead to long term positive e¤ects on
consumer welfare, but limited gains in the short term if licensee entry requires longer time than
entry from the original innovator.
      The e¤ects of the MPP on market outcomes are much smaller than the e¤ect on licensing.
This is due to the bundled nature of the pool license contracts, as the model suggests (licensees
only launch in a small subset of countries covered by the MPP license) and by a lower propensity
of patentees to be active in a country once a product enters the MPP. This point is noteworthy
because most studies of pools focus on how they a¤ect licensing. But when licensing is bundled,
this will overstate the impact on what ultimately matters, which is commercialization and
product entry. Our estimates imply that, in the IQVIA sample (which does not include sub-
Saharan Africa), the probability of observing a licensing deal for product-countries in the MPP
is more than 7 times larger than those not in the MPP, but the probability of observing an
actual launch by a licensee only increases by 40 percent.
      The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature and Section 3
provides institutional details on the MPP. Section 4 presents a simple conceptual framework. In
Section 5 we describe the data and the empirical speci...cation. Section 6 presents the baseline
estimates of the e¤ect of the MPP on patent licensing. Section 7 examines the heterogeneity
of the e¤ect across countries and ...rms. In Section 8 we investigate the impact of the MPP on
drug launches (entry) and sales. We conclude with a brief summary of the ...ndings and their
implications.


2    Related literature

This paper is related to three strands of the literature in economics of innovation. The ...rst is the
empirical literature on the di¤usion of new drugs in developing countries. Cockburn, Lanjouw
and Schankerman (2016) show that income levels, and patent and price regulation regimes,
strongly a¤ect how quickly new drugs are launched in di¤erent countries. Price regulation
delays launch, while longer and more extensive patent rights accelerate it. Kyle (2006) examines
the role of ...rm characteristics on pharmaceutical product launches. Kyle (2007) shows that


                                                  5
price controls signi...cantly retard the speed of launch, as well as the number of countries in
which a drug is launched, in the European Union. Duggan, Garthwaite, and Goyal (2016)
study the e¤ect of patent protection on drug sales and prices in India. Delgado, Kyle, and
McGahan(2013) exploit variation in patent protection generated by the implementation of the
TRIPS agreement to examine the e¤ect of patents on prices, quantities and international trade.
Dubois, Lefouili and Straub (2021) show that centralized procurement reduces drug prices in
low- and middle-income countries. Our paper complements this line of research by examining
how patent pools can speed up the di¤usion of essential drugs.
      The second is the empirical literature on bargaining frictions in the market for technology.
Furman and Stern (2011) exploit articles deposited in the Biological Resource Center in the
U.S. (BRC), which is a clearinghouse that facilitates access to biomaterials for cumulative inno-
vation. They ...nd that the BRC substantially increases follow-on citations to scienti...c articles.
Williams (2013), Galasso and Schankerman (2015) and Sampat and Williams (2019) provide
causal evidence that patent rights retard follow-on research in some technology environments
but not in others. A key challenge in this line of research is the lack of comprehensive datasets
on transactions in patent rights. These studies on how clearinghouses and patent rights a¤ect
follow-on innovation use their ...ndings to infer whether bargaining frictions limit the market
for technology. Our paper departs from this approach by relying on patent licensing data both
for patents in the pool and for related patents not included in the pool. For some products we
even have information on failed negotiations, an aspect no paper in the literature has previously
examined.
      The third strand is the literature on patent pools. The theoretical work studies the
incentives to form pools and the e¤ect of patent pools on innovation incentives (Lerner and
Tirole, 2004; Quint, 2014; Llanes and Poblete, 2014; Reisinger and Tarantino, 2019). Empirical
work on patent pools is limited and has typically focused on two aspects: the factors that a¤ect
the participation decision, including the licensing and governance rules (Lerner, Strojwas and
Tirole 2007; Layne-Farrar and Lerner, 2011), and the impact of pools on innovation outcomes
(Lampe and Moser, 2013; 2019).
      Finally, there are two recent studies on the MPP. Wang (2020) examines the impact of
the MPP on pharmaceutical research expenditure, clinical trials and sales of generic drugs.
Martinelli et al (2020) study the e¤ect of MPP inclusion on the volume of drugs bought by
procurement agencies and on the reallocation of market shares between originators and gener-



                                                 6
ics. Our paper complements these studies by focusing on the direct impact of patent pooling
on licensing and its interaction with market outcomes. We also develop new identi...cation
strategies to address endogeneity of MPP patents ad countries, which may also prove useful
for future studies using MPP data.


3       The Medicines Patent Pool

The Medicines Patent Pool (MPP) is a voluntary licensing and patent pooling mechanism,
established in 2010, with a mandate to accelerate access to a¤ordable, appropriate and quality-
assured HIV treatments in developing countries. The global health organization UNITAID
provided most of the ...nancial support to the establishment of the MPP. In 2015, the mandate
of the MPP was expanded to include hepatitis C and tuberculosis (Medicines Patent Pool,
2018).
         The MPP negotiates patent licensing agreements with patent-holding pharmaceutical
companies. The medicines to be licensed are identi...ed through in a priority list of drugs both
approved and at the pipeline stage. The priority list is de...ned after consultations with the
World Health Organization and experts from the government and the civil society. The choice
of drugs takes into account medical needs and patent status in low- and middle-income countries
(LMICs).
         Once a drug enters the MPP priority list, the MPP approaches relevant patent holders to
negotiate for inclusion of the drug in the pool. In negotiating a license deal, the MPP focuses
on the public health impact, and aims to obtain broad geographical coverage and freedom to
develop pediatric formulations and ...xed-dose combinations that meet the needs of resource-
limited settings. MPP licenses are typically royalty-free (more than 60 percent of licenses). In
about 30 percent of the licenses royalties are paid to the patentee (typically 5% of net sales of
...nished products). In the remaining cases, royalties are collected by the MPP and channeled
back to community-based HIV organizations in the country paying the royalty.2
         Once a license deal with a patent holder is in place (`
                                                               upstream license'
                                                                               ), the MPP is-
sues an expression of interest inviting generic producers to apply for sub-licenses. In striking
sub-licenses, the goal of the MPP is to ensure that licensees have the capacity, willingness

    2
     There is no within-...rm variation in royalties in our sample. In particular, the 5% royalties involve all the
HIV products licensed from Gilead, and the royalty channeled back locally is related to the only HIV drug
licensed from Bristol-Myers Squibb. This prevents us from identifying the e¤ect of royalties as it would be
collinear with the ...rm e¤ect.



                                                        7
and commitment to obtain appropriate regulatory approval, follow strict quality assurance re-
quirements, develop the formulations and make them available in the licensed territory. MPP
sub-licenses are non-exclusive and wide in geographical scope, including up to 131 low- and
middle-income countries. Licenses often allow generic manufacturers to sell outside the licensed
territory if they are not infringing on a patent.


4      Analytical framework

When the market for a pharmaceutical product is small ­ in terms of number of potential
users and per capita income ­ the costs of negotiating, drafting, monitoring and enforcing a
patent licensing contract may exceed the pro...t that can be extracted. In such cases, a drug
company may still be interested in licensing its patents as an investment in corporate social
responsibility (CSR) and virtue-signalling, which generates indirect market value (Hong and
Liskovich, 2015). A geographic patent pool can increase the private return to CSR investments
by absorbing the costs of negotiating and monitoring licenses with generic manufacturers.
Moreover, the information about the involvement of the patentee in poor countries may be
disseminated more e¤ectively by the pool.
       When drug patents are included in a pool, downstream generic manufacturers negotiate
with the pool for a bundled license that provides the right to sell the product in multiple
countries. This can a¤ect licensing outcomes and product launch decisions. To illustrate this
point, we develop a simple model of how a patent pool a¤ects the licensing and drug launch
decisions.
       A patentee owns two patents related to a pharmaceutical product, one covering country
A and another for country B . A potential licensee is considering whether to license the patents
and commercialize/launch the product. We denote the present value of pro...ts generated during
patent protection in market j by Rj with j 2 fA; B g : A launch in country j involves a sunk
cost Cj ; which includes the cost of securing regulatory approval in the target country and
investment in distribution channels and marketing. If the patents are not included in a pool,
the patentee and licensee bargain over a bilateral license that grants permission to launch in
the countries. The cost of striking a license deal for one country is c; and c +   for two countries
with    > 0 and c +       2c: If the patents are included in a pool, the licensee can only license
the bundle (both countries) at a cost c     c+      .
       The most natural interpretation of the parameters c;         and c is as transaction costs.


                                                 8
These (private) costs encompass the expenses that a licensee sustains to negotiate, draft and
review a patent license contract. We assume that it costs more to negotiate a bilateral patent
license contract for two countries than for only one country, i.e.                             > 0, as it involves patents in
di¤erent jurisdictions and country-speci...c contractual provisions. The innocuous assumption
that         c accommodates economies of scale in bargaining. The assumption that c                                         c+
   implies that negotiating a two-country license with the pool is less expensive than the
corresponding bilateral negotiation. In the context of the MPP, we expect c to be low relative
to c +       because most aspects of the MPP license contracts are standardized and do not
require negotiations. In other contexts, where pool licenses are more tailored toward the speci...c
licensees, the di¤erence between c and c +                   may be much smaller.
       The timing of the game is as follows. In period 0 the licensee decides whether to license
the patents. In period 1 the licensee decides whether to pay the cost Cj and enter in each of
the countries for which a patent license is in place. Consider ...rst the case where patents are
licensed bilaterally. At time 1 the licensee launches in country j only if                             j   = Rj   Cj      0. At
time 0 the licensee will obtain a license for both countries only if the following two conditions
are met:

                                     A   +   B       c               0

                                     A   +   B       c               max         j        c:
                                                                         j

These conditions require that the expected pro...ts of joint licensing are positive and greater
than the pro...ts from licensing in only one country. If these conditions are not satis...ed, the
licensee will license only one patent and license in the country with the highest                                 j   as long as
maxj     j   c > 0: There will be no license and launch in any country if maxj                               j    c < 0:3
       Now consider a patent pool with bundled licensing for both countries at cost c. At stage 1,
commercialization in country j will take place only if                   j       0. Licensing and commercialization
in both countries is optimal if the following conditions are satis...ed:

                                         A   +   B       c       0

                                         A   +   B       c       max         j       c:
                                                                     j


    3
      Our model implicitly assumes that the licensee has full bargaining power and makes a take-it-or-leave it
o¤er to the patentee or the pool. This leads to a royalty free contract which is consistent with the majority of
MPP licenses. One can extend the model to include royalties by interpreting j as net of royalty payments and
allowing this variable to di¤er in bilateral and pool licenses.



                                                             9
These conditions are the same as the bilateral licensing case, except that the licensing cost is
now c rather than c or c +       :
       A comparison of these conditions yields two basic empirical predictions. First, a geo-
graphic patent pool has an ambiguous e¤ect on the total amount of licensing relative to bilateral
contracting. When both       A   and   B   are large relative to c +   , creating a patent pool has no
e¤ect on licensing as both patents would be licensed with or without a pool. When the pro...ts
that can be obtained in the two countries are asymmetric, the presence of a pool may increase
or decrease the number of patents licensed. To see this, consider the case where            A   < 0 and
 B   > c. In this case the ...rm will only license patent B with a bilateral deal. With a patent
pool, the ...rm license two patents if      B   > c and no patent if   B     c: We expect c to be low
relative to c for the MPP, and thus that the MPP should increase licensing.
       This simple model compares the licensing through a pool versus direct bilateral licensing.
In practice, the MPP does not restrict the ability of participating drug companies to engage
also in bilateral licensing. When c is low, extending the model to include the choice between
bilateral and pool licensing would not change the prediction that the pool increases licensing.
However, in a more general setting, the option of using a geographic pool may reduce overall
licensing activity when negotiations are costly (c is close to c +         ) and independent licensing
by patentees is not permitted. Thus, the impact of a geographic pool depends on the particular
costs involved and restrictions it may impose on participating patentees. This is is consistent
with Lerner and Tirole (2004) who show that rules allowing independent licensing a¤ect the
participation of ...rms and the welfare impact of technology patent pools.
       The second implication of our model is that, in a patent pool with bundled licensing,
the correlation between patent licensing and drug launch may be low. With costly bilateral
licensing, the generic ...rm is expected to launch the product in any country for which it has
a license. With a pool, the ...rm is constrained to license a bundle of countries, in some of
which launch may not be pro...table. This observation highlights an important distinction
between patent pools that license complementary technological components and pools like the
MPP which bundle di¤erent geographical markets for a given technology.               In the ...rst case,
one would expect that most, if not all, the licensed patents would be used by the licensee to
ensure compliance with the technology standard. This does not apply in pools which serve as
clearinghouses for international market access. As a consequence, empirical studies that rely




                                                    10
on licensing data alone may over-estimate the e¤ect of a pool on actual commercialisation.4
        Another consideration, outside the lens of our model, is that a geographic patent pool
creates a potential coordination problem for licensees. Since licenses give access to a speci...c set
of countries, the pool removes the ability of the patentee to coordinate entry across countries.
To see this, consider the case in which markets A and B are natural monopolies, and there are
multiple potential licensees. With bilateral licenses, the patentee may restrict entry in each
country to only one licensee. This cannot be done when access to both countries is o¤ered
through a bundled license by a pool. This implies that the pool may generate a coordination
problem in which potential licensees are reluctant to license and launch due to the risk of
excessive entry.5


5       Data and econometric speci...cation

Our analysis starts with a balanced product-country-year panel dataset covering the period
2005-2018. The products in our sample were retrieved from three di¤erence sources. First,
we download the products listed in MedsPal, a data portal managed by the MPP providing
information on key drugs for HIV, hepatitis C, tuberculosis and a few other diseases prominent
in low- and middle-income countries. Second, we added to this list all the medicines in the 2017
WHO Essential Medicine List for HIV, tuberculosis, and hepatitis C that were not included
in MedsPal. This list is a guide for national institutions in identifying products that need
to be available in a functioning health system, and is based on disease prevalence, public
health relevance, clinical e¢ cacy and cost-e¤ectiveness. Finally, we include products related
to compounds in the 2010 MPP priority list, if these were not included in MedsPal or the
Essential Medicine List.
        The data set covers 216 products. Each product is de...ned by a molecule-strength com-
bination (e.g. Abacavir 300mg or Etravirine 100mg). About half (52 percent) of the products
are in the 2017 WHO Essential Medicine List. The 2010 MPP priority list includes 83 prod-

    4
     This also applies to studies in the public health literature (e.g., Juneja et al., 2017) that have tried to
estimate the impact of the MPP assuming that its commercial impact takes place in all countries covered by
its licenses. In practice, even a technology patent pool may contain patents that are not, strictly speaking,
essential for the implementation of a standard. To this extent, some of the patents may not be implemented by
all licensees (Lemley and Simcoe, 2018).
   5
     This point has been formalized in a one-market dynamic framework by Bolton and Farrell (1990) who show
that the coordination problem generated by decentralization may lead to investment delays, especially when
there is no substantial private information about the market pro...tability and when the number of potential
entrants is not very large.


                                                      11
ucts. The countries in our sample are the 177 countries listed by MedsPal in July 2019, which
includes all countries classi...ed as low- or middle-income by the World Bank and some countries
that in recent years graduated to high-income status.
       We collected information on the patents protecting products in each country. For 63
percent of the products in our sample, this information is provided by the MedsPal dataset.
For the remaining 37 percent (80 products), the information was retrieved manually from a
variety of sources (including the DrugBank database, the WIPO Pat-INFORMED database and
Google patents). Using this information, we identify product-country-years for which there is
at least one non-expired patent protecting the product in the country in the focal year.
       The ...nal dataset is an unbalanced panel with 80,103 observations encompassing 129
countries and 173 products.6 Focusing on product-country-years observations in which patent
protection is in place allows us to examine the e¤ect of inclusion of a patent in the Medicines
Patent Pool on the likelihood that the patent is licensed in the country. If anything, restricting
to this sample leads to an under-estimation of the e¤ect of the pool if licensees also sell in
countries where patent protection is not in place.7
       Our main source of data for patent license agreements is the MPP. In this paper, for
clarity, we refer to licensing deals between the MPP and pharmaceutical ...rms as "upstream
licenses", and licensing deals between the MPP and generic manufacturers as "sub-licenses".
Finally, we refer to the non-MPP deals between a pharmaceutical company and a generic
producer as "bilateral licenses".
       Through its web-site, the pool provides open access to the full text of their upstream
licensing deals. In some cases, these agreements have been renegotiated over time to include
additional countries or drug formulations. The MPP shared with us all the historical contracts,
so our data allow us to track how each upstream licensing deal has evolved over time. The pool'
                                                                                              s
web-site also provides information on sub-license agreements between the pool and generic
manufacturers for all the drugs in the pool. Data on bilateral (non-MPP) licensing deals is also
obtained through the MPP. The MPP discloses, through its MedsPal database, information on

   6
    We drop products that are listed in MedsPal with patents expired before 2005, those with patents ...led after
2018 and products that are not in MedsPal and for which patent information could not be retrieved from other
datasets. We drop countries for which our data show no patent ...led for all of the products during the entire
sample period. These include con   ict-a¤ected poor countries (such as Afghanistan and South Sudan) and many
very small countries (such as the Cook Islands, Tonga and Mirconesia).
   7
     Typically, MPP license deals allow licensees to sell outside the licensed territory as long as they are not
infringing on any granted patents. Our discussions with MPP executives suggest that this provision is not
present in many bilateral non-MPP deals which may include stricter restrictions on sales.


                                                       12
bilateral licensing deals related to non-MPP drugs. This information is retrieved both from
public sources (such as licensors'websites or o¢ cial press releases) and from non-con...dential
direct communications to the MPP from the licensors. The information on bilateral licences
deals available on the MedsPal portal only covers deals signed after 2010, but the MPP also
collected information on bilateral deals signed between 2001 and 2010 and shared it with us
for this project.
         We construct a variable, Deals, equal to the total number of licensing deals (either
bilateral or MPP sublicense) which are in force in the product-country-year observation. We
also construct a dummy variable, Access, which is equal to one if at least one of these licensing
deals is in force in the product-country-year observation.8

5.1      Descriptive statistics

By the end of 2018, about 27 percent (47/173) of the products in our sample are included
in the MPP. Panel A of Table 1 provides summary statistics for some of the key variables in
our dataset. The dummy Access equals one for about 18 percent of the product-country-year
observations in our sample. Conditional on having at least one license in place, the average
number of Deals is equal to 4.6. Of these deals, 1.4 are MPP sublicenses and 3.2 are bilateral
deals.
         In the appendix we provide a graphical illustration (Figure A1) of the trend in Access
for products that enter the MPP by the end of our sample period and those that do not. On
average, the likelihood of observing at least one licensing deal is larger in product-countries
in the MPP relative to those that are not in the MPP. More strikingly, access for MPP and
non-MPP medicines follow a similar trend before 2010, the year in which MPP was instituted,
but diverge after 2010 with a substantial increase in access for medicines in the pool. We ...nd
a similar pattern plotting the number of deals rather than the indicator variable for country
access (unreported).
         While illustrative, a simple before- vs. after- 2010 comparison does not take into account
that product-country combinations enter the MPP at di¤erent times across our sample period.

   8
    While the number of MPP sublicenses is accurately reported, for some of the bilateral deals we do not know
the exact number of licensees involved (but we do know the products involved and the geographic coverage of
the deal). This required us to perform two types of imputations in our data. First, we set the number of deals
as equal to one in cases where no information on the number of licensees is reported in our data. Second, in
some of these cases licensing deals are expanded geographically and we assume that that the revised agreement
involves all the original licensees. In the empirical analysis we show that adding a dummy for these adjustments
or dropping these subsamples has no impact on our ...ndings.



                                                      13
To address this, Panel B of Table 1 provides preliminary evidence of the e¤ect of a country-
product entering the pool. The ...rst row shows the baseline probability of at least one MPP
license (Access ) and the average number of deals for country-product combinations that are
not included in the MPP during our entire sample period. The second row presents the same
information for country-products that enter the pool, for the sample years before their inclusion
in the MPP. The last row provides similar statistics for country-products in the pool during the
sample period in which they are included in the MPP. The results are striking. Access rates
are respectively 0.13, 0.09 and 0.87, implying that the probability of striking at least one license
deal related to the product-country increases is nearly 10 times larger once the product-country
is included in the MPP. Similarly, the average number of deals are 0.48, 0.45 and 5.45. These
are very large e¤ects, but they may confound the causal e¤ect of pool inclusion with unobserved
heterogeneity driven by country and product characteristics. The econometric analysis below
attempts to control for these dimensions of heterogeneity.
      As emphasized earlier, given the bundled licensing by the MPP, patent license deals
capture "potential generic entrants" for the product/country rather than "actual entry." In
Section 8 we examine this distinction in detail, using drug launches and sales data purchased
from a private vendor.

5.2   Econometric model

Our empirical strategy relies on a di¤erence-in-di¤erences estimation:

                         Yp;c;t =   + M P Pp;c;t + Xc;t +   t   + fp;c + "p;c;t                 (1)

where the dependent variable, Yp;c;t , captures licensing activities in product, p, country, c; and
year t: The unit of observation is a product-country-year. The treatment variable, M P Pp;c;t
is equal to one for product-countries that are included in an upstream license between MPP
and a pharmaceutical ...rm in year t. The term Xc;t captures a series of time-varying country
controls. The terms    t   and fp;c are year and product-country ...xed e¤ects. The coe¢ cient
is a di¤erence-in-di¤erences estimator identifying the e¤ect of entering the pool on licensing
relative to product-countries that are not in the MPP.
      The baseline regressions are estimated by OLS, with standard errors clustered at the
product-country level. Section 6.2 con...rms robustness of our ...ndings using alternative speci...-
cations that account both for the count nature and other features of our data. In Sections 6.3
and 6.4 we develop two identi...cation strategies to address endogeneity concerns. Each reduces

                                                14
the usable sample size, so we begin with the OLS applied to the full sample.


6     Empirical Results
6.1    Baseline speci...cation

Table 2 provides the baseline results. In column 1, the dependent variable is Access, an indicator
equal to one if at least one licensing deal is in place for product p and country c in year t.
The estimated parameter           is positive and statistically signi...cant: the likelihood of at least
one deal for the product-country increases by 66 percentage points after the product-country
combination enters the MPP. Since the mean value of Access for non-MPP products-countries
is 0.13, this corresponds to a 5-fold increase in the likelihood of observing at least one licensing
deal. In column 2 the dependent variable is the total number of licensing deals. The estimated
MPP treatment e¤ect is an increase of 4.6 deals, and it is strongly signi...cant. Compared to
the average number of deals for product-countries that never enter the MPP, this represents a
10-fold increase.
       Columns 3 and 4 estimate a more exible speci...cation in which the e¤ect of MPP is
allowed to vary during the ...rst ...ve years after entry into the pool. The estimates con...rm the
positive association between inclusion in the MPP, Access and licensing deals. The coe¢ cients
become large and statistically signi...cant immediately after a product-country enters the pool
and monotonically rise over time. This indicates that the growth in licensing deals that follows
entry in the MPP begins very quickly, during the ...rst couple of years, and solidi...es over time
with new deals struck even ...ve years after MPP inclusion.9 Finally, in column 5 we check
whether licensing deals rose in the two years prior to the product-country entering the MPP.
The estimated coe¢ cients are small and statistically insigni...cant, indicating that entry into
the MPP was not associated with pre-entry trends.
       Overall, the monotonic pattern of the timing of the MPP e¤ect is in line with the simple
plot of raw-data in Appendix Figure A1. An important caveat is that Figure A1 compares
Access before and after 2010, the year in which MPP was established. Because most of the
products-countries in our sample entered the MPP two to three years after 2010, the bulk of the
increase in deals takes place a few years after MPP establishment. Conversely, the regression
analysis, which focuses on di¤erences before and after the inclusion of a product-country in the

   9
     To address truncation concerns, we estimate these speci...cations dropping from the sample product-country
pairs that are in the MPP for less than 4 years. Results are similar if we use the full sample.



                                                      15
MPP, shows that deal growth starts quickly after MPP inclusion.

6.2    Robustness

We perform a variety of tests to con...rm robustness of our main ...nding. Appendix Table A1
shows that the relationship between MPP and deals is robust to using alternative econometric
speci...cation. We re-estimate the baseline model using Poisson and Negative Binomial speci...-
cations, and con...rm the strong and statistically signi...cant positive correlation. The estimated
coe¢ cient in the Poisson model implies that product-country pairs in the MPP experience 370
percent more deals than their non-MPP counterparts.10
       The dependent variables used in our baseline analysis are stock variables based on the
number of licensing deals that are in place in a speci...c product-country-year. A cumulative
measure is preferable in our setting since licensing deals are long lasting, and the total number
of generic ...rms with a license agreement in place captures more directly the potential supply
and competition in the country. In Appendix Table A1 we redo the analysis with ow versions
of the dependent variables, and the results are in line with the baseline speci...cation ­the ow
of licensing deals sharply increases after a product-country enters the MPP.
       Part of the e¤ect we estimate in Table 2 is mechanically due to extension of existing
upstream deals to new countries. When the MPP and upstream drug company agree to revise
an existing license to include additional countries, the existing sub-licensees automatically gain
immediate access to the newly listed countries. To remove this e¤ect, Appendix Table A2
re-estimates columns 3 and 4 of Table 2 using only the countries listed in the ...rst upstream
deal between the MPP and the upstream drug company and dropping the product-country
combinations that enter the MPP through a revision of an existing deal. The coe¢ cients in
these regressions are only slightly lower than those estimated in Table 2, indicating that the
treatment e¤ect is not driven by a broadening of the existing sub-licenses.11
       Finally, our analysis de...ned products by a molecule-strength combination, even though

  10
    Table A1 also con...rms the result using the logarithm of the number of deals (plus one) as dependent variable.
The results are also robust to two alternative corrections of the dependent variable with values of zero in the
log speci...cation ­ speci...cally, we add 0.01 instead of 1 to the zero value, and include a dummy control for
observations with zero deals. We also re-estimated the speci...cation with Access as dependent variable using a
proportional hazard survival model with an exponential distribution. We ...nd that the e¤ect of the MPP is a
very large increase in the hazard of Access, con...rming our ...nding with the OLS speci...cation.
  11
    Because of missing information in our data, some of the number of bilateral deals in our sample had to be
imputed. Appendix Table A2 takes this into account by adding a dummy for observations in which the number
of deals was not precisely measured and by dropping these observations from the sample. Overall this has no
impact on our estimates, indicating measurement error associated with these imputed deals is not a problem.


                                                        16
pharmaceutical patents often cover an entire molecule. There are two reasons why this is the
more appropriate level of analysis in our setting, rather than the molecule level. First, many
of the licenses in our data only cover a subset of the products related to a molecule. This is
particularly the case for licenses that focus on pediatric or adult formulations. For example,
the MPP licenses on the pediatric formulations of abacavir includes the 60mg but not the
300mg version of the product. Second, several products in our sample are combinations of
multiple compounds and are protected both by molecule patents and patents on combination
therapies and layered tablets. Nonetheless, in order to con...rm that our results are not driven by
the disaggregated nature of the data, we re-estimate our baseline regressions using data at the
molecule-country level. The results are very similar to those based on molecule-strengh-country
level (Appendix Table A2).12

6.3    Potential endogeneity of medicines in the MPP

One potential concern is that products are not likely to be randomly allocated to the patent
pool. There may be unobservable factors that are correlated both with the likelihood that the
product enters the MPP and the underlying demand for licenses for that product. The direction
of the induced bias is ambiguous, however, and would depend on how the MPP decides which
products to target. For example, the MPP may decide not to target the most e¤ective drugs
with large demand, as it may anticipate that there would be a large number of licenses for
these products even without their intervention. This would induce a negative bias in the OLS
regression of licensing against MPP inclusion. At the same time, the MPP may not consider
drugs with niche markets and small demand, as it might expect no licensing interest even if
the drugs were included in the MPP. This would induce a positive bias in our estimates.
       To address this issue, we exploit the MPP 2010 priority list. This list of medicines was
compiled when the pool was established, after consultations with the WHO, national govern-
ments and other experts. It comprises medicines that the MPP wanted to be included in the
pool in 2010. For all these drugs, MPP entered a negotiation with the pharmaceutical company
owning the patent. The 2010 priority list encompasses 83 of our sample products, but only 38.5
percent of them eventually made it into the MPP. Under the assumption that success/failure

  12
    In these regressions we re-de...ne the MPP dummy as equal to one if at least one product related to the
molecule-country is included in an MPP license, and measure Deals as the maximum number of licensees across
the products related to a molecule-country. In Appendix Table A2 we drop product combinations, and cluster
standard errors at the molecule-country level. Results are similar when we treat each combination as if it was a
separate molecule or when we cluster the standard errors at the molecule level.



                                                      17
in the negotiation for these drugs was quasi-random ­i.e. not related to unobservable drivers
of future licensing ­ focusing on this priority list would alleviate concerns related to selection
into the MPP.13
       In short, we use the drugs for which negotiations failed as a counterfactual for what would
have happened to the drug that entered the pool in the absence of pool inclusion. The key
identi...cation assumption is that drugs in the 2010 priority list would have trended identically
in the absence of MPP inclusion, conditional on the other control variables. This identi...cation
strategy is similar to the one employed by Greenstone et al. (2010), who estimate the e¤ect of
large plant openings in a county using counties that were considered by the plant managers,
but not chosen, as a counterfactual. Columns 1 and 2 in Table 3 provide the resulting estimates
of the MPP treatment e¤ect on Access and the number of deals. The results are similar to
those in our baseline regressions, indicating that product level selection into the MPP does not
seem to be a source of bias.
       One remaining concern is that there could be confounding, time-varying unobservables
that are correlated both with success of the negotiations and with the number of downstream
licensing deals executed. For example, during the negotiations new information about the
potential market may be revealed that changes the interest of the pool in the medicine as
well as subsequent bilateral deals. Discussions with MPP executives identi...ed one such case,
Etravirine whose product-country observations account for roughly 6 percent of our sample.
During the negotiation new market information was revealed that the medicine would only
have a niche market, and led the MPP to drop its negotiation with the patentee. This would
induce an upward bias in the estimated MPP e¤ect. In columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 we drop
this drug from our sample and re-estimate the baseline model. The point estimates are indeed
smaller, but the magnitude of the change is small.14
       Finally, in column 5 we re-estimate the model including e¤ects for the two years before

  13
    Using failed negotiations over drugs in the priority list should also take care of another possible concern.
Speci...cally, a licensee might decide to delay a bilateral negotiation over a product-country once it learns that
the MPP is negotiating with a pharmaceutical company. Since this information is available at the same time for
both treatment and control group, such strategic delay should not cause any bias.
  14
     An additional concern is that positive shocks to the product's pro...tability may lead patentees to keep the
market for themselves and not license the product neither through the MPP or bilateral deals. This would lead
us to over-estimate the e¤ect of MPP, as negotiations that break down will be associated to products with less
bilateral deals. Our baseline estimates are robust to controlling for commercialization activity by the original
patentee, suggesting that this mechanism is not generating bias in our estimates. In Section 8, we discuss
the data used to identify patentee commercialization and examine additional issues related to product market
outcomes.



                                                       18
the product-country entered the pool. The coe¢ cients are small and statistically insigni...cant,
indicating that, prior to MPP entry, there was no di¤erence in trends in licensing deals for
products with successful and failed negotiations.

6.4       Potential endogeneity of countries in the MPP

Our baseline regression includes product-country ...xed e¤ects which account for stable char-
acteristics that may be correlated with upstream and downstream licensing. However, there
could be time-varying country characteristics that a¤ect both the inclusion of countries in MPP
licenses and their bilateral licensing. For example, the introduction of government policies that
make the market more attractive to the patent-holding drug companies may make bilateral li-
censing more likely and thus make it less likely that the country will be covered by the upstream
license with the MPP. In this sub-section we address this potential source of endogeneity.

6.4.1      Country controls

As a ...rst step, we extend the baseline speci...cation by including time-varying demographic
features of the sample countries. These variables are taken from the World Bank data portal.15
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 4 show that our baseline results are robust to including controls for
the log of population in the focal year. In columns 3 and 4 we add controls for the prevalence
of HIV in the country (measured as the percent of the population living with HIV) and per-
capita health expenditure. Licensing deals appear strongly correlated with the population of
the country, the prevalence of HIV and, to a lesser extent, with the country health expenditure.
The estimates of the MPP e¤ect on Access is stable but the coe¢ cient on Deals drops by about
half.16
          Introducing the World Bank controls substantially reduces the sample size, as some of
those variables are only available for a subset of countries. In column 5 and 6 we follow a
di¤erent approach that exploits the full sample by including a full set of country-year e¤ects
that capture any time-varying factors in the economy of the country. In this more demand-
ing, speci...cation, the size of the MPP coe¢ cients falls by about 20 percent relative to the
baseline (columns 1 and 2 in Table 2), but the MPP e¤ect remains statistically signi...cant and

  15
     We drop countries that have no data for the survey variables for entire sample period, and interpolate
missing values for incomplete series.
  16
    It is di¢ cult to interpret the coe¢ cients on these controls, as these are reduced form coe¢ cients and there
can be various mechanisms at play.



                                                       19
economically large.

6.4.2    Fuzzy regression discontinuity design

The second identi...cation strategy to address endogeneity of MPP countries exploits the fact
that the MPP targets countries in the low- or lower middle-income bracket. This allows us to
implement a fuzzy regression discontinuity design. This approach provides a more convincing
counter-factual for countries included in the MPP, but it has the disadvantage it relies on local
cross-sectional variation and thus is based on a much smaller sample.
        Discussions with MPP executives indicate that the pool considers a variety of factors
when negotiating the geographical scope of a deal. One prominent element is the income level of
the country and special attention is given to the income groupings provided by the World Bank.
Each year the World Bank classi...es countries into income categories distinguishing between
low-income, lower middle-income, upper middle-income and high-income.17 The mission of the
MPP, as stated on their web-page, is to increase access to, and facilitate the development of,
life-saving medicines for low- and middle-income countries.
        High-income countries are typically excluded from MPP deals. The distinction between
lower and upper middle-income plays an important role. The typical upstream MPP license
includes a large number of lower middle-income countries but only a handful, if any, of upper
middle-income countries. This is both because drug companies see greater potential for bilateral
deals for the upper middle-income group (e.g. Brazil or China) and because the MPP itself
has less interest in such countries (Branigan, 2018). We con...rmed this directly with MPP
executives, who reported that companies often use the upper middle-income thresholds as a
key criterion for agreeing whether to include a country into the upstream license.
        Figure 1 illustrates how the World Bank classi...cation status a¤ects the likelihood of
entering the MPP. To construct this ...gure, we focus on drugs that enter the MPP during our
sample period and identify countries that were within a $500 window below and above the
upper middle-income threshold in the year in which the drug joined the pool. The di¤erence
in the likelihood of inclusion in the pool is striking and signi...cant at the 0.01 level. About
56 percent of the product-country dyads related to lower middle-income countries are included

  17
    This classi...cation exploits thresholds of gross national income (GNI) per-capita calculated using the World
Bank Atlas method. For example, in 2018 low-income economies were de...ned as those with a GNI per capita of
$1,025 or less; lower middle-income economies are those with a GNI per capita between $1,026 and $3,995; upper
middle-income economies are those with a GNI per capita between $3,996 and $12,375; high-income economies
are those with a GNI per capita of $12,376 or more.



                                                       20
in the pool, whereas only 18 percent of those in upper middle-income bracket enter the MPP.
Within the same narrow income bracket, we cannot reject equality between lower and upper
middle-income countries in terms of logarithm of population (p-value=0.32), percentage of
population a¤ected by HIV (p-value=0.36) and health expenditure per capita (p-value=0.54).
These tests support the idea of covariate balance, i.e. that countries in the neighborhood of
the threshold are similar to one another in their observable characteristics.
       This evidence motivates a fuzzy regression discontinuity design where we use a dummy
for whether the country is below or above the upper middle-income threshold as an instrument
for inclusion in the MPP. The IV estimator captures the local average treatment e¤ect for the
sub-set of countries for which inclusion in the MPP is a¤ected by the instrument, under the
exclusion restriction that the World Bank classi...cation does not a¤ect licensing negotiations
directly -i.e., through channels other than the MPP (Lee and Lemieux, 2010).
       To implement the fuzzy RD design, we re-shape our dataset as a cross-section and esti-
mate the following speci...cation:

                              Yp;c =     + M P Pp;c + Entry _yearp + "p;c                                    (2)

The unit of observation is a product-country. The dependent variable is the total number of
licensing deals in a time widow after the inclusion in the pool. The term Entry _yearp captures
any macroeconomic e¤ect in the year the product enters the pool. We instrument MPP with
the World Bank status of the country at the time of inclusion of the product in the MPP.
The sample only includes products that enter the MPP by 2018. A cross-sectional dataset is
required because the IV does not vary over time for a product-country. The focus on products
that enter the MPP is required because the instrument is not de...ned for products that are
not included in the MPP.18 We estimate equation (2) on the sub-sample of product-countries
for which countries had GNI per-capita within a small window around the World Bank upper
middle-income threshold at the time of inclusion of the product in the MPP.
       Column 1 in Table 5 provides the OLS estimate of (2) for the sub-sample. The GNI
per-capita window is between $1,385 below and $1,675 above the World Bank threshold. This
sample comprises 352 observations which represent 30 percent of the product-country dyads
involving middle-income countries. The sample is equally split above and below the threshold.
Despite the much smaller sample size, the point estimates con...rm the ...ndings in the baseline

  18
    We also restrict attention to the ...rst negotiated deal, dropping country-product dyads that are included in
the sample after a re-negotiated deal. Results are similar if we include these dyads.


                                                       21
speci...cation ­the MPP is associated with an increase of 5.4 licensing deals in the 3-year window
that follows inclusion in the pool.
       Column 2 reports the ...rst stage regression, con...rming a strong negative correlation
between the upper middle-income status of the country and inclusion in the MPP. Column 3
presents the parameter estimates from the IV regression. The estimated coe¢ cient on MPP is
larger, but not statistically di¤erent, from the OLS estimate. Column 4 narrows the sample only
including observations where countries are within $500 of the upper middle-income threshold.
The sample size is reduced to only 108 observations, but we still ...nd a signi...cant MPP e¤ect.
Though it is larger, it is not statistically di¤erent from the estimate in column 3.
       One might be concerned that upper middle-income status may a¤ect licensing negoti-
ations through channels other than the MPP (violating the exclusion restriction). The main
candidate is ...nancing by the Global Fund (GF) a large international organization which sup-
ports programs targeted at AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria. Eligibility to receive GF ...nancing
is driven by a variety of factors, including World Bank income status. While all low- and lower
middle-income countries are eligible, not all upper middle-income countries are eligible. To
check whether our estimated MPP e¤ect is a¤ected by changes in GF ...nancing eligibility, we
collect information provided in the GF web-site and re-estimate the IV speci...cation where we
include a control for the eligibility of the country for GF ...nancing around the time the drug
entered the MPP. The coe¢ cient on the (instrumented) MPP variable is essentially identical
to the one in column 3 (6.67, p-value<0.01), lending credence to the exclusion restriction.
       Appendix Table A3 provides additional evidence on the robustness of the ...ndings. We
exploit the MPP 2010 priority list and expand the sample to include a set of products that
do not enter the MPP but for which a negotiation started in 2010.19 This sample alleviates
concerns related to the endogeneity of MPP products (by contrasting those where negotiations
succeeded and failed) and the endogeneity of MPP countries (by instrumenting MPP inclusion
with World Bank status). The estimated coe¢ cient is 4.95 (p-value<0.01), slightly smaller but
in line with those estimated in Table 5. The appendix table also shows robustness to widening
the window to ...ve years for the number of deals and the Access dummy, and to including
controls related to country size, prevalence of HIV and the size of its health care system.

  19
    For the medicines whee negotiation failed, we impute 2011 as year inclusion, implicitly assuming that one
year was required to negotiate the deal. Results are robust to alternative assumptions.




                                                     22
7         Heterogeneus treatment e¤ects

To this point we have assumed that the e¤ect of the MPP on licensing is constant across
countries and products. In this section we examine the heterogenous impact of the MPP by
relating it to observable characteristics of the country. We also briey discuss heterogeneity
across patentees and products.

7.1         Country heterogeneity

We examine whether the impact of the MPP on licensing varies across characteristics of the
destination country. We distinguish countries along two dimensions. The ...rst group is countries
with high prevalence of HIV-infected individuals. We identify the top four countries in term
of average absolute number of people living with HIV during our sample period: South Africa,
Nigeria, Kenya and Mozambique.20 These countries are more attractive markets for upstream
drug companies, and thus more likely to have bilateral licensing deals. Thus we would expect
the impact of coverage by the MPP (relative to bilateral licenses) to be smaller.
            The second group is countries that are small (population in the ...rst quartile of our
sample) and that are not in Sub-Saharan Africa. Countries with these features are likely to
attract fewer bilateral deals, given that their market demand is limited. Thus, we expect the
impact of being included in the MPP to be larger.21
            Columns 1-3 in Table 6 show the impact of the MPP on licensing varies sharply along
these dimensions. The probability of at least one deal (Access ) increases substantially once a
small, non Sub-Saharan country is included in the MPP. Conversely, the e¤ect on Access is much
less pronounced for the countries with the largest incidence of HIV. This result is robust across
various speci...cations. Column 1 includes year and product-country e¤ects. Column 2 includes
additional covariates to capture demographic characteristics ­ log population, percentage of
population with HIV, and health expenditure per capita. Column 3 includes country-year
e¤ects.
            Columns 4-6 present similar regressions using the number of deals as the dependent
variable. Here the coe¢ cients on the interaction of MPP and country characteristics are very

    20
         Results are robust to picking the top 3, 5 or 6 countries.
    21
    These countries include: Albania, Antigua Barbuda, Armenia, Barbados, Belize, Bosnia Herzegovina, British
Virgin Islands, Costa Rica, Fiji, Georgia, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Kiribati, Kosovo, Lebanon, Macedo-
nia, Moldova, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nauru, Panama, Saint Lucia, Solomon Islands, Trinidad Tobago, Turk-
menistan, Turks Caicos, Tuvalu, Uruguay and Vanuatu.



                                                            23
small relative to the direct e¤ect of the MPP, and not statistically signi...cant. Overall, the
estimates in Table 6 show substantial country heterogeneity at the extensive margin (going
from no license to one license) but not at the intensive margin (number of deals). The main
reason behind this asymmetry is that MPP downstream deals allow licensees to access a bundle
of heterogeneous countries. Therefore, any additional MPP licensee increases the number of
deals in an MPP country by one, independently of country characteristics. Provided there is
only limited substitution with bilateral deals, the e¤ect of the MPP on the total number of
licensing deals will be more similar across heterogenous countries.22
       These results show that the MPP is more important in generating additional licensing
deals for small, non-Sub-Saharan countries where there is lower exposure to HIV. In this respect,
the pool represents a gateway to needed drugs for countries that are neither big enough to be
an attractive market, nor able to generate `halo'e¤ects for upstream drug owners.

7.2    Other dimensions of heterogeneity

We also explored two additional sources of heterogeneity. First, we examine whether the e¤ect
may be driven by the products of a handful of large pharmaceutical ...rms by re-estimating the
baseline where we drop (one at a time) each of the three largest pharmaceutical companies in
our sample (accounting for 52 percent of the sample) ­Gilead, ViiV and Janssen. Unreported
results shows that our ...ndings are robust to dropping each of these players. The largest change
occurs when we drop Gilead, where the estimated coe¢ cient is about 20 percent lower than
the one in the full sample, but still large and statistically signi...cant.23
       Second, we examined whether the e¤ect of the MPP on licensing is stronger for prod-
ucts relying on a combination of compounds ("drug cocktails") relative to single compound
products. About 40 percent of the products in our sample involve combinations of multiple
compounds. If the compounds are owned by di¤erent patentees, bilateral bargaining failure

  22
    To gain the intuition for this, consider the following illustrative example. A drug is available for license in
two countries: Albania and South Africa. Assume that in the absence of MPP there are no licensees in Albania
and 4 licensees in South Africa. Assume that both countries are included in the MPP license for the drug and
that 3 sub-licensees sign up. The number of deals increases by 3 in both countries, but the dummy Access
changes from 0 to 1 in Albania and is not a¤ected in South Africa.
  23
     Our results are also robust to a speci...cation which includes ...rm-year e¤ects, which capture time-varying,
...rm-level unobservables. We also examined how upstream drug ...rms react to inclusion of their patents in
the MPP in terms of their bilateral licensing activity. The bilateral deals of Gilead appear to react positively
to MPP inclusion. For all other ...rms, the e¤ect of MPP on bilateral deals is small, negative and, in most
speci...cations, statistically insigni...cant. This suggests that the pool had a di¤erential e¤ect on the licensing
strategies of upstream drug companies. A detailed examination of this issue is outside the scope of the paper
but a potentially fruitful direction for future research.


                                                        24
is more likely in those cases, so being covered in the pool would have a larger impact. The
estimated impact of the MPP on Access is 7.3% larger for combination products, and 15.4%
larger when we use Deals as the dependent variable and the di¤erences are statistically signi...-
cant.24 This points to some bargaining failure but the di¤erence is modest. The explanation for
this result is that many combinations in our sample involve compounds licensed by the same
company (e.g., many cocktails mix subsets of tenofovir, emtricitabine, cobicistat, and elvite-
gravir, all licensed by Gilead). Other combinations are a mix between a patented compound
and older compounds no longer subject to patent protection (such as abacavir/lamivudine or
dolutegravir/lamivudine). These features make negotiations over combinations quite similar to
those related to one compound products.


8         Drug launches and sales

Thus far we examined the impact of the MPP on downstream licensing deals. These contracts
give licensees the right to practice the patented product, but they may not necessarily translate
into actual launch and sales. In short, patent license deals measure potential entry of the generic
...rms rather than actual entry. This distinction is important in our setting where MPP license
contracts include large bundles of countries, as licensees are likely to only be interested in a
subset of the countries. Moreover, even if the generic ...rm does launch and sell in a country,
the patentee may react by withdrawing from the market when the product is covered by the
MPP.
            To examine this issue requires data on actual entry by generic ...rms and their sales
across the countries in our sample. We purchased a dataset with this information from a
private vendor, IQVIA, a leading provider of data on international sales of pharmaceutical
products. The IQVIA data provide detailed information on the launch of new products across
countries, sales revenues (in US dollars) and volume (number of packs) for the period of our
study. Despite this level of detail, the IQVIA data do not cover our full sample. Data on sales
are only available for 32 countries out of the 129 countries in our sample. The countries for
which we have data are mostly middle-income countries outside Sub-Saharan Africa (such as
Egypt, Pakistan, Peru and Vietnam).25 In terms of products, IQVIA information covers about

    24
    Using Access as the dependent variable, the split-sample estimates (standard errors) are 0.688 (0.012) for
combinations and 0.641 (0.016) for single compound products. For Deals, the coe¢ cients are 4.938 (0.152) and
4.280 (0.161).
    25
         This is an important di¤erence with other contemporaneous studies examining the e¤ects of the MPP.


                                                      25
80 percent of the products in our sample.
       Matching these data with our licensing dataset, we obtain an unbalanced panel with
24,663 product-country-year observations. Because many Sub-Saharan and poor countries that
are often included in MPP agreements are not present in the IQVIA data, the dummy MPP is
equal to one for only 3.6 percent of the sample (compared to 7 percent in the licensing sample).
For about 75 percent of the sample, we observe no ...rm active in the product-country, i.e. no
...rm has launched the product in the country by that year. On average, at least one licensee
launches a product in about 7 percent of the observations.26

8.1    Impact on entry

Table 7 provides evidence on how inclusion of a country-product in the MPP a¤ects market
outcomes. In column 1 the dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if at least one ...rm
has launched the product in the country in the focal year. The regression shows a decline
of about 5.1 percentage points in the likelihood of having at least one active entrant during
the ...rst four years after inclusion in the MPP, with this decline moderating each year (the
estimated coe¢ cient is statistically insigni...cant after the fourth year). This represents a 20
percent decline relative to the mean for non-MPP products-countries.
       That decline in entry after coverage by the MPP may seem surprising at ...rst blush.
Columns 2 and 3 show that this result is due to a lag in generic entry combined with retrench-
ment by the patentee once the product-country enters the MPP. Column 2 shows that inclusion
in the MPP increases the likelihood that at least one licensee launches the product in the coun-
try, but this entry takes place with a delay. This delay is consistent with information reported
in the MPP web-site and MPP publications on the timing required for licensees to sell once a
patent deal is in place, as commercialization requires setting up manufacturing and distribution
facilities as well as obtaining WHO prequali...cation of the generic version of the drug.27 At

They focus on transactions that rely on resources from international organizations, such as the Global Fund,
which predominantly operate in Sub-Saharan Africa. The IQVIA data includes local sales ...nanced by these
organizations as well as other local sales to local governments and private entities.
  26
     Despite the smaller sample, the relationship between licensing and inclusion in the MPP replicates well in
the IQVIA sample. The coe¢ cient in the regression of Access on the MPP dummy is 0.691 (p-value<.01), and
for the number of deals the coe¢ cient 4.241 (p-value<.01). These are similar to the baseline estimates in column
1 and 2 in Table 2.
   27
      Take, for example the drug Dolutegravir (DGT) which entered the MPP in April 2014 and is highlighted
by the pool as one of the MPP medicines with faster penetration in developing countries. A number of licensees
signed up a downstream agreement shortly after MPP inclusion ­ e.g., Cipla in June 2014 and Mylan in July
2014. MPP documents report that these two companies applied for prequali...cation of generic DTG in November


                                                       26
the same time, column 3 shows that, after MPP coverage, the likelihood of a product launch
by the original patentee falls and this e¤ect occurs quickly.
       In short, the pool increases the likelihood of generic entry by licensees with a lag, but
reduces entry by the upstream patentee. This yields a U-shaped impact of the MPP on the
product launches and di¤usion.28

8.2    Impact on sales

With the available data, it is not possible to identify the e¤ect of the MPP on the number of
entrants (degree of competition) for a given product-country. For about 70 percent of product-
country-years in which entry occurs, there is only one active ...rm. Our attempts to estimate
the impact of the MPP on the number of entrants indicated small e¤ects, but they were very
imprecise. As an alternative approach, we focus on the impact of the MPP on sales directly,
as reported by IQVIA.
       In column 4 of Table 7, we examine the e¤ect of the MPP on the log of total sales (plus
one) in U.S. dollars for the product in the country during the focal year. The impact on total
sales is very limited, but this confounds countervailing e¤ects on quantities and prices. Column
5 runs the same regression using the volume of product sold as the dependent variable.29 Here
the estimates indicate an increase in quantity sold, especially after the fourth year of entering
the MPP. Together, columns 4 and 5 suggest that inclusion in the MPP leads to higher quantity
sold and an associated (implied) decline in market prices.30
       Together, the null e¤ect on revenue and the positive e¤ect on quantities suggest that

2016 and that no shipment to developing countries took place before the spring of 2017.
    28
       IQVIA also provided us with partial data on product launches for seven additional countries, all former
members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS): Armenia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Moldova, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan. For these countries we do not have information on volume or sales.
Moreover, information on launches is aggregated at the molecule level (i.e., not by dosage) and it is available
only for a subset of molecules accounting for about 55 percent of the products in our sample. We re-estimated
columns 1-3 of Table 7 at the more aggregate molecule level, including these countries but restricted to the
subset of available compounds. The results, reported in Appendix Table A4, are broadly consistent with the
...ndings of Table 7. The likelihood of observing at least one licensee selling increases after a few years but it is
countervailed by an equivalent decline in the activity of original patentees.
  29
    For both dependent variables, we add a dummy equal to one for sales equal to zero. Volume is constructed
at the product level adjusting the IQVIA data on packs sold for the number of vials or tablets in each pack.
  30
    An analysis of market prices (computed as sales/volume) is di¢ cult in our setting as prices are not de...ned
when there are no sales in a country. If we impute a value of zero and control with a dummy for those (numerous)
cases, we ...nd a negative correlation between MPP inclusion and market prices, statistically signi...cant at the
0.01 level after four years of inclusion.




                                                         27
the underlying demand has an elasticity of about (minus) one. This is consistent with the
estimates in Kremer and Snyder (2015, 2018), who show that the distribution of HIV infection
risk approximates a Zipf distribution, which in turn yields a unit elastic demand. In a recent
study of the impact of drug procurement systems on prices in low- and middle-income countries,
Dubois et al. (2021) also ...nd elasticities in the vicinity of one.31
       In summary, the evidence shows that inclusion in the patent pool promotes entry and
di¤usion of essential medicines, but the e¤ect is a combination of di¤erent responses by licensees
and patentees. While the MPP is associated with entry of licensees selling higher quantities
of products, patentees appear less active in the country once a product enters the MPP. This
may lead to long term positive e¤ects on consumer welfare, but limited gains in the short term
if licensee entry requires time.
       There are two important caveats. First, more than half of the MPP product-countries in
our sample were included in the pool in the past ...ve years. For these licensees, manufacturing
and launch are still underway, so our time window may not be adequate for a full examination
of sales. Second, the IQVIA data do not include some poor and Sub-Saharan countries that are
often target of MPP deals. Future research using a longer time span and additional countries
would allow us to learn more about the market, and thus welfare, e¤ects of the MPP.

8.3    Discussion and potential welfare e¤ects

We have shown that entry into the MPP leads to a very large and immediate increase in the
likelihood of observing at least one licensee for the product-country. Our simple model explains
this as being driven by a reduction in transaction costs. An alternative explanation, however,
is that the increase is due to more favorable licensing terms provided by the pool to generic
producers relative to bilateral licenses. Unfortunately, we do not have information on the terms
and conditions of the bilateral deals in our sample, so we cannot directly test this alternative
hypothesis. Nonetheless, there are several reasons why we expect the di¤erences in licensing
terms not to be substantial. First, media statements released by pharmaceutical companies
after the implementation of bilateral agreements indicate that royalties are often low or zero.32

  31
    Speci...cally, they estimate the demand elasticity at about -0.88; it ranges from -0.73 to -0.97, depending on
the type of procurement system. Their analysis uses a wider set of molecules than the one in our data (including
but not limited to HIV and tuberculosis) and it is limited to seven countries.
  32
     For example, the 2011 license between Bristol Myers Squibb and Matrix Laboratories for stavudine and
didanosine in Sub-Saharan Africa is royalty free. The same is true for a number of Boehringer-Ingelheim's
licenses of nevirapine in low-income countries.



                                                       28
Second, many of the bilateral deals in our sample focus on Sub-Saharan Africa or other low-
income countries, which have limited potential to generate royalty income in any case. Finally,
there is some anecdotal evidence that the MPP designed some of its downstream licenses using
drug companies'bilateral contracts as templates.33
       Our analysis also shows that the likelihood of at least one licensee launching the product
in the country increases after entry into the MPP. However, the size of this e¤ect on launch
is much smaller, and more delayed, than the impact on licensing. This is consistent with the
theoretical discussion in Section 4, where we pointed out that MPP contracts constrain licensees
to license a bundle of patents which may include markets for which a launch is unpro...table. We
can use our estimates to get a better sense of the relative size of these e¤ects. First, predicted
values from our baseline regression (column 1, Table 2) ­constructed using means of covariates
and including the estimated ...xed e¤ects ­imply that the probability of observing at least one
license is 0.11 for product-countries that are not in the MPP, and equal to 0.84 for those in
the MPP. Second, predicted values of an unreported regression of launches on Access indicate
that the presence of one licensing deal translates into an actual launch with probability 0.62
for product-countries that are not in the pool and with probability 0.12 for those covered by
the MPP.34
       Together, these estimates imply that, in country-products not covered by the pool, the
probability of observing one launch is about 0.07 (= 0.11 x 0.62), and that this probability is
equal to 0.10 (= 0.84 x 0.12) for product countries included in the MPP. In short, our empirical
analysis implies that inclusion in the MPP increases the probability of licensing by 73 percentage
points (from 0.11 to 0.84), but it increases the probability of observing an actual launch by
only 3 percentage points (from 0.07 to 0.10). This ...nding has an important implication for
empirical research on patent pools with bundled licensing, as it shows that focusing on licensing
can be very misleading as to the impact of the pool on actual entry and di¤usion.
       As pointed out earlier, our ...nding that the MPP has no e¤ect on sales but a positive
e¤ect on quantities is consistent with an underlying unit elastic demand. This takes the form
p = A=q; where A is the total sales revenue obtained in the market. When at least one unit

  33
    This led some advocacy groups, such as the Initiative for Medicines, Access, and Knowledge (I-MAK), to
voice concerns after the 2011 MPP-Gilead agreement because it appeared too similar to existing Gilead's licenses.
Source: www.i-mak.org/2011/10/11/implications-of-the-patent-pool-licenses-with-gilead-part-ii/
  34
    Speci...cally, we regress the variable capturing launch by a licensee on Access and its interaction with MPP
including year and product-country e¤ects. The estimates show a positive correlation between Access and launch
which is reduced substantially once the product-country is included in the MPP.


                                                       29
of product is consumed, the corresponding total welfare is W = A log(q ), which implies that
an increase in quantity by z percent translates to a welfare gain of Az=100. In principle, we
can use this demand function to perform a `
                                          back of the envelope' calculation of the welfare
gains from the MPP. For this, we need to know the sales generated by a drug ...ve years after
it enters the pool and use our parameter estimates of the MPP impact on volume to compute
the welfare generated by each drug licensed by the MPP. A full welfare analysis along these
lines is not feasible with our data, as many of the countries that are listed in MPP licenses are
not in the IQVIA sales data. Moreover, many of the MPP licenses in our data are less than
...ve years old, so these estimates can be only be done for a very limited set of drugs.
      Nonetheless, we do this calculation on the available data, but we emphasize that it
represents an extreme lower bound for the reasons mentioned. To perform this computation
we identi...ed the product-countries in which MPP licenses were in place for more than 5 years
and for which positive sales were recorded by IQVIA. We used the average revenue generated
in the sample years following the fourth after MPP inclusion as a proxy for the demand scale
parameter, A. The increase in quantity is obtained by exponentiating the coe¢ cient estimated
in column 5 of Table 7 (61 percent), and we assume this increase in volume lasts until the
patent expires in the focal country. We compute a welfare gain of roughly 27 million USD
for the period 2010-18. By comparison, the total operating costs of the MPP for the period
2010-2015 was 22.9 million USD (Junejia et al., 2017). Given that the computed welfare gains
are almost certainly a substantial underestimate, even this simple exercise suggests that the
welfare bene...ts from the MPP well exceed the cost of the institution.


9    Conclusions

In this paper we examine how the Medicines Patent Pool a¤ects licensing and launch of HIV
and other essential drugs in low- and middle-income countries. There are three key empirical
...ndings. First, inclusion in the pool is associated with a ...ve-fold increase in the probability
of licensing. Second, the e¤ect is heterogeneous -it is much larger for small, non-sub-Saharan
countries and smaller in countries with large exposure to HIV (where bilateral deals are more
likely). Finally, we show that being in the MPP has real impacts on product market outcomes
­increasing the likelihood of launch, increasing quantities sold and reducing prices. The mag-
nitude of these e¤ects is much smaller than the one estimated for the e¤ect on licensing. We
argue that this di¤erential e¤ect is driven by the bundled nature of the pool license contracts


                                                30
and by a lower propensity of patentees to be active in a country once a product enters the
MPP.
       Our analysis highlights that, in order to study the impact of patent pools with geograph-
ical bundling on technology di¤usion, it is important to go beyond their impact on licensing.
Focusing exclusively on licensing is likely to overstate the impact of the pool on actual market
di¤usion. This is both because the licensee is typically not going to launch in all countries in
the bundled license and because the patentee may be less likely to be active in the country when
the product is covered by the pool. More broadly, our paper suggests the potential of pools
to promote di¤usion of other types of innovation in developing countries, including climate
mitigation technologies.




                                               31
References
 [1] Bolton, Patrick, and Joseph Farrell (1990) "Decentralization, duplication, and delay,"
     Journal of Political Economy 98: 803-826.

 [2] Branigan, David (2018), "Key Hepatitis C Drug Licensed To Medicines Patent Pool, Access
     Expanded For LMICs," Intellectual Property Watch, November 12

 [3] Cockburn, Iain, Jean Lanjouw, and Mark Schankerman (2016) "Patents and the global
     di¤usion of new drugs," American Economic Review 106: 136-64

 [4] Delgado, Mercedes, Margaret Kyle and Anita McGahan (2013) "Intellectual property pro-
     tection and the geography of trade," Journal of Industrial Economics 61: 733-762

 [5] Dubois, Pierre, Yassine Lefouili and Stéphane Straub (2021) "Pooled Procurement of
     Drugs in Low and Middle Income Countries," European Economic Review 132: 1-23

 [6] Duggan, Mark, Craig Garthwaite and Aparajita Goyal (2016) "The market impacts of
     pharmaceutical product patents in developing countries: Evidence from India," American
     Economic Review 106: 99-135

 [7] Furman, Je¤rey and Scott Stern (2011) "Climbing atop the shoulders of giants: The impact
     of institutions on cumulative research," American Economic Review 101: 1933-63

 [8] Galasso, Alberto and Mark Schankerman (2015) "Patents and Cumulative Innovation:
     Causal Evidence from the Courts," Quarterly Journal of Economics 130: 317-369

 [9] Gans, Joshua (2020), Economics in the Age of COVID-19 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

[10] Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck and Enrico Moretti (2010), "Identifying agglom-
     eration spillovers: Evidence from winners and losers of large plant openings," Journal of
     Political Economy 118: 536-598

[11] Gokengin, Deniz, Cristiana Oprea, Josip Begovac, Andrzej Horban, Arzu Nazl¬ Zeka,
     Dalibor Sedlacek Bayjanov Allabergan et al. (2018), "HIV care in Central and Eastern
     Europe: How close are we to the target?," International Journal of Infectious Diseases 70:
     121-130

[12] Hong, Harrison and Inessa Liskovich (2015) "Crime, punishment and the halo e¤ect of
     corporate social responsibility," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper
     21215

[13] Juneja, Sandeep, Aastha Gupta, Suerie Moon and Stephen Resch (2017), "Projected sav-
     ings through public health voluntary licences of HIV drugs negotiated by the Medicines
     Patent Pool (MPP)," PloS one 12: e0177770



                                              32
[14] Kennedy, Nick (2015) "Merck' s HIV patent agreement ignites criticism," SciDevNet, 13
     March, available at www.scidev.net/global/news/merck-hiv-patent-agreement-monopoly-
     criticism/

[15] Kyle, Margaret (2006) "The role of ...rm characteristics in pharmaceutical product
     launches," RAND Journal of Economics 37: 602-618

[16] Kyle, Margaret (2007) "Pharmaceutical price controls and entry strategies," Review of
     Economics and Statistics 89: 88-99

[17] Kremer, Michael and Christopher Snyder (2015), "Preventives versus treatments," Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics 130: 1167-1239

[18] Kremer, Michael and Christopher Snyder (2018), "Preventives versus treatments redux:
     Tighter bounds on distortions in innovation incentives with an application to the global
     demand for HIV pharmaceuticals," Review of Industrial Organization 53: 235-273

[19] Lampe, Ryan, and Petra Moser (2013) "Patent pools and innovation in substitute
     technologies-- evidence from the 19th-century sewing machine industry," RAND Journal
     of Economics 44: 757-778

[20] Lampe, Ryan, and Petra Moser (2015) "Patent pools, competition, and innovation--
     Evidence from 20 US industries under the New Deal," Journal of Law, Economics, and
     Organization 32: 1-36

[21] Layne-Farrar, Anne and Josh Lerner (2011) "To join or not to join: Examining patent pool
     participation and rent sharing rules," International Journal of Industrial Organization 29:
     294-303

[22] Lee, David and Thomas Lemieux (2010), "Regression discontinuity designs in economics,"
     Journal of Economic Literature 48.2: 281-355

[23] Lemley, Mark and Timothy Simcoe (2018), "How essential are standard-essential patents,"
     Cornell Law Review 104: 607-637

[24] Lerner, Josh and Jean Tirole (2004) "E¢ cient patent pools," American Economic Review
     94: 691-711

[25] Lerner, Josh, Marcin Strojwas, and Jean Tirole (2007) "The design of patent pools: The
     determinants of licensing rules" RAND Journal of Economics 38: 610-625

[26] Llanes, Gaston and Joaquin Poblete (2014) "Ex-Ante Agreements in Standard Setting
     And Patent-Pool Formation," Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 23: 50-67

[27] Martinelli, Arianna, Andrea Mina and Elena Romito (2020) "Collective licensing and
     asymmetric information: The double e¤ect of the Medicine Patent Pool on generic drug
     markets," Scuola Superiore Sant'
                                    Anna working paper




                                              33
[28] Medicines Patent Pool (2018), "Exploring the Expansion of the Medicines Patent Pool'  s
     Mandate to Patented Essential Medicines: A Feasibility Study of the Public Health Needs
     and Potential Impact," MPP Publications

[29] Merges, Robert. (2001) "Institutions for Intellectual Property Transactions: The Case of
     Patent Pools," in R. Dreyfuss, D. Zimmerman, and H. First, eds., Expanding the Bound-
     aries of Intellectual Property. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press)

[30] Quint, Daniel (2014) "Pooling with Essential and Nonessential Patents," American Eco-
     nomic Journal: Microeconomics 6: 23-57

[31] Reisinger, Markus and Emanuele Tarantino (2019) "Patent pools, vertical integration, and
     downstream competition," RAND Journal of Economics 50: 168-200

[32] Van Zimmeren, Esther, Sven Vanneste, Gert Matthijs, Wim Vanhaverbeke, and Geertrui
     Van Overwalle (2011) "Patent pools and clearinghouses in the life sciences," Trends in
     Biotechnology 29: 569-576

[33] Wang, Lucy Xiaolu (2020) "Global drug di¤usion and innovation with a patent pool:
     The case of HIV drug cocktails," Max Planck Institute for Innovation and Competition,
     Working Paper

[34] Williams, Heidi (2013) "Intellectual property rights and innovation: Evidence from the
     human genome," Journal of Political Economy 121: 1-27

[35] Sampat, Bhaven and Heidi Williams (2019) "How do patents a¤ect follow-on innovation?
     Evidence from the human genome," American Economic Review 109: 203-36




                                             34
              FIGURE 1: Differences in MPP inclusion for lower middle-income and upper middle-income countries


                               Lower Middle Income                   Upper Middle Income
                  .6
                  .4
mean of MPP




                  .2
                    0




              NOTES: The sample includes 108 product-country observations for countries that were within 500 dollars
              from the threshold for the upper middle-income World Bank classification in the year in which the drug
              entered the MPP.
Table 1 - Panel A: Summary Statistics

                               obs.        mean       sd        min       max

Access                        80,103      0.180      0.385       0         1

Deals                         14,453      4.589      4.365       1         20

MPP sublicenses               14,453      1.408      2.801       0         17

Bilateral deals               14,453      3.181      3.609       0         13



Panel B: Mean comparisons for MPP inclusion


                               obs.       Access     Deals


Product-countries never                    0.133     0.481
                              65,886
in MPP                                    (0.339)   (1.842)


MPP product-countries                      0.092     0.454
                               8,588
before entry                              (0.290)   (1.857)


MPP product-countries                      0.870     5.454
                               5,629
after entry                               (0.335)   (5.021)


NOTES: Unit of observation is product-country-year. In panel A the statistics for
Deals, MPP sublicenses and Bilateral deals are restricted to the sample in which
Access=1. In panel B standard deviations are in parentheses.
Table 2: MPP, access and licensing deals


                                (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)

Dep. Var.                     Access       Deals      Access      Deals       Deals

MPP                          0.663*** 4.610***
                              (0.010) (0.113)

MPP year 1                                          0.384*** 1.259*** 1.242***
                                                     (0.022) (0.072) (0.072)

MPP year 2                                          0.453*** 1.312*** 1.295***
                                                     (0.022) (0.079) (0.081)

MPP year 3                                          0.456*** 1.362*** 1.346***
                                                     (0.022) (0.081) (0.082)

MPP year 4                                          0.532*** 1.835*** 1.818***
                                                     (0.021) (0.103) (0.103)

MPP years 5+                                        0.667*** 4.419*** 4.402***
                                                     (0.014) (0.134) (0.133)

MPP year -1                                                                  -0.051
                                                                             (0.032)

MPP year -2                                                                  -0.046
                                                                             (0.031)

Year effects                    YES         YES         YES        YES         YES
Product-country effects         YES         YES         YES        YES         YES

Observations                   80103      80103       72693       72693       72693
NOTES: standard errors clustered at the product-country level in parentheses. * p <
0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Deals= total number of licensing deals for the country
product in year t (includes MPP and non-MPP deals). Access=1 if Deals>0. MPP =1 if
the product-country is included in an upstream MPP license. Columns 3-5 drop
product-country pairs that are included in the MPP for less than 4 years.
Table 3: Effect of MPP for drugs in the 2010 priority list


                                  (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)

Dep. Var.                       Access          Deals          Access          Deals          Deals

MPP                           0.603***        3.083***        0.589***       3.046***       3.023***
                               (0.055)         (0.617)         (0.055)        (0.615)        (0.621)

MPP year -1                                                                                   -0.105
                                                                                             (0.088)

MPP year -2                                                                                   -0.027
                                                                                             (0.085)

                                                                               2010          2010
                                                            2010 priority
                            2010 priority 2010 priority                     priority list priority list
Sample                                                       list without
                                list          list                           without       without
                                                              etravirine
                                                                            etravirine etravirine

Observations                    40536          40536           38136           38136          38136
NOTES: standard errors clustered at the product-country level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01. Deals= total number of licensing deals for the country product in year t (includes MPP and
non-MPP deals). Access=1 if Deals>0. MPP =1 if the product-country is included in an upstream MPP
license.
Table 4: Controlling for country characteristics


                                (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)

Dep. Var.                     Access      Deals     Access      Deals      Access      Deals

MPP                         0.623*** 4.421*** 0.559*** 2.365*** 0.530*** 3.845***
                             (0.011) (0.114) (0.014) (0.081) (0.012) (0.115)

log (Population)            1.214*** 5.005*** 1.544*** 4.588***
                             (0.050) (0.286) (0.062) (0.252)

Perc. Pop. HIV                                     0.050*** 0.186***
                                                    (0.010) (0.042)

Health Exp.                                         0.014**      0.040
                                                    (0.007)     (0.037)

Country-year effects           NO          NO         NO          NO         YES        YES

Year effects                   YES         YES        YES        YES         YES        YES
Product-country effects        YES         YES        YES        YES         YES        YES

Observations                  78498      78498       54734      54734      80103       80103
NOTES: standard errors clustered at the product-country level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p <
0.05, *** p < 0.01. Deals= total number of licensing deals for the country product in year t
(includes MPP and non-MPP deals). Access=1 if Deals>0. MPP =1 if the product-country is
included in an upstream MPP license. Log(Population) = log of population in the country-year.
Perc. Pop. HIV = percentage of population affected by HIV. Health Exp.= Health Expenditure per-
capita in the country-year.
Table 5: World Bank status and MPP effect


                                      (1)                    (2)                   (3)                  (4)

Dep. Var.                        Deals 3 yrs                MPP                Deals 3 yrs          Deals 3 yrs

MPP                               5.365***                                     6.403***             11.198***
                                   (0.440)                                      (1.291)              (3.086)

Upper Middle-Income                                      -0.292***
                                                           (0.049)


                              15 percentiles    15 percentiles    15 percentiles       $500
Sample                      above/below upper above/below upper   above/below      above/below
                              middle-income     middle-income     upper middle-    upper middle-
                                threshold         threshold     income threshold income threshold

Estimation                           OLS              OLS - 1st stage              IV                   IV

First stage F-stat                                                               35.83                 7.52

Observations                         352                    352                   352                   108
NOTES: standard errors clustered at the product-country level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Deals 3 years= total number of licensing deals for the country product in the three years following MPP inclusion.
Upper Middle-Income= 1 if country classified as upper middle-income by the World Bank. MPP =1 if the product-
country is included in an upstream MPP license. Columns 3 and 4 instrument MPP with the dummy Upper Middle-
Income. The sample is a cross-section and only includes medicines that enter the MPP.
Table 6: Heterogeneous effects


                                                (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)

Dep. Var.                                     Access     Access      Access      Deals       Deals      Deals

MPP                                         0.663*** 0.552*** 0.517*** 4.584*** 2.340*** 3.862***
                                             (0.011) (0.015) (0.014) (0.129) (0.089) (0.130)

MPP x Top HIV                                -0.082** -0.125*** -0.096**        -0.121       0.050 0.041
                                              (0.038) (0.044) (0.048)           (0.359)     (0.255) (0.382)

MPP x Small not Sub-Saharan                   0.040*    0.177*** 0.146***        0.235       0.188 -0.143
                                              (0.023)    (0.042) (0.033)        (0.323)     (0.269) (0.342)

Demographic controls                            NO         YES         NO         NO          YES        NO
Country-year effects                            NO         NO          YES        NO          NO         YES

Year effects                                   YES         YES         YES        YES         YES        YES
Product-country effects                        YES         YES         YES        YES         YES        YES

Observations                                  80103       54734      80103       80103      54734       80103
NOTES: robust standard errors clustered at the product-country level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01. Deals= total number of licensing deals for the country product in year t (includes MPP and non-MPP
deals). Access=1 if Deals>0. MPP =1 if the product-country is included in an upstream MPP license. TOP HIV = top
4 countries for number of people with HIV. Small not Sub-Saharan=1 for small countries not part of Sub-
Saharan Africa. Demographic controls are Log(Population), Perc. Pop. HIV and Health Exp. per-capita.
Table 7: MPP and market outcomes


                               (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)

                                           one
Dep. Var.                   one firm                patentee      log(sales)      log(volume)
                                        licensee

MPP up to year 4            -0.051**      0.003     -0.068***        -0.009           0.155
                             (0.023)     (0.019)      (0.014)       (0.073)          (0.137)

MPP years 5+                 -0.038      0.076*     -0.090***        0.190          0.476**
                             (0.037)     (0.041)      (0.031)       (0.159)         (0.195)

Year effects                   YES         YES         YES            YES              YES
Product-country effects        YES         YES         YES            YES              YES

Observations                  24663      24663        24663         24663            24663
NOTES: Standard errors clustered at the product-country level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p <
0.05, *** p < 0.01. One firm= at least one firm has launched the product in the country by year t.
One licensee =1 if at least one licensee has launched. Patentee=1 if original patentee has
launched. Sales= total sales for the product in the country at year t. Volume= total number of
tablets and vials sold.
APPENDIX FIGURES AND TABLES

Figure A1: Access before and after the establishment of MPP




NOTES: The figure plots the trend in Access distinguishing between products that enter in the MPP
by 2018 (1, red line) and products that do not enter the MPP (0, blue line).
Table A1: Robustness to alternative econometric models


                                (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)

Dep. Var.                      Deals        Deals      log(Deals+1) new Deals first Access

MPP                          1.552***     1.920***       1.251***      1.709***     0.153***
                              (0.122)      (0.035)        (0.022)       (0.046)      (0.004)

Estimation                    Poisson     Neg. Bin.         OLS           OLS          OLS

Observations                  29183         29183         80103         80103         80103
NOTES: standard errors clustered at the product-country level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p <
0.05, *** p < 0.01. Deals= total number of licensing deals for the country product in year t
(includes MPP and non-MPP deals). Access=1 if deals>0. MPP =1 if the product-country is
included in an upstream MPP license. New deals = new license deals signed in year t. First
access=1 the year in which first license deals is signed.
Table A2: Deals extension, imputation and molecule level analysis


                                (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)

Dep. Var.                     Access        Deals         Deals         Deals        Access         Deals

MPP                          0.653***     4.508***      4.615***       4.916***     0.677***      4.529***
                              (0.011)      (0.117)       (0.113)        (0.116)      (0.021)       (0.223)

Imputed deals                                            -0.131**
                                                          (0.064)

                                                                         drop   molecule- molecule-
                            drop deal drop deal
                                                       full sample     imputed   country     country
                            extensions extensions
Notes                                                                    deals aggregation aggregation

Observations                  77817        77817          80103         77867        18639         18639

NOTES: standard errors clustered at the product-country level in parenthesis. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p <
0.01. Deals= total number of licensing deals for the country product in year t (includes MPP and non-MPP
deals). Access=1 if Deals>0. MPP =1 if the product-country is included in an upstream MPP license. Imputed
deals=1 if information on bilateral deals is incomplete. Columns 1 and 2 drop product countries that enter
MPP through revisions of existing deals. In columns 5 and 6 the data are aggregated at the molecule-country
level with standard errors clustered at the same level. Product combinations dropped from the sample in
columns 5 and 6.
Table A3: World Bank classification and MPP - Robustness


                                             (1)                       (2)                   (3)                   (4)                  (5)

Dep. Var.                                Deals 3 yrs              Deals 5 yrs            Deals 5 yrs           Deals 3 yrs         Access 3 yrs

MPP                                       4.949***                  7.597***             13.011***              6.913***             0.925***
                                           (0.918)                   (1.411)              (3.611)                (1.469)              (0.092)

Demographic controls                         NO                        NO                    NO                    YES                  NO



                                 Products in 2010 priority
                                                             15 percentiles                     15 percentiles   15 percentiles
                                 list and countries within                   $500 above/below
                                                           above/below upper                    above/below      above/below
Sample                                 15 percentiles                          upper middle-
                                                             middle-income                      upper middle-    upper middle-
                                    above/below upper                        income threshold
                                                               threshold                      income threshold income threshold
                                 middle-income threshold



Estimation                                    IV                       IV                     IV                    IV                   IV

First stage F-stat                          23.76                    35.83                   7.52                 30.16                35.83

Observations                                 655                      352                    108                   274                  352
NOTES: standard errors clustered at the product-country level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Deals 3 (5) years= total number
of licensing deals for the country product in the 3 (5) years following MPP inclusion. Regressions instrument MPP with the dummy Upper Middle-
Income. The sample is a cross-section and columns 2-5 only include medicines that enter the MPP. Demographic controls include log(Population),
percentage of population with HIV and health expenditure per capita. Access 3 = 1 if at least one deal in the 3 years following MPP inclusion.
Table A4: MPP and market outcomes -molecule level analysis


                                           (1)            (2)          (3)

                                                          one
Dep. Var.                               one firm                   patentee
                                                       licensee

MPP up to year 4                        -0.089**        0.058      -0.123***
                                         (0.039)       (0.038)       (0.026)

MPP years 5+                             -0.061        0.159**      -0.168**
                                         (0.102)       (0.062)       (0.081)


Year effects                               YES           YES           YES
Molecule-country effects                   YES           YES           YES

Observations                             10842          10842        10842
NOTES: standard errors clustered at the molecule-country level in parentheses.
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. One firm= at least one firm has launched
one product related to the molecule in the country by year t. One licensee =1
if at least one licensee has launched. Patentee=1 if original patentee has
launched.
