                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    SERVICE-LED OR SERVICE-BIASED GROWTH? EQUILIBRIUM DEVELOPMENT
                  ACCOUNTING ACROSS INDIAN DISTRICTS

                                          Tianyu Fan
                                         Michael Peters
                                        Fabrizio Zilibotti

                                      Working Paper 28551
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28551


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




This study is part of a broader research project also involving Philippe Aghion and Robin
Burgess. We are extremely grateful to our discussant Sebastian Sotelo for his suggestions. We
thank Fabian Eckert, Reto Foellmi, Doug Gollin, Cormac O'Dea, Peter Klenow, Samuel Kortum,
Rachel Ngai, Richard Rogerson, Maria Saez Marti, and seminar participants at the ASSA
Meeting 2021, Cowles Macro Conference, the STEG Workshop, Penn State University, Peking
University, RIDGE, the University of Sankt Gallen, and Yale University. We also thank Sarah
Moon, Shengqi Ni, Pariroo Rattan, and Huihuang Zhu for excellent research assistance.
Financial support from SNSF project ``Inequality, Cultural Transmission, and Human Capital
Accumulation" (grant 100018 165616) is gratefully acknowledged. Michael Peters thanks the
``Minnesota Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute" for their hospitality. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Tianyu Fan, Michael Peters, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Service-Led or Service-Biased Growth? Equilibrium Development Accounting across Indian
Districts
Tianyu Fan, Michael Peters, and Fabrizio Zilibotti
NBER Working Paper No. 28551
March 2021
JEL No. O1,O18,O4,O41

                                         ABSTRACT

In many developing countries today, the structural transformation is a shift of employment out of
agriculture into the service sector. By contrast, industrial employment is mostly stagnant. Is the
service sector an engine of growth and hence growth service led? Or is its expansion a mere
corollary of growth, where rising incomes stemming from productivity growth in goods-
producing industries increases the demand for services? To determine whether growth is service
led or service biased, we estimate a spatial equilibrium model with nonhomothetic preferences.
Our methodology is in the spirit of development accounting and lends itself to a quantitative
assessment of both the aggregate and the heterogenous welfare effects of sectoral productivity
growth. In an application to India, we find that productivity growth in consumer services such as
retail and hospitality was an important driver of rising living standards between 1987 and 2011.
However, such benefits were highly skewed and accrued mostly to high-income households
living in urbanized locations.

Tianyu Fan                                      Fabrizio Zilibotti
Yale University                                 Department of Economics
tianyu.fan@yale.edu                             Yale University
                                                28 Hillhouse Avenue
Michael Peters                                  New Haven, CT 06520
Department of Economics                         and NBER
Yale University                                 fabrizio.zilibotti@yale.edu
28 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
m.peters@yale.edu
                       Service-Led or Service-Biased Growth?
                Equilibrium Development Accounting across Indian Districts

                               Tianyu Fan, Michael Peters, and Fabrizio Zilibotti

                                                       Yale University
                                                        February 2021


                                                            Abstract
          In many developing countries today, the structural transformation is a shift of employment out of agriculture
      into the service sector. By contrast, industrial employment is mostly stagnant. Is the service sector an engine of
      growth and hence growth service led? Or is its expansion a mere corollary of growth, where rising incomes stem-
      ming from productivity growth in goods-producing industries increases the demand for services? To determine
      whether growth is service led or service biased, we estimate a spatial equilibrium model with nonhomothetic pref-
      erences. Our methodology is in the spirit of development accounting and lends itself to a quantitative assessment
      of both the aggregate and the heterogenous welfare effects of sectoral productivity growth. In an application
      to India, we find that productivity growth in consumer services such as retail and hospitality was an important
      driver of rising living standards between 1987 and 2011. However, such benefits were highly skewed and accrued
      mostly to high-income households living in urbanized locations.



1     Introduction
The major industrialized countries have undergone a similar pattern of structural transformation. At an early stage
of development, a growing industrial sector drew labor from a declining agricultural sector. At a later stage, the
employment shares of both agriculture and manufacturing fell, while the service sector became the main source
of employment growth. This pattern fits the experience of most Western and East-Asian economies. However, in
other parts of the globe, economic development appears to have taken a different turn. Over the last four decades,
the share of manufacturing jobs has barely grown in most developing countries, including fast-growing economies
such as India and sub-Saharan Africa. There, the structural transformation has taken the form of a shift from
agriculture to services.
    To many scholars (e.g., McMillan and Rodrik (2011) or Rodrik (2015)), the absence of employment growth in
the manufacturing sector is a cause of concern. Traditionally, technical progress in manufacturing is seen as the
engine of growth. By contrast, the expansion of the service sector is often interpreted as a by-product of growth
driven by rising incomes. Hence, growth is often characterized as service biased, but not service led.
    This study is part of a broader research project also involving Philippe Aghion and Robin Burgess. We are extremely grateful

to our discussant Sebastian Sotelo for his suggestions. We thank Fabian Eckert, Reto Foellmi, Doug Gollin, Cormac O'Dea, Peter
Klenow, Samuel Kortum, Rachel Ngai, Richard Rogerson, Mar´      ia S´
                                                                    aez Mart´
                                                                            i, and seminar participants at the ASSA Meeting 2021,
Cowles Macro Conference, the STEG Workshop, Penn State University, Peking University, RIDGE, the University of Sankt Gallen, and
Yale University. We also thank Sarah Moon, Shengqi Ni, Pariroo Rattan, and Huihuang Zhu for excellent research assistance. Financial
support from SNSF project "Inequality, Cultural Transmission, and Human Capital Accumulation" (grant 100018 165616) is gratefully
acknowledged. Michael Peters thanks the "Minnesota Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute" for the hospitality.



                                                                 1
    A key hurdle to resolving this controversy is measurement: quantifying productivity growth in service industries
is difficult. In this paper, we propose a novel structural methodology that allows us to estimate productivity
in the service sector and quantitatively assess its importance for the development process. We then apply this
methodology to the growth process of India since 1987. Our results go against this pessimistic view. We find
substantial productivity growth in consumer services such as retail or hospitality that can account for about one
third of aggregate welfare gains. In short: Indian growth was to a large extent service led.

Methodology: Equilibrium Development Accounting. Our approach follows the tradition of the development
accounting literature. We do not attempt to explain the determinants of productivity growth but provide a method
to measure sectoral productivity through the lens of a structural model. The estimation is disciplined by a theory
that stands on two building blocks: (i) nonhomothetic preferences, and (ii) a spatial multisector equilibrium model
with inter-regional trade where firms have heterogeneous productivities in different locations. These two ingredients
allow us to capture two important features of services: the possibility of service-biased growth if services are luxuries
and the fact that services are non-tradable and hence depend on local demand.
    Because the service sector is broad and heterogeneous, we split it into two parts. Many services improve
households' access to consumption goods (e.g., restaurants or retail) or directly enter their consumption basket
(e.g., leisure services). We call these services consumer services (CS). Other services are predominantly inputs to
the production of goods, mostly in the industrial sector, and include, among others, business services, corporate
law services, and part of transport services. We refer to such services as producer services (PS). To capture this
distinction, we model CS as directly entering the households' consumption basket so that consumers' preferences
are defined over three final items: food, industrial goods, and CS. By contrast, PS are inputs into the production of
industrial goods so that people can work in four sectors of activity: agriculture, manufacturing, PS and CS.
    To highlight the fact that restaurant visits and personal services are local goods, we assume food and industrial
goods are freely traded, whereas CS have to be purchased locally. Local CS productivity therefore directly affects
the price and availability of CS in each market. Similarly, local income directly affects the demand for the local
provision of CS. By contrast, PS are embedded in industrial goods so that their value added is tradable. To close the
model, we assume labor is the only productive factor and is perfectly mobile across industries although immobile
across locations. Thus, there is a single wage per effective unit of labor in each location, although wages differ
across locations. These assumptions are extreme but can be relaxed by introducing non-prohibitive labor-mobility
frictions across both sectors and space.
    Our model allows us to disentangle the relative importance of service-biased versus service-led growth by estimat-
ing the variation in sectoral productivity across space and time. Conditional on a set of preference and technology
parameters, regional endowments of human capital, and sectoral labor productivity in each region, the model yields
a unique equilibrium vector of wages and sectoral labor allocations. Conversely, if we have data for the allocation
of labor across sectors in each district and for local earnings, we can retrieve a unique set of labor productivity for
each region-sector pair that rationalizes the data.
    The main identification challenge emerges because of non-homothetic preferences. For example, imagine two
small districts R (rich) and P (poor), which are part of a large multi-district economy, and abstract for simplicity
from PS. Let Ars denote labor productivity in district r and sector s. Consider two polar opposite scenarios.
In the first scenario, ARF > AP F and ARM > AP M ; that is, the productivity of the tradable sectors food and
manufacturing are larger in R than in P . Instead, the productivity of CS is the same in both districts, ARCS =
AP CS . In equilibrium, workers in district R earn a higher wage. If food is a necessity and CS is a luxury, consumers


                                                           2
in R will spend a higher share of their income on CS, whereas consumers in P will spend a higher share of their
income on food. Because CS is nontradable, district R will also have a larger employment share in CS, whereas
P will specialize in the production of goods.1 In this scenario, spatial differences in expenditure and employment
shares are entirely driven by income effects in demand. We refer to this case as service-biased growth.
     The second scenario is one in which productivity in the tradable sectors is identical in R and P , whereas
ARCS > AP CS . As before, district R is richer, has a larger service sector, and consumers spend a smaller share of
their budget on food. However, in this case, any difference stems from a technological gap in the CS sector. We
refer to this scenario as service-led growth.
     Although the example highlights the difference across space, the same argument applies to the analysis of a
given district at two points in time. Under service-biased growth, the growth of the service sector would be entirely
a consequence of the productivity growth in the goods-producing sectors. Under service-led growth, productivity
growth in the service sector would be the sole cause of productivity growth and structural change.
     To solve this identification problem, we estimate the aggregate demand system for consumer services and directly
measure the strength of the income effect. The key aspect of the demand system is the income elasticity. If service
demand is very income elastic, growth tends to be service biased, because rising incomes sharply increase service
demand. If, by contrast, this income elasticity is small, changes in employment indicate changes in productivity.
     Given the pivotal role of this elasticity, we estimate it from Engel curves using microdata on income and
expenditure. To link this empirical estimate to the aggregate demand system of our theory, we have to address
two challenges. First, in the presence of nonhomothetic preferences, the income elasticity at the micro level is not
necessarily informative about the elasticity of aggregate demand. Second, as stressed in Herrendorf et al. (2013),
in general, no direct mapping exists between the preference parameters estimated from data on final expenditure
to the ones of the value-added demand system used in our theory.
     The preference specification we opt for overcomes both of these difficulties. We model preference as belonging to
the PIGL class, which was first introduced by Muellbauer (1976) and has been recently popularized in the literature
on growth and structural change by Boppart (2014) and Alder et al. (2019). The PIGL preference class has a
crucial aggregation property: the choice of a set of agents endowed with PIGL preferences facing a common price
vector can be rationalized as the choice of a representative agent whose preferences also fall into the PIGL class.
In particular, the parameter governing the income elasticity for aggregate value added coincides with the micro
elasticity. Moreover, we also show this parameter can be estimated from data on final expenditure.
     Our methodology allows us quantify the extent to which the growth of the service sector is either a source or a
consequence of the development process. First, it provides us with an estimate of sectoral productivity growth at
the regional level so that we can directly determine whether productivity in the service sector actually grew. Second,
it lends itself to a quantitative assessment of both the aggregate and the heterogenous welfare impact of service-led
growth. In particular, when agents have nonhomothetic preferences and live in different locations characterized by
different provision of local services, the growth of different sectors benefits people differentially­rich versus poor as
well as urban versus rural residents. Using our model, we can quantify the heterogeneous welfare gains of service-led
growth both across the income distribution and across space. We view this as important, because growth theory is
often criticized for glossing over the distributional implications of economic growth.

Application: Service-led growth in India (1987-2011). We apply our methodology to India, a fast-growing
economy, with an average annual growth rate of 4.2% during 1987­2011. In this period, the lion's share of the
1   Because food and industrial goods are tradable, whether P specializes in agriculture or industry depends on its comparative advantages.



                                                                      3
process of structural change was a shift from agriculture to services. Our estimation exploits individual geolocalized
consumption and employment data, and we estimate sectoral productivity growth for almost 400 Indian districts.
    Our results are interesting in several respects. First, at the spatial level, there are large sectoral productivity
differences. In particular, the CS sector features a large productivity gap between urban and rural districts. Thus,
urban districts have a higher service employment share not only because their inhabitants are richer, but also
because the market provides them more efficiently.
    Second, we document a very important role for service-led growth. At the aggregate level, rising efficiency in
the provision of consumer services accounts for almost one third of the increase in living standard since 1987. For
comparison, the impact of agricultural productivity growth is roughly similar, but growth in the industrial sector
was substantially less important. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to quantify the importance
of the consumer-service sector for a developing economy such as India.
    Third, service-led growth is very unequal. Productivity growth in CS is the main source of welfare gains for
richer households, especially those in urbanized districts. The residents in the top quintile of urbanization would
have been better off taking a 42% income cut in 2011 than moving back to the productivity that the CS sector had
in 1987. By contrast, for poorer households living in rural districts, improvements in living standards hinge mostly
on productivity growth in agriculture.
    Finally, productivity growth in CS turns out to also be the key driver of structural change. Had productivity in
the service sector stagnated, the employment share of agriculture would not have declined. By contrast, the effect
of agricultural productivity growth is negligible.

Related Literature. Our paper contributes to the macroeconomic literature on the structural transformation
including, among others, Ngai and Pissarides (2007), Herrendorf et al. (2013, 2014, and 2020), Gollin et al. (2014),
Hobijn et al. (2019), and Garcia-Santana et al. (2020).
    A recent literature focuses on the service sector, however, mostly with a focus on developed economies such as
the US. Buera and Kaboski (2012) emphasize the importance of the (demand-driven) growth of a skill-intensive
service industry in the post-1950s US economy. Hsieh and Rossi-Hansberg (2019) argue that in more recent years,
ICT has triggered an industrial revolution and has been a major source of productivity growth. Their view is
echoed by Eckert et al. (2020) who argue service-led growth is the main cause of the growing urban-rural gap in
the US. An exception to this rich-country focus is Duarte and Restuccia (2010), who document large cross-country
productivity differences in service industries, a finding broadly in line with our results across locations within India,
and Gollin et al. (2015), who emphasize how urbanization often goes hand in hand with a booming consumption
of non-tradable services, although their focus on such "consumption cities" in resource-rich African economies is
very different from ours. Finally, our finding that service growth was decidedly pro-rich and pro-urban is consistent
with Chatterjee and Giannone (2021), who use data on regional income growth for a large number of countries and
document that rising productivity in services is associated with regional divergence.
    On the methodological side we build on the large literature on development accounting; see, for example, Caselli
(2005) and Hall and Jones (1999). This literature postulates aggregate production functions and uses information
on the accumulation of productive factors to fit the data. Our methodology is closer to the structural development
accounting of Gancia et al. (2013), who exploit the restrictions imposed by an equilibrium model to identify sectoral
productivities. Similarly, Cheremukhin et al. (2015) and Cheremukhin et al. (2017) use an accounting approach in
conjunction with a neoclassical growth to study the determinants of growth in China and Russia.
    We perform our accounting exercise in the context of a model with inter-regional trade linkages, commonly used


                                                           4
in the economic geography literature; see, for example, Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017) or Allen and Arkolakis
(2014). In contrast to these papers, we abstract from labor mobility, even though one could extend our methodology
to allow for it. Cravino and Sotelo (2019) is a recent example of an analysis of the structural transformation in the
context of a model with international trade.
    Non-homothetic preferences play a key role in our analysis. The classic reference for the service bias (and
resulting cost disease) of economic growth is Baumol (1967). Earlier papers emphasizing their importance for the
growth process include Foellmi and Zweimueller (2006), Kongsamut et al. (2001), and Matsuyama (2000). The more
recent literature on structural change with nonhomothetic preferences includes, among others, Boppart (2014) and
Alder et al. (2019) who, like us, propose generalizations of the PIGL preferences class proposed in Muellbauer
(1976). Eckert and Peters (2020) is the first paper to incorporate these preferences in a spatial model of structural
change. In contrast to us, they focus on the interaction between spatial mobility and the structural transformation.
Instead, Matsuyama (2019) and Comin et al. (2020) use a class of generalized CES preferences related to Sato
(2014). The authors show these preferences can account accurately for the patterns of structural transformation
across several countries. In our paper, we use PIGL preferences because their tractable and transparent aggregation
properties are especially suitable. Exploring a different class of preferences would certainly be interesting, but we
leave it for future research.
    We also contribute to the vast literature on economic development of India including, among others, Aghion
et al. (2005, 2008), Akcigit et al. (2020), Basu (2008), Basu and Maertens (2007), Foster and Rosenzweig (1996,
2004), Goldberg et al. (2010), Kochhar et al. (2006), and Martin et al. (2017).

Road Map. The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents some stylized facts of the role of services
in India. Section 3 lays out the theoretical framework. Section 4 describes the data and the main empirical
patterns in India. Section 5 discusses the estimation method. Section 6 discusses the main results. Section 7
performs robustness analysis. Section 8 concludes. The Appendix contains technical details, a description of the
data sources, and additional tables and figures.

2       Structural Change and Service Growth in India: 1987-2011
Between 1987 and 2011, the Indian economy experienced a remarkable transformation. Not only did income per
capita grow by a factor of 3, but the employment structure also changed markedly. In Figure 1, we show the time-
series evolution of sectoral employment shares.2 Panel (a) is based on the standard ISIC classification. Two facts
are apparent: First, agriculture is the largest employment source, accounting for almost half of total employment
in 2011. Second, the structural transformation in India is mostly an outflow of agriculture and an inflow into
services and construction. Today, the service sector accounts for one third of aggregate employment. By contrast,
employment in the manufacturing sector is stagnant. Panel (b) relies on a model-based classification of activities
to which we return in Section 4.
    The service sector encompasses a set of heterogeneous activities. In Figure 2, we decompose it into five subsectors:
(1) Wholesale, Retail, Hotel and Restaurant; (2) Health and Community Services; (3) Financial, Business, and
Transport; (4) ICT, and (5) Education and Public Administration (PA). The first and second subsectors, which
serve mostly consumers, employed well over half of all Indian service workers in 2011. The third and fourth
subsectors sell part of their services to industrial firms. Finance, business, and transport services accounted for
2   The figure is constructed using micro data on employment from the NSS whose description is deferred to Section 4.




                                                                   5
        Panel a: Structural Change in India (ISIC class.)                                               Panel b: Structural Change in India (our sample)
                     .8




                                                                                                                    .8
                             .6




                                                                                                                            .6
             Employment Shares




                                                                                                            Employment Shares
                    .4




                                                                                                                   .4
           .2




                                                                                                          .2
                     0




                                                                                                                    0
                                  1985   1990       1995              2000         2005      2010                                1985   1990       1995           2000        2005           2010
                                                               Year                                                                                        Year

                                                Agriculture                  Manufacturing                                                 Agriculture                   Manufacturing
                                                Construction                 Services                                                      Consumer Services             Producer Services



Figure 1: Structural Change in India: 1987­2011. The figure shows the evolution of sectoral employment
shares over time. Panel (a) is based on a standard ISIC classification. Panel (b) is based on the classification we
use in our analysis--see Section 4.

about a quarter of service sector employment in 2011. Although the growth rate of employment in the ICT sector
was especially fast, this sector accounts for a mere 3.1% of service employment in 2011. Education and PA are
mostly government-run activities. The share of the Indian labor force employed in this subsector is constant over
time--in contrast to all other subsectors that grew rapidly during the period studied.3 Thus, the expansion of
services in India is not confined to business-oriented service industries, such as finance and ICT services. The vast
majority of employment gains are found in consumer services such as retail, hospitality, and health.
    Figure 2 also highlights important differences across local labor markets in India. We split India into rural and
urban districts, broken down so that approximately half of the workers belong to rural districts and urban districts,
respectively. Service activities are more prevalent in urban than in rural areas, especially so in business-oriented
activities such as financial services and ICT.
    Was this expansion of the service sector shown in Figures 1 and 2 a source or a corollary of Indian growth? In
the remainder of the paper, we argue that rising service productivity was indeed an important source.

3       Theory
We consider a general equilibrium environment with R regions. Consumers have preferences over three goods:
agricultural goods (F for food ), industrial goods (G for goods ), and consumer services (CS). A single factor of
production--labor-- is inelastically supplied. Whereas goods and food are tradable, CS are not traded and must
be provided locally. All markets are frictionless and competitive.
    Our theory reflects the three salient aspects highlighted in Figures 1 and 2. First, we allow consumer preferences
to be non-homothetic. Hence, the increase in retail employment can be driven both by income effects and by rising
productivity in the retail sector. Second, we break down services into CS that--like retail--directly enter consumers'
utility functions and PS that--like corporate legal services--are inputs to the production of goods. Finally, we
assume services to be non-tradable across space so that some locations (e.g., cities) specialize in services because
they are efficient in providing them or because their inhabitants are rich (or both).
3   In absolute terms, employment in the first and second subsectors increased by approximately 32 million in 1987­2011. Employment
    in the third and fourth subsectors increased by approximately 20 million. Finally, employment in education and PA increased by
    approximately 7 million--proportionally to the growth of the labor force.




                                                                                                    6
                                                 .15




                             Employment Shares
                                                  .1




                                                 .05




                                                  0
                                                          1987 2011      1987 2011      1987 2011      1987 2011    1987 2011
                                                       Wholesale & Retail,  Health,       Financial,      ICT      Education & PA
                                                       Hotel & Restaurants Community      Business,
                                                                                          Transport

                                                                                       Rural            Urban


Figure 2: Service Industries. The figure displays the employment shares in 1987 and 2011 of five groups
of service industries: (1) Wholesale, Retail, Hotel, and Restaurants; (2) Health and Community Services; (3)
Financial, Business, and Transport Services; (4) ICT Services; and (5) Education and Public Administration.

3.1    Technology and Preferences
Technology. All goods and services are produced under constant return technologies such that

                                                                 Yrst = Arst Hrst            for s = F, CS, G,

where Hrst denotes the amount of human capital employed in sector s in region r at time t. Whereas we take
total productivity in agriculture, ArF t , and CS, ArCSt , as exogenous, productivity in the industrial sector, ArGt ,
is endogenously determined. However, in Section 3.5, we show the equilibrium allocation in the industrial sector
implies YrGt = ArGt HrGt , where ArGt is a function of structural parameters that does not depend on equilibrium
prices. Therefore, we can characterize the general equilibrium taking ArGt as if it were a primitive, and then solve
for the equilibrium in the industrial sector.

Preferences. We assume consumers' preferences to be in the PIGL class. PIGL preferences have two important
advantages for us. First, they allow us to parameterize the extent of nonhomotheticity in a flexible way, which we
can estimate from individual data. Second, they have simple and transparent aggregation properties that allow us
to take a district-level demand system to the data.
    PIGL preferences do not have an explicit utility representation but are represented by an indirect utility function
of the form                                                      
                                                      1     e
                                          V (e, p) =               - D (p) ,                                        (1)
                                                       B (p)
where e denotes total spending and p the vector of prices of goods. The function D (p) and B (p) are homogeneous
of degree zero and one, respectively.
    For the traded commodities, consumers buy a CES aggregate of differentiated regional varieties with an elasticity




                                                                                         7
of substitution  . We parameterize the functions B (p) and D(p) in (1) as
                                                                                                        

                           B (p) =                  ps
                                                       s
                                                           and D (p) =                           ~s ln ps  ,
                                       s{F,G,CS }                                  s{F,G,CS }


with    s   s = 1 and     s    ~s = 0. This specification yields the indirect utility function
                                                                            
                                                           1      e
                                             V (e, p) =             s          -        ~s ln ps .                                         (2)
                                                                 s ps               s


Roy's Identity implies the sectoral expenditure shares associated with V (e, p) (see Section A-1 in the Appendix)
are given by
                                                                      -
                                                                 e
                                        hs ( e, p ) = s + ~
                                                           s       s    .                                     (3)
                                                                s ps

Equation (3) highlights income and price effects. The expenditure share on s is increasing in income (i.e., s is a
luxury) if and only if ~s < 0. For instance, if food is a necessity, ~F > 0 and its expenditure share converges to
                                                             h
F from above. Likewise, if CS is a luxury,   ~CS < 0 and CS increases toward CS from below. The strength of
nonhomotheticities is governed by the parameter , which, with a slight abuse of terminology, we label the "income
elasticity". This income elasticity  turns out to be the crucial parameter in our analysis.


3.2     Heterogeneity, Aggregate Demand, and Welfare
As already mentioned, PIGL preferences have nice aggregation properties. Suppose individuals have heterogeneous
abilities, and let wrt denote the wage per efficiency unit of labor. Income (and expenditure) for individual h is
then given by eh       h              h
                 rt = q wrt , where q is the number of efficiency units of labor. Let Frt (q ) denote the distribution
function of q in region r at the t. Empirically, we will relate the spatial variation in the distribution of q to observable
differences in human capital. Using (3), the aggregate spending share on goods in sector s in region r is then given
by
                                                                                                                      -
                                       Lrt   h
                                             s (qwrt , prt ) qwrt dFrt (q )                            Ert [q ] wrt
                  rs (wrt , prt )                                                  = s + rs                               ,                (4)
                                             Lrt qwrt dFrt (q )                                       p F G CS
                                                                                                       F pG pCSr

where
                                                                 Ert q 1-
                                                           rs               1-   ~s .                                                      (5)
                                                                 Ert [q ]
    Comparing (4) and (3) highlights in what sense PIGL allows for a representative household: the aggregate
demand system is isomorphic to that of a representative consumer in region r who earns the average income
Ert [q ] wrt , and has the inequality-adjusted preference parameter rs instead of the primitive parameter ~s .
    The correct inequality-adjustment to go from the micro preferences      ~s to the market demand parameters rs
                     1-             1-
is given by Ert q         /Ert [q ]    and hence depends, in general, on the local income distribution. The analysis
                                                                                                                          
simplifies further if we assume q follows a Pareto distribution with c.d.f. Frt (q ) = 1 - q rt /q                            , with a region-
                                                                                          
                                                      
invariant tail parameter  . Then, Er [q ] =           -1 q r   and Er q 1- =             1-
                                                                                                q1 -
                                                                                                     , so that equation (5) simplifies to
                                                                                        1- -1
                                                                                                 r
                ( -1)1-
rs = s           +-1    ~s .   Thus, if income is Pareto distributed with a common tail parameter, all regions have the


                                                                    8
same "aggregate" parameter s , which is proportional to the primitive individual preference parameter     ~s . In this
case, regional demand differences are solely driven by local prices, wages, and human capital Ert [q ]  q rt , and we
can write rs (wrt , prt ) = s q rt wrt , prt . Hence, despite heterogeneity in income and non-homothetic preferences,
we can express aggregate demand as a function of wages, prices, and the average level of efficiency.

    A similar aggregation property also allows us to calculate utilitarian welfare in location r. Given the local
skill distribution Frt and a vector of local wages and prices, utilitarian welfare is defined as Urt (wrt , prt ) 
  V (qwrt , prt ) dFrt (q ). Using the indirect utility function in (2), Urt (wrt , prt ) has the simple closed-form expression

                                                                                                           
                                                            1- ( - 1)                1    Ert [q ] wrt                 U
            Urt (wrt , prt ) = U (Ert [q ] wrt , prt ) =              ×                   F G CS              -        s ln prst   ,          (6)
                                                               -                         pF t pGt prCSt            s

         U
where s     s × (( - ) ( - (1 - )))/( ( - 1)). Hence, utilitarian welfare is akin to the indirect utility of a
                                                                                      U
representative agent with average income Ert [q ] wrt and a scaled taste parameter s     that accounts for the income
distribution ( ) and the income elasticity ( ). Note that given this scaled taste parameter, the distribution Frt
only enters through the average income term Ert [q ] wrt . Hence, we also write Urt (wrt , prt ) = U (Ert [q ] wrt , prt ) to
stress that welfare differences across time and space depend entirely on wages wrt , prices prt , and average human
capital Ert [q ].

   Importantly, because CS are a luxury and productivity growth in CS lowers their price, the welfare benefits
of an increase in the local productivity of CS is skewed toward the rich. The expenditure share CS (e, prt )
exactly measures the welfare exposure of a change in prices at the individual level.4 Hence, richer households,
that is, households with high human capital q and households living in high-productivity locations benefit more
from service-led growth. Below, we show the heterogeneity in the welfare impact across the income distribution is
quantitatively large and makes service-led growth significantly pro rich.


3.3        Equilibrium
To characterize the equilibrium, recall that each variety of food and industrial goods is traded in the national
market, whereas the market for CS clears locally. The CES demand structure and the fact that the competitive
prices are given by prst = A- 1
                            rst wrt implies a set of nationwide market-clearing conditions for the two tradable goods



                                                1-  -1                  R
                                               wrt Arst
                       wrt Hrst    =          R       1-  -1
                                                                   ×            s q jt wjt , prt wjt Hjt          for s = F, G,               (7)
                                              j =1   wjt Ajst          j =1


and a set of district-specific market-clearing conditions for nontradable CS,

                                                  wrt HrCSt = CS q rt wrt , prt wrt Hrt .                                                     (8)

Together with the market-clearing conditions for local labor markets, HrF + HrG + HrCS = Hr , these equations
fully describe the equilibrium.
4   Formally, letting e(prt , V ) denote the expenditure function of achieving a utility level of V given prices prt ,  ln e(prt , V )/ ln prCSt =
    CS (e, prt ).




                                                                            9
3.4    Service-Led or Service-Biased Growth?
The equilibrium condition for the CS sector in (8) highlights the focal point of our analysis: Is growth service led
or service biased? Using the definition of the expenditure share CS in (4), the local CS employment share implied
by(8) is given by
                                                                                       -
                     HrCSt                               1-CS
                           = CS + CS p F G
                                      F pG × Ert [q ] × wrt   ×                A CS
                                                                                            ,                      (9)
                                                                                     
                                                                                rCSt 
                      Hrt
                                                          Skills   Wages    Productivity


where we have eliminated prCS using the competitive equilibrium condition prCS = wrt /ArCSt .
   Equation (9) highlights how our theory encompasses both the possibility that growth was service-led and that
growth was service-biased. Because preferences are nonhomothetic and CS are not tradable, employment depends
on the local supply of skills (Ert [q ]), local wages (wrt ), and local productivity (ArCSt ). Hence, locations such as
Delhi or Bangalore might have a large employment in the retail service industry either because consumers living
there are, on average, rich or because the local retail sector is highly productive. Similarly, rising educational
attainment and factor prices or rising productivity can increase CS employment over time. The former channel
describes a service-biased growth scenario: the rise of service employment is due to income effects. The latter
channel captures a service-led growth scenario where rising service employment is driven by rising productivity and
the CS sector is a source rather than a corollary of growth.
   To solve this identification problem, we leverage both the structure imposed by our theory and additional data.
First, the data on earnings, schooling, and an estimate of the returns to schooling allow us to measure local skills
and their price. Given an income elasticity  and the (endogenous) prices of tradable goods pF and pG , we can
use (9) to identify ArCS . Similar to the traditional approach in development accounting, we use a set of structural
parameters to identify productivity in a model-consistent way. However, our inference hinges on solving for a set of
equilibrium prices, pF , pG , and wr . For this reason, we label our methodology equilibrium development accounting.


3.5    Equilibrium in the Industrial Sector
Thus far, we have taken ArG as exogenous. In this section, we characterize the equilibrium of the industrial
sector that determines ArG . We assume each district's industrial good is produced by a continuum of firms using
production workers and PS as inputs. PS are provided by a separate service sector comprising corporate law services,
accounting, financial advising, and so on. Our theory explicitly allows for structural change to occur within the
industrial sector in the form of an adoption of production techniques that are more intensive in PS over time.

Environment. We construct a model with heterogeneous firms where the demand of PS is related to firm size
(or productivity). Intuitively, in small firms, activities such as accounting are carried out by the manager, whereas
large firms outsource them to professional providers. We formalize this idea by positing a nonhomothetic production
function of the following form:
                                               1--                           
                                         yi = zi      HP M i (ArP S HP Si + ) .                                  (10)

Here, zi is firm i's productivity, and HP M i and HP Si denote the inputs of manufacturing production workers and
PS, respectively. ArP S denotes the productivity of the PS sector in region r. The parameter   0 governs the
nonhomotheticity of firms' technology--if  > 0, the input share of PS increases with firms' size. We assume


                                                          10
                                     Relative
                                employment share
                                    of lawyers
                                 (!HPS(z)/ HPM(z))
                                                           Not active         Active; no lawyers              Active; with lawyers




                                           ! / 


                                                                                                                              HPS(z)
                                                                                                                                             (    z)
                                                                                                                                                 z
                                                                                                                          !             =    × 1- L
                                                                                                                              HPM(z)




                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                    AM
                                                                                                                                       !f (z) = 
                                                                                                                                                   z +1


                                                     !AM           !z*(APS)                        !zL(APS)                            Productivity (z)




Figure 3: Equilibrium in the Industrial Sector. The figure displays the main qualitative features of the
industrial equilibrium. All firms with z  z  (AP S ) are active. All firms with z  zL (AP S ) demand PS. The shaded
blue area represents the productivity distribution.


 +  < 1, which captures a limited span of managerial control. Decreasing returns to scale guarantee firms earn
profits in equilibrium.
    The mass of active firms is endogenously determined via free entry. To enjoy the opportunity of drawing a
realization from the productivity distribution, an entrant firm must pay a sunk labor cost of fE manufacturing
                                                                                           
workers. The productivity zi is drawn from a Pareto distribution Frt (z ) = 1 - (ArM t /z ) , where ArM is a lower-
bound productivity that parametrizes the state of technology in region r, and  > 1 is the tail parameter of the
Pareto distribution.
    Active firms must hire fO manufacturing workers in order to start production. Some low-zi firms therefore
might opt to remain inactive. In particular, we assume

                                                               fO    + (1 - ) ( - 1)
                                                                  >                  ,                                                                             (11)
                                                               fE      1--

which ensures some low-productivity firms will choose not to be active. Although inessential, it simplifies the
analysis and avoids a taxonomic presentation.

Equilibrium. In this section, we summarize--with the aid of Figure 3--the properties of the equilibrium, whose
analytical characterization is deferred to Appendix Section A-2.
    Under condition (11), two productivity thresholds, z  and zL (AP S ), exist such that AM < z   zL (AP S ),
defining three productivity ranges. Low-productivity firms with z  [AM , z  ] are inactive; medium-productivity
firms with z  [z  , zL (AP S )] produce using only production workers;5 high-productivity firms with z > zL (AP S )
demand both workers and lawyers.
    High-productivity firms also specialize on PS on the intensive margin. Interestingly, the cutoff zL (AP S ) fully
                                                                                                     1- 
5   The medium-productivity range may be empty. In particular, if AP S >                               f0
                                                                                                          ,        all active firms hire lawyers, AM < z  = zL (AP S ).



                                                                                      11
determines this intensive margin:

                                          HP S (z )         z
                                                    = × 1-               .
                                          HP M (z )        zL

As z increases, the share of lawyers approaches /. The following proposition summarizes the main properties of
the equilibrium.
Proposition 1. The equilibrium production level of the industrial-goods sector in region r is given by YrG =
ArG HrG , where HrG = HrM + HrP S and ArG = AG (ArM , ArP S ) is given by
                                                                                             1--
                                                                         (1-)(-1)+             
                                                                     -
                       Q A(1-- )    1 + - 1         1-                      1--                                        
    AG (AM , AP S ) :=  1 M                 1 1-        (AP S )                                       if  (AP S ) >   1-   ,
                                                     (1-)(1-- )
                       
                           (1-- )                                                                                      
                       
                       Q2 AM     AP S (1 -  (AP S ))                                                  if  (AP S ) 
                                                          
                                                                                                                      1-

                   
where  (AP S )  fO APS
                       , Q1 and Q2 are constant terms, and AG (AM , AP S ) is continuous and increasing in both
arguments.
The employment share of PS is given by
                              
                                               +(-1)(1-)
                      HP S
                                                      (-1)(1-)+              if  (AP S ) >    
                                                                                             1-
                           =   +(1-)(-1)( 1- 
                                             (AP S ))
                                                          1--
                                                                                                  .                            (12)
                      HG       - (1 -  -  ) -1    ( A    )                                    
                                                      PS
                                                                             if  (AP S ) 
                             
                                               1- (AP S )                                    1-


HP S /HG  [0,  ] is continuous and strictly increasing in AP S .
Proof. See Section A-2 in the Appendix.

    Proposition 1 contains three main results. First, it shows the aggregate production function of goods-producing
sectors has indeed a simple form: it is linear in total employment, that is, PS and manufacturing employment, with
a constant productivity AG . Second, it provides a closed-form expression for AG that is increasing in both AM
and AP S . The comparative static of AP S reflects both the direct effect of lawyers being more productive and the
indirect effect of selection: an increase in AP S in creases z  and de creases zL , and hence induces a reallocation of
resources toward more productive firms. Third, the proposition yields a closed-form expression for the aggregate PS
employment share HP S /HG . Interestingly, the sole determinant of structural change within the industrial sector
(i.e., of PS deepening) is the local productivity of the PS sector ArP S . In particular, aggregate manufacturing
productivity ArM does not affect the composition of employment. Free entry is key for this stark result. If
manufacturing productivity ArM (or the demand for the regional industrial variety) were to increase, more entry
would occur, whereas the technology choice of the active firms would remain unaffected.
    In summary, the model has a tractable recursive structure. The trade equilibrium pins down the employment
share of the industrial sector as a function of ArM and ArP S , given preferences and technology in the other sectors.
The employment breakdown into manufacturing and PS is then determined by ArP S only.

4    Empirical Analysis
We now turn to the empirical analysis. We first describe our main data sources. We then discuss measurement
aspects.

                                                          12
4.1       Data
Our analysis relies on four datasets.6

     1. The NSS Employment-Unemployment Schedule for the years 1987 and 2011, henceforth, the "NSS data."

     2. The Economic Census for the years 1990, and 2013, henceforth, the "EC."

     3. A Special Survey of the Indian Service Sector for the year 2006, henceforth, the "Service Survey."

     4. The NSS Consumer-Expenditure Schedule, henceforth, the "Expenditure data."

    The NSS data, which form the backbone of our analysis, are a household survey with detailed information on
employment characteristics and households' location of residence. We use data for 1987 and 2011. The NSS data
allow us to measure sectoral employment shares and average income at the district-year level. Consistent with our
theory, we measure employment shares in four sectors: agriculture, manufacturing, PS, and CS. For agriculture and
manufacturing, we follow the ISIC sectoral classification in the NSS data. As highlighted in Figure 2, the situation
is more complicated in the service industry. Whereas, for example, retail workers are arguably part of the CS sector,
the distinction is less clear for lawyers becuase this category includes both corporate lawyers and divorce lawyers,
providing, respectively, PS and CS. To solve this problem, we combine information from the Economic Census and
the Service Survey to estimate the extent to which particular subsectors within the service sector provide their value
added to firms rather than consumers. We describe this procedure in detail in in Section 4.2 below. To measure
income, we proxy earnings by average expenditure. We prefer this measure to direct information on wages to also
capture informal employment.
    The EC is a complete count of all establishments engaged in the production or distribution of goods and services
in India. The census covers all sectors except crop production and plantation. The EC collects information on each
firm's location, industry, employment, and the nature of ownership. It covers approximately 24 million and 60
million establishments in 1990 and 2013, respectively.7 We use the EC to classify service employment into CS and
PS.
    The Service Survey was conducted in 2006 and is designed to be representative of India's service sector. It
covers almost 200,000 private enterprises subdivided into six service industries. This relatively unexplored Service
Survey allows us to estimate the size of PS within the service sector. In Appendix Section B-1, we compare it with
the EC and document that it is representative of the distribution of firm size in India.
    Finally, we use the NSS Consumer-Expenditure Schedule. This dataset contains detailed information on house-
holds' expenditure allocation across narrowly defined goods, and thus allows us to measure expenditure shares on
food and CS. We refer to Section B-1.5 in the Appendix for details on the product classification. We leverage this
information to estimate the income elasticity , which is the key preference parameter for our analysis.

    To compare spatial units over time, we create a time-invariant definition of geography. We define regions as
Indian districts. Because the boundaries of several districts changed over time, we harmonized them using GIS
software, relying on maps for the years 1987, 1991, 2001, and 2011. We define regions so that they have the same
boundaries over time. To keep the number of regions as large as possible, a region is always the smallest area that
covers a single district or a set of districts with consistent boundaries over time. In the end, we obtain 370 regions
6   A more detailed description of these datasets is deferred to Appendix Section B-1. Here, we highlight the main features.
7   As shown in earlier studies, most Indian firms are very small, with an average size ranging between two and three employees, over half
    having a single employee, and only one in 1,000 firms employing more than 100 workers.


                                                                    13
that cover all of India. For simplicity, we refer to these regions as "districts." Section B-3 in the Appendix describes
in detail how we construct this crosswalk.


4.2    Measurement
Consumer vs. Producer Services. We aim to distinguish between PS and CS in a way that is consistent with
our theory. Ideally, we would want to measure employment in PS and CS with the help of detailed input-output
matrices so as to associate the value added of each firm to the identity of the buyers (either private individuals or
firms). To the best of our knowledge, this information is not available.
    We therefore leverage micro data on the firms' downstream trading partners contained in the Service Survey.
Specifically, this data report whether a firm is selling mostly to consumers or to other firms. We could thus, in
principle, calculate the share of employment in every service industry-district cell distinguishing between firms
selling to other firms and those serving consumers. In practice, this procedure is not feasible, because the Service
Survey contains too few firms to precisely estimate these employment shares for each service industry-district cell.
Instead, we rely on the fact that the probability of a firm selling to other firms rather than to consumers is highly
correlated with firm size--larger firms are more likely to sell to firms. We show this pattern in Table 1, which
displays the share of firms that mainly sell to other firms by employment size. A clear pattern emerges: small firms
with one or two employees sell almost exclusively to final consumers, whereas a significant share of large firms sell
to other firms.

                                                     Firm size: Number of employees
                                 1        2        3       4       5     6-10    11-20        21-50     51+
           PS share            5.0%     3.8%     6.2% 8.5% 11.5% 12.6% 11.8%                  27.6%    42.5%
           Number of firms     97337    46571    13227 5156      2777    4841    2830          601      403

Table 1: Share of producer services by firm size. The table reports the share of firms selling to firms (rather
than private individuals) in different size categories.


     We use the pattern reported in Table 1 in the following way. First, we estimate the PS employment share by firm
size for different industries within the service sector. We then use the district -specific size distribution from the EC
to infer the aggregate PS employment share in district r. More formally, the PS employment share (relative to the
total service sector) in subsector k in region r is given by sP S
                                                              rk =
                                                                         PS                PS
                                                                       b kb kbr , where kb is the share of employment
in firms selling to firms in sector k in size class b, and kbr is the employment share of firms of size b in sector k in
region r. Note this procedure assumes the structure of production for firms of equal size to not vary across Indian
districts. The regional variation in PS and CS employment stems from differences in (i) total service employment,
(ii) the relative share of different service industries, and (iii) the distribution of firm size. We exclude from the
analysis a subset of service industries for which the categorization into PS and CS is ambiguous. These industries
include public administration and defense, compulsory social security, education, and extraterritorial organizations
and bodies. In Section B-2.2 in the Appendix, we describe this procedure in more detail.
     In Figure 4, we display the result of this exercise for different subsectors within the service sector. Within the
retail and restaurant sector, only a few establishments cater to other firms. Hence, we estimate that more than 97%
of employment in that industry is engaged in the production of CS. The situation is very different in the financial
or the ICT sector, where roughly 26% of 53% of employment caters mainly to other firms.



                                                           14
                                              1        .8
                                     Employment Shares
                                       .4      .6
                                              .2
                                              0



                                                            Wholesale & Retail,      Health,      Financial,            ICT
                                                            Hotel & Restaurants     Community     Business,
                                                                                                  Transport

                                                                              Consumer Services           Producer Services




Figure 4: Producer vs consumer services in different industries. The figure shows the share of producer
and CS in 2011 in different industries within the service sector.


    Finally, we merge construction and utilities with the service sector. Although the construction sector is some-
times included in the industrial sector, the key distinction in our theory is that goods are tradable whereas services
are nontradable. Because construction and utilities are local goods, we find it natural to merge them with services.8
The construction sector serves both consumers (e.g., residential housing) and firms (e.g., business construction). To
break these activities into PS and CS, we follow a procedure similar to that used for services. We exploit information
from the "Informal Non-Agricultural Enterprises Survey 1999­2000" (INAES) dataset, which also reports whether a
firm sells to consumers or other firms and which covers the construction sector. Given the sample size, splitting the
destination of construction activities is possible only at the national, not the district level. We obtain the following
breakdown. First, we remove 9.1% of the construction activity from the sample, which corresponds to the share
of government activity (infrastructure and public goods). Then, based on the INAES data, we attribute 87.1% of
what is left to CS and 12.9% to PS in every district-year. For more details, see Section B-2.2 in the Appendix.

    Given these measurement choices, we are now in the position to quantify the structural transformation in India,
across both time and space. Panel (b) of Figure 1 uses the sectoral classification we adopt in our analysis. Relative
to Panel (a), we exclude the public sector, merge services with construction and utilities, and break down services
into CS and PS, as discussed above. The time-series evolution of agricultural and manufacturing employment is
essentially unchanged. Within the service sector, CS grow particularly quickly.9
    In Figure 5, we turn to the spatial heterogeneity across Indian districts. We focus on urbanization as our
measure of spatial heterogeneity. This as a mere descriptive device. In Section C-1 in the Appendix, we show a
strong positive correlation between urbanization and the expenditure per capita in the NSS data for 2011. Thus, we
take the urbanization rate as a proxy for economic development across Indian districts. Figure 5 displays sectoral
employment shares by urbanization quintiles. The average urbanization rates of the five quintiles are, respectively,
6.4%, 12.1%, 19.5%, 29.2%, and 56.4%. Richer, urban locations have lower employment shares in agriculture and
specialize in the production of services and industrial goods. Over time, the share of agriculture declines. Between
8 In Section 7, we redo our analysis when we include construction in the manufacturing sector and show our results do not depend on
  this particular choice.
9 Panel (b) of Figure 1 shows the employment share of education and PA remains constant over time at a 5% level. This finding suggests

  our choice to exclude them is largely inconsequential.


                                                                                            15
1987 and 2011 the structural transformation was especially fast in more urbanized districts. In 1987, agriculture
was the main sector of activity even in the top quintile of urbanization. By contrast, in 2011, more than half of the
working population was employed in CS and PS. This difference is even starker when one looks at earnings instead
of employment (see Section C-1 in the Appendix.).

                        Panel a: Sectoral Empl. by Urbanization (1987)                                                         Panel b: Sectoral Empl. by Urbanization (2011)




                                                                                                                    .8
             .8




                                                                                                                          .6
                   .6
     Employment Share




                                                                                                           Employment Share
                                                                                                                 .4
           .4




                                                                                                                    .2
             .2
             0




                                                                                                                    0
                          1st Quintile   2nd Quintile    3rd Quintile   4th Quintile   5th Quintile                              1st Quintile   2nd Quintile    3rd Quintile   4th Quintile   5th Quintile
                                                        Urbanization                                                                                           Urbanization
                                          Agriculture                   Consumer Services                                                        Agriculture                   Consumer Services
                                          Manufacturing                 Producer Services                                                        Manufacturing                 Producer Services



Figure 5: Sectoral Employment over Time and Space. The figure plots the sectoral employment shares by
urbanization quintile in 1987 and 2011.

Human Capital. To be consistent with our theory, we measure each district's endowment of human-capital
units Frt (q ) and its distribution across sectors in terms of efficiency units of labor. To measure the distribution
of human capital across sectors within a district, we rely on the sectoral distribution of earnings. Because local
labor markets are frictionless, each district has a single wage per efficiency unit. Hence, differences in earnings
must reflect heterogeneity in the endowment of effective units of labor.10 To measure the distribution of human
capital across districts, we follow the approach in the development accounting literature and leverage data on the
regional distribution of schooling. We assume individual human capital qi as a function of schooling si is given by
qi = exp (si ) × i , where si denotes the number of years of education,  is the annual return to schooling, and
i is an idiosyncratic shock, which we assume to be iid across districts and years and which satisfies E [i ] = 1.
To measure schooling attainment si , we classify people into four educational groups: (i) less than primary school,
(ii) primary and upper primary/middle school, (iii) secondary school, and (iv) more than secondary school. We
associate each step in the education ladder with three extra years of education, consistent with the organization of
schools in India.
    We estimate  using Mincerian regressions--see Section 5.1. Given an estimate of , we then calculate the
average amount of human capital per region as Ert [q ] = e exp( × e) r (e), where r (e) denotes the share of people
in region r with e years of education. Hence, the distribution of educational attainment across space determines the
spatial distribution of human capital. Finally, consistent with our assumption that q follows a Pareto distribution
                                                              
with lower bound q rt , we use Ert [qi ] = Ert [exp (si )] =  - 1 q rt .
    Table 2 shows why allowing for human capital differences across years, sectors, and space is important. First, the
10    In Section 7.3.2 below, we extend our model to allow for imperfect substitution of skills across sectors.



                                                                                                      16
level of schooling increased markedly between 1987 and 2011 and is itself a source of growth. Second, educational
attainment differs across sectors. That agriculture is the least skill-intensive industry and educational attainment is
highest in PS is not surprising. However, note the CS sector also employs lots of skilled individuals and is more skill
intensive than the manufacturing sector.11 Through the lens of our model, these patterns imply that the average
number of efficiency units differs across sectors, and by using earnings shares rather than employment shares, our
methodology takes such differences into account. Finally, there are large spatial differences whereby city dwellers
are much more educated than the rural population. By explicitly measuring the local supply of human capital, we
refrain from attributing these differences to differences in local TFP.

                                          Less than Primary, upper primary, Secondary                  More than
                                           primary          and middle                                 secondary
                                                Aggregate Economy (1987 - 2011)
                      1987                 66.79%             22.03%             7.99%                    3.19%
                      2011                 40.32%             30.10%            18.79%                   10.79%
                                                        By sector (2011)
                      Agriculture          53.72%             29.23%            14.45%                    2.60%
                      Manufacturing        32.63%             35.31%            20.68%                   11.39%
                      CS                   25.16%             31.99%            27.94%                   14.90%
                      PS                   17.38%             26.58%            26.29%                   29.74%
                                                     By Urbanization (2011)
                      Rural                46.97%             30.00%            16.30%                    6.84%
                      Urban                33.69%             30.30%            21.27%                   14.73%

Table 2: Educational Attainment. The table shows the distribution of the educational attainment. Wholesale,
Retail, Hotel, Restaurants, Health, and Community Service are classified as CS. Financial, Business, Transport, and
ICT Services are classified as PS. The breakdown of rural and urban districts is chosen in a way that approximately
half of the population lives in rural and urban districts.


5        Estimation: Identification and Results
With the aforementioned data at hand, we can now turn to the estimation of our model. Our approach is in
the tradition of development accounting, which has a long history in macro and development economics (see, e.g.,
Caselli (2005), Hall and Jones (1999), and Gancia et al. (2013)). Whereas these studies infer productivity at the
country-level from an aggregate production function, we estimate the entire distribution of productivity {Arst }
across sectors and space. We do so by relying on the entire equilibrium structure of our model, and hence refer to
our method as equilibrium development accounting.
    The centerpiece of our methodology is the distinction between structural parameters and local productivity.
Our model is characterized by 14 structural parameters describing preferences, technologies, and the distribution
of skills
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                        = , CS , F , CS , F ,  , , , , fO , fE ,  ,          ,         .
                                                                                     
                                      Preference parameters   Manufacturing technology Human capital

11   For ease of comparison with Figure 2, we classify CS and PS according to the NIC classification, that is, assign wholesale, retail,
     hotels, restaurants, health, and community services to CS and financial, business, transport and ICT services to PS.




                                                                   17
    In terms of local productivity, each region is characterized by a 3-tuple of regional productivity levels in agri-
culture, CS, and the goods-producing industry:

                                                    At = {ArF t , ArCSt , ArGt } .

The industry productivity ArGt in turn depends on manufacturing and PS productivity ArM t and ArP St .
   In Section 5.1, we describe how we estimate the structural parameters in . Given the parameters in , a
unique mapping exists from the equilibrium skill prices {wrt } and sectoral employment allocations {Hrst } to the
underlying productivity fundamentals in At . In Section 5.2, we describe this procedure and our estimates of At .


5.1       Estimation of Structural Parameters 
The Income Elasticity .

The crucial parameter in our analysis is the income elasticity , which determines how quickly demand shifts away
from agricultural goods as incomes rise. To estimate , we use the cross-sectional relationship between income and
expenditure shares at the household level and estimate  via indirect inference. In particular, letting F,h denote
the observed expenditure share of food of household h and eh total household spending, we estimate the following
Engel curve using the data on household expenditure:

                                                  ln F,h = r +  × ln eh + xh  + uh ,                                                    (13)

where r is a region fixed effect and xh contains household characteristics that could induce a correlation between
total spending ln eh and food shares. We then estimate  via indirect inference; that is, we estimate (13) in our
model using the estimated coefficient ^ as a moment.12
   Although  is not an explicit structural parameter in our theory, the structural parameter  and the regression
coefficient  are tightly connected. Our theory implies

                                                                                                  -
                                                                                    e
                                      ln h                   h
                                         F (e, pr ) = ln F + F                                          .
                                                                           p     G    CS
                                                                            F × pG × pCSr
                                                                             F




Hence, if F  0 (which is the case in our structural estimation), our theory implies

                                                              F G CS          
                                         ln h                                  h
                                            F (e, pr ) = ln (pF pG pCSr ) + ln F -  × ln e;


that is, the estimated income elasticity  directly coincides with the structural parameter . Note that the region-
specific price of CS, prCSt , is absorbed in the district fixed effect r in (13) and that our additional household level
                                                          h
controls xh aim to capture variation in preferences (F      ) which we abstract from in our theory.
    Table 3 reports the results of estimating (13). The first column contains our baseline specification, where we
control for a region fixed effect, a dummy for whether the household lives in an urban or rural area (within districts),
a full set of fixed effects for household size and the number of workers within the household. We cluster standard
12   To estimate (13) in our model, we randomly draw a sample of 1 million individuals from the region-specific income distribution Frt (q ),
     calculate the model-implied food shares, and then run a regression of log food share against log income and region fixed effects. We
     draw our sample in a way to replicate the relative size of each district; that is, the share of observations from district r is the same
     as observed in the data.



                                                                      18
                                                              ln food expenditure share
                               ln expenditure        -0.332      -0.318 -0.331 -0.366
                                                      (0.008)     (0.007)   (0.008)     (0.010)
                               Winsorized (2%)                       
                               Addtl. Controls                                  
                               IV                                                          
                               F-stat                                                   2093.77
                               N                      101,654     101,654   101,601     94,436
                               R2                      0.476       0.462      0.486      0.478

Table 3: Income elasticity for food. The table shows the estimated coefficient  of the regression (13). In
all specifications, we control for region fixed effects, an urban/rural dummy, a full set of fixed effects for household
size, and the number of workers within the household. In column 2, we topcode household expenditure at the
98% quantile. In column 3, we control for the type of the household, the religion, the social class and whether
the household receives rationing cards. In column 4, we instrument household expenditure with a set of three-digit
occupation fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the district level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1


errors at the region level to account for the correlation spending shares through regional prices. We estimate an
empirical elasticity of 0.332 that is precisely estimated.
    In the remaining columns of Table 3, we report additional specifications to show the robustness of this esti-
mate. In column 2, we winsorize the expenditure variable ln eh at the top 2% level to limit the importance of
measurement error. In column 3, we control for additional household-level controls. In particular, we control non-
parametrically for differences in the household type, that is, whether the household is self-employed (in agriculture
or non-agriculture), a regular wage earner or a casual laborer (in agriculture or non-agriculture), the household's
religion, and social group and whether the household is eligible to purchase subsidised food grain from the Indian
government. In both specifications, the estimate is indistinguishable from our baseline estimate.
    In column 4, we present the results from an IV specification. We do so to address concerns about measurement
error in ln eh that would make our estimate for  downward biased. We instrument total expenditure with a full
set of three-digit occupation fixed effects.13 Expectedly, these fixed effects strongly predict total expenditure as
evidenced by the large F-statistic. The resulting estimate is slightly larger but quantitatively very similar to the
OLS specifications reported in columns 1 - 3. In Section B-5 in the Appendix, we report additional specifications and
also show the constant elasticity between expenditure and the expenditure share on food is a good approximation
for a large part of the expenditure distribution.
    For our baseline results we take an empirical elasticity of -0.33 as our target moment. In Section 7, we show
that our results are robust to other choices for  in line with the results reported in Table 3.

Value Added vs. Final Expenditure To link the structural parameter in our theory () to these empirical
estimates, note that our theory specifies consumers' preferences over sectoral value added, whereas the data on
household expenditure pertain to final expenditure. As stressed in Herrendorf et al. (2013), the structural parameters
of the demand system based on final goods differ from the one based on value added. Although true in general,
this is fortunately less of a concern for the elasticity parameter , the only parameter we estimate from the data on
expenditure shares.
13   The expenditure survey assign a unique occupation to each household by choosing the occupation of the household member with the
     highest earnings.


                                                                  19
   To see this formally, suppose the final-good demand system takes the form
                                                                                 -F E
                                                                        e
                                    F
                                    s
                                      E           FE
                                        (e, q ) = s  + FE 
                                                      ~s                 F E
                                                                                            ,
                                                                           j
                                                                      j qj


where qj denotes the price of the final good of sector j , and we use the superscript "F E " to highlight that the
respective structural parameters correspond to the final-expenditure demand system. Furthermore, suppose a unit
of the final good in sector s is produced with a Cobb-Douglas production function of sectoral value added:

                                             FE                   VA        js
                                            ys  =                yjs             .                               (14)
                                                    j (A,CS,G)


Hence, the matrix [js ]js describes the input-output matrix of the economy.
   As we show in Section B-5 in the Appendix, these assumptions imply that the value-added share of sector s is
                                                                                 -F E
                                                                  e
                                 V
                                 s
                                   A   VA
                                     = s  + VA
                                           ~s  ×                    VA
                                                                                        ,
                                                               pV A j
                                                           j    j

         VA             FE          VA            FE
where s      =    j js j    and   ~s    =   j js ~j  . Hence, the implied value-added demand system is exactly
consistent with our theory. It is of the PIGL form and the final-good expenditure elasticity F E coincides with the
                                                                                  VA         VA
value-added expenditure elasticity . This is different for the other parameters j     and   ~j  , both of which are
                                                                               FE        FE
expenditure-share weighted averages of the final-good structural parameters j and       ~j . Hence, as stressed by
Herrendorf et al. (2013), in general, knowledge of the entire input-output structure [js ]js is required to identify
the parameters of the value-added demand system. This, however, is not the case for the expenditure elasticity ,
which is the only parameter we estimate from the data on final-good expenditure.
   In Section B-5 in the Appendix, we show that this intuition is more general than for the particular case of
Cobb-Douglas aggregation embedded in (14) and extend this argument for a general CES production function.


Other Preference Parameters CS , F , CS , F and  .

The market-level demand system depends on the aggregate preference parameters CS and F , which are in turn
related to the primitive microlevel preference parameters ~CS and  ~F ­cf. equation (5). We estimate s directly from
                                                     h
the data and infer the structural micro parameters s given an estimate of the inequality parameter  . Identifying
  h
s   separately from s is only required to quantify the welfare consequences of service-led growth, not to estimate
the model.
    Equation (4) shows the taste shifters CS and F determine sectoral spending and employment when holding
income and prices constant. In Section A-3 in the Appendix, we prove the taste shifter for CS CS is not separately
identified from the productivity in CS ArCSt . Hence, without loss of generality, we can normalize it to -1. The taste
shifter for agricultural products, F , can then be directly identified from the aggregate agricultural employment
share in a given year. We opt to match it in the year 1987. Doing so yields F = 1.277. Given the normalization
of CS = -1, M = - (F + CS ) = -0.277. Hence, manufacturing products are also luxury goods, becuase their
expenditure share is increasing in income. However, their income elasticity is below the one for CS.



                                                          20
                                Parameter      Target                                         Value
                                                      Preference parameters
                                               Engel curve                                     0.34
                                   F           Agricultural spending share US                  0.01
                                   CS          Agricultural Employment share 2011              0.69
                                   F           Agricultural Employment share 1987              1.28
                                   CS          Normalization                                    -1
                                               Set exogenously                                   3
                                                Production function parameters
                                               Tail of the employment distribution              1.42
                                               Employment share of lawyers in the US             0.7
                                               Profit share                                    0.158
                                    fO         Normalization                                      1
                                    fE         Normalization                                    0.11
                                               Normalization                                      1
                                                         Skill parameters
                                               Mincerian schooling returns                     0.056
                                               Earnings distribution within regions              3

Table 4: Structural Parameters. The table summarizes the estimated structural parameters. The details of
the estimation are discussed in the text.


    To identify the share parameters CS and F , recall that h                     h                       h
                                                               F (e, p) > lime F (e, p) = F and that CS (e, p) <
lime h    CS (e, p) = CS . Hence, the expenditure share on food (CS) approaches F (CS ) from above (below) as
income increases. In the US, which we take an example of a rich economy, where nonhomothetic demand is less
important, the agricultural employment share is about 1%. Hence, we take F = 0.01. For CS , we follow a similar
strategy as for F and match the aggregate sectoral employment shares in a given year. Given our interest in the
long-run growth experience of India, we opt to match sectoral employment in 2011, which implies CS = 0.69.14
Finally, we set the inter-regional trade elasticity  to a consensus estimate in the literature and assume  = 3.

Skill Parameters  and .

Our specification of skills qi = exp(si )i implies log earnings of individual i in region r at time t, yirt are given
by the usual Mincerian regression ln yirt = ln wrt + si + ln i . Hence, we can estimate  from the within-region
variation between earnings and education, which we can measure from the NSS data. We estimate an average
annual rate of return of 5.6%. Although this estimate is on the lower end of standard Mincerian regressions, recall
that we are using data on consumption rather than income. In Section 7, we discuss the robustness of our results
with respect to the Mincerian estimate.
   We also estimate the tail parameter of the skill distribution  . This parameter does not affect the equilibrium
conditions given that we estimate the aggregate preference parameter s directly. Hence, our estimate of regional
productivity does not depend on the value of zeta. An estimate of  is only required once we want to calculate
                                                                                                               q wr   
welfare. To estimate  , recall that the distribution of income in region r is given by Gr (y ) = 1 -            r
                                                                                                                 y       , implying
ln (1 - Gr (y )) =  ln q r wr -  ln y . We therefore estimate  from a cross-sectional regression ln (1 - Gr (yi )) =
14   Our model implies regional employment shares in CS are bounded by CS from above. As we discuss in more detail in Section B-2.4
     in the Appendix, our Indian data contains seven districts that feature employment shares in CS that exceed CS . Because these
     districts are very small and account for less than 1% of employment, we drop them from our analysis.


                                                                 21
r +  ln yi + uir , where r is a district fixed effect and {yi } is a grid of the income distribution. In practice, we pick
a grid of 200 points and consider a support of regional incomes above the median, because the Pareto distribution
is a better fit to the left tail of the income distribution. This procedure yields an estimate of   2 (see Appendix
Section B-7).

Technology parameters: , , , fO , fE , and .

To decompose ArG into the ArM and ArP S , we need to know the underlying parameters of the industrial sector.
Proposition 1 establishes that all allocations only depend on ArP St × fO /. Hence, the parameters  and fO are
not separately identified from ArP St , and we normalize fO =  = 1. This normalization entails no loss of generality,
because the scale factor fO  has no bearing on any of our results. Similarly, the entry cost fE is not separately
identified from the level of productivity ArM t as long as some firms are "discarded" after their efficiency draw z
is observed, that is, condition (11) is satisfied. We therefore chose fE to satisfy (11). This leaves us with three
parameters: ,  , and .
    We identify the tail of the productivity distribution  from the employment distribution of the EC. As we
show in detail in Section B-8 in the Appendix, our model implies that, as for the distribution of productivity, the
distribution of employment for large firms is also Pareto with shape . We find an estimate of  = 1.42, which is
very precisely estimated.
    We then pick  and  to jointly match a profit share of 10% and the long-run share of PS workers within the
industrial sector. Consider a situation in which AP S becomes large. Our model implies limAP S  HP S /HG =  .
In the US, PS account for about 28% of employment and production workers for 12%. This observation suggests
        0.28
 = 0.28+0   .12 = 0.7. Given  and  , the parameter  is tied to the profit share because  +  determines the returns
to scale and hence the share accruing to the fixed factor. In particular, our model implies the profit share equals
(1 -  -  )/. For  = 0.7 and  = 1.42, a profit rate of 10% requires that  = 0.158.


The Demand for Consumer Services: Direct Evidence
In Table 3, we used data on food shares to estimate the income elasticity . In principle, we could use data on the
expenditure share of CS. We choose food expenditures for two reasons. First, food expenditures might be better
measured if these expenditures are more salient. Second, as argued above, the log-linear specification in (13) is
particularly informative about  if s is small, because our theory then exactly implies a log-linear relationship,
and the distinction between final expenditure and value added becomes less important. Because CS are a luxury,
F  0 but CS > 0.
    Reassuringly, our estimated model yields a nontargeted expenditure elasticity for CS that is broadly in line
with the empirical evidence. Specifically, we ran--in the model and in the data--the same specification as in (13)
except that we used households expenditure share on CS, ln CS,h , as the dependent variable. We follow the official
classification of the NSS expenditure module to assign expenditures to CS. These expenditures include, for example,
domestic servants, barber shops, or tailor services. We also add entertainment expenses such as movie theaters,
club fees, and cable TV. Again, we refer to Section B-1.5 in the Appendix for the exact list of expenses.
    In Table 5, we report the estimates using the Indian expenditure data. The structure of the table is exactly the
same as in Table 3 above; that is, in column 2, we winsorize the data; in column 3, we control for additional household
characteristics; and in column 4, we report the IV specification, where we instrument total household expenditure
with three-digit occupation dummies. Again, we cluster standard errors at the district level. Empirically, CS are


                                                           22
                                                         ln consumer service expenditure share
                                 ln expenditure        0.268 0.270 0.214 0.571
                                                        (0.022)   (0.021)     (0.021)   (0.031)
                                 Winsorized (2%)                     
                                 Addtl. Controls                                 
                                 IV                                                        
                                 F-stat                                                 722.50
                                 N                     100,383 100,383 100,334          93,571
                                 R2                      0.240     0.240       0.250     0.213

Table 5: Income elasticity for consumer services. The table shows the estimated income elasticity for the
CS expenditure share (see (13)). In all specifications, we control for region fixed effects, an urban/rural dummy, a
full set of fixed effects for household size and the number of workers within the household. In column 2, we topcode
household expenditure at the 98% quantile. In column 3, we control for the type of household, the religion, the
social class, and whether the household receives rationing cards. In column 4, we instrument household expenditure
with a set of three-digit occupation fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the district level in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


indeed luxuries, because their spending shares are increasing in income. Quantitatively, this elasticity is estimated
to be between between 0.25 and 0.3 for the OLS specification and around 0.55 in the IV case. When we estimate
this specification in our model, we estimate a coefficient of about 0.4. Hence, even though we do not use the data
on CS spending to estimate the model, the implied elasticities are consistent with what we see in the household
data.
    Our model also implies the price of CS varies across space and reflects differences in wages wr and CS productivity
ArCS . In particular, conditional on total expenditure ln eh , CS shares are predicted to be large in regions where
prices are low, that is, where ArCS is large relative to the local wage. In the context of the regression in Table 5,
this variation is captured by the regional fixed effects.
    In Figure 6, we plot the correlation between our estimates of regional fixed effects and the regional urbanization
rate. To visualize the relative size of districts, the size of the markers reflects the size of the population. Figure
6 shows a robust positive relationship: cities are particularly productive in CS (relative to the prevailing wage).
As we show below, we find the same qualitative patterns in our structural analysis even though we do not use the
information from the expenditure data.

   Our estimated demand system also delivers estimates of the elasticity of substitution that are quantitatively
broadly consistent with findings in the literature. For the class of PIGL preferences, the elasticity of substitution is
not a structural parameter but depends on relative prices and total expenditure.15 As we show in detail in Section
B-6 in the Appendix, we find services and goods are complements, with an average elasticity of substitution of 0.7.
By contrast, food and CS are, on average, substitutes with a substitution elasticity of around 1.3.


5.2       Estimation of Productivity Fundamentals At
Given the structural parameter vector , data on local wages and sectoral employment allocations as well as
time-series data on relative prices and aggregate income, the equilibrium conditions uniquely identify a set of local
15                                                                                               (s -s )(k -k )
     The Allen Uzawa elasticity of substitution between goods s and k is given by EOSsk = 1 -        s k
                                                                                                                .   See Section A-4 in the
     Appendix.




                                                                  23
                                                   .5
                                        Regional Fixed Effects
                                           -.5     -1       0

                                                                 0         .2           .4             .6         .8        1
                                                                                        Urbanization rate




Figure 6: Urbanization and Regional Fixed Effects of Consumer Service Spending. The figures
displays the correlation with the region fixed effects stemming from Table 5 (column 1) against the urbanization
rate.


productivity fundamentals At . We refer to Section A-3 in the Appendix for details, but we describe the main
intuition here. Consider first the identification of ArCSt , which we discussed in Section 3.4. Equation (9) implies
we can uniquely solve for ArCSt as


                                                                                1  1
                                                                                CS      F        G
                                      (-CS )                                                                  1-CS              -1
                         ArCSt =                                                       pF CS pGCS Ert [q ] × wrt                 CS   .   (15)
                                     CS - HH
                                           rCSt
                                             rt



    Controlling for the level of human capital Ert [q ] and the equilibrium factor price wrt , CS productivity is
increasing in the observed employment share HH         . Conversely, holding the employment share HH
                                                   rCSt 16
                                                    rt
                                                                                                         rCSt
                                                                                                          rt
                                                                                                              constant,
CS productivity ArCSt is decreasing in both human capital and factor prices. Structurally decomposing the observed
variation in employment shares into the part that is service led (i.e., ArCSt ) versus the part that is service biased
                                          1-CS
because of income effects (i.e. Ert [q ] wrt   ) is a key aspect of our equilibrium accounting methodology.
    The procedure to estimate productivity in tradable sectors is different. Equation (7) implies relative productivity
across two locations is given by
                                                                                 1               
                                      Ars                            Hrs         -1
                                                                                       wr        -1
                                          =                                                                 for s = F, G.                 (16)
                                      Ajs                            Hjs               wj

Hence, sectoral productivity differences can be inferred from relative skill prices and relative factor inputs (in
units of human capital) given the elasticity of substitution  . No other preference parameters are involved in this
estimation, because food and industrial goods are tradable so that local demand is dissociated from local income.
    Although we can use (16) to estimate relative sectoral productivity, we still need additional restrictions to
estimate the level of productivity in agriculture and industry. As we show in the Appendix, we can exploit the
time-series data on the relative price of food (relative to goods) and on aggregate GDP.17
16   Recall that if CS are a luxury, CS < 0 and HH
                                                 rCSt
                                                      < CS .
                                                  rt
17   We measure GDP in terms of the numeraire industrial good. Because of nonhomothetic preferences, we cannot define a standard



                                                                                           24
   To finally decompose our estimates of productivity in the goods-producing sector ArGt into the manufacturing
(ArM ) and PS (ArP S ) component, we rely on the regional employment share in PS. Specifically, equation (12) in
Proposition 1 shows that--given ,  , and --we can infer  (ArP S ) (and hence ArP S ) from the observed relative
employment share of PS relative to manufacturing.18
    This discussion underscores the sense in which our methodology is an accounting procedure: for given parameters,
we estimate sectoral productivity that exactly rationalizes the observed data on wages and sectoral factor inputs
as equilibrium outcomes. Our identification strategy leverages the recursive structure of Proposition 1: we can
identify productivity in agriculture, CS, and the industrial sector independently of the particular microstructure of
the industrial sector. Such structure is only required to decompose the overall productivity of the industrial sector
into the part stemming from PS and the part stemming from manufacturing workers.

             Panel a: Agriculture                              Panel b: Consumer Services                          Panel c: Industry
   6




                                                                                                         6
                                                     6
   4




                                                                                                         4
                                                     4
                                                  ln ACS




                                                                                                       ln AG
 ln AF
   2




                                                                                                          2
                                                  2
   0




                                                                                                         0
                                                     0
   -2




                                                                                                         -2
                                                     -2




         0    .2    .4            .6     .8   1            0       .2    .4            .6     .8   1           0   .2   .4            .6     .8   1
                     Urbanization Rate                                    Urbanization Rate                              Urbanization Rate




Figure 7: Estimated Sectoral Productivities. The figure shows a bin scatter plot of the estimated sectoral
labor productivities in agriculture, CS, and industry across urbanization-rate bins. Each plot is constructed by
pooling the estimates for 1987 and 2011 after absorbing year effects.

    In Figure 7, we summarize the main cross-sectional pattern of our productivity estimates by displaying a bin
scatter plot of the (logarithm of the) estimated labor productivities in the agricultural, industrial, and CS sector
as functions of the urbanization rate. The relationship between productivity and urbanization is increasing for CS
(Panel (b)) and in the industrial sector (Panel (c)). For agriculture, the relationship is relatively flat and slightly
hump shaped. The declining portion corresponding to districts with an urbanization rate above 50% likely reflects
the scarcity of land (a factor of production from which we abstract) in urban areas.
    Remarkably, the productivity dispersion and its correlation with urbanization is strongest in the CS sector.
Hence, the large employment share of CS in urbanized districts is not only a consequence of high wages (the Baumol
effect) or of an abundance of human capital, but also of high CS productivity relative to rural areas. Qualitatively,
this pattern is consistent with the estimated fixed effects in Figure 6 stemming from the CS-expenditure data:
conditional on income, individuals in cities spend a larger share of their resources on CS.
    Among the tradable goods, productivity is significantly more dispersed in the industrial than in the agricultural
sector. To understand why, note a district's relative productivity is identified by its sectoral earning share relative
   consumption price index. For comparison, we calculated wage growth for a fictitious agent endowed with the median wage and living
   in a district in which the supply of CS is at the median level. Based on the consumption basket of such an individual in 1987 and
   2011, we calculated real wage growth using a Laspeyres and a Paasche index. The resulting real wage growth in the two cases is 1.82
   and 4.85, respectively. Our calibration yields a wage growth factor of 2.60, which is in between.
18 Our identification relies on the nonhomothetic factor demand functions. If  = 0, equation (12) implies  (A
                                                                                                              P S ) = 0 irrespective of
   AP S and that the PS employment share would be constant and equal to  . Intuitively, with a Cobb-Douglas technology, the relative
   employment and expenditure shares would be independent of productivity. Moreover, AM and AP S would both be factor neutral,
                                                          -- 
   and the aggregate TFP AG would only depend on A1     M      AP S . Hence, AM and AP S could not be independently identified.


                                                                                25
                                                                    Sectoral productivity growth
                                                          10th    25th 50th 75th 90th Aggregate
                                                                         Service-led growth
                         Consumer Services (grCS )        -1.4     0.7    3.4     8.1   14.0     5.0
                                                                       Growth in other sectors
                         Agriculture (grF )               0.02     1.1    2.1     3.1    4.0     2.0
                         Industry (grG )                  0.7      2.1    3.3     4.6    5.9     3.5

Table 6: Regional distribution of sectoral productivity growth. The table reports different moments
of the distribution of growth rates in the different industries between 1987 and 2011. These growth rates are
                                         1
annualized and calculated as grs = 2011-   1987 (ln Ars2011 - ln Ars1987 ). Columns 1 - 5 report different quantiles.
The "Aggregate" column reports the population-weighted average. All distributions are truncated at the top and
bottom 3%.



to its skill price (see (16)). The "compressed" productivity distribution in agriculture reflects the observation that
wages are negatively correlated with the employment share of agriculture across districts. By contrast, wages are
positively correlated with the employment share of industry, implying a wider productivity dispersion.

6       The Importance of Service Led Growth
We now turn to our main question of interest: Was Indian growth service led? If so, did productivity growth in the
provision of CS play a quantitatively important role for rising living standards and the structural transformation
since 1987?
    To answer these questions, we first use our sectoral productivity estimates Arst and calculate sectoral produc-
tivity growth between 1987 and 2011 for each district. We summarize these distributions of annualized productivity
growth in Table 6. In the first row, we focus on CS-productivity growth; in the remaining rows, we report the
distributions of growth rates in the tradable sectors. Two salient facts emerge. First and foremost, productivity in
the CS sector grew in the majority of districts. Hence, the rise in CS employment was not merely driven by changes
in demand driven by rising incomes or human-capital accumulation. Second, productivity growth was unequal
across space and particularly so in the CS sector.19
    To quantify the macroeconomic impact of these growth estimates reported in Table 6, we compute counter-
factual equilibria where we set the respective sector's productivity growth to zero in all districts. The resulting
changes in wages and employment allocations thus reflect the effect of sectoral productivity growth holding constant
productivity growth in all other sectors. Our model then allows us to compute the welfare effects for consumers and
how these effects vary across space and the income-distribution ladder. As we shall see in Section 6.1, our analysis
uncovers a great deal of heterogeneity in both dimensions. In addition, we can also compute the implications for
the structural transformation, and we do so in Section 6.2.


6.1       The Welfare Implications of Service Led Growth
To measure changes in welfare, we calculate equivalent variations relative to the status quo in 2011. We focus on
three layers of heterogeneity: (i) across individuals differentiated by income, (ii) across districts differentiated by
19   To account for measurement error, we winsorize the top and bottom 3% of the estimated productivity distributions. The details are
     discussed in the Appendix, where we also report robustness results to these choices (see Section B-9).



                                                                  26
their rate of urbanization, and (iii) for the aggregate Indian economy.
    As already discussed in Section 3.2 above, the PIGL demand system allows us to capture such heterogeneous
welfare impacts in a tractable way. More specifically, suppose we want to compare the two vectors of wages and
prices {wr , pr }r and wr CF
                             , pCF
                                r   r
                                      , where CF stands for counterfactual. Let  h wr   CF
                                                                                            , pCF
                                                                                               r |pr , q be the income
                                                                                                            CF
individual h with skill level q facing prices pr requires to achieve the same level of utility as under wr     , pCF
                                                                                                                  r  r
                                                                                                                       .
                                                      h
Using the indirect utility function V given in (2),  is implicitly defined by

                                          V ( h wr
                                                 CF
                                                    , pCF                      CF   CF
                                                       r |pr , q , pr ) = V (qwr , pr ).                                                   (17)

Thus, we can directly calculate the welfare-equivalent income  h from wr        CF
                                                                                   , pCF
                                                                                      r , pr r for each level of human
capital q . In a similar vein, we can calculate the utilitarian welfare consequences at the district level. Exploiting
the aggregation result from Section 3.2, the appropriate representative agent in district r facing prices pr would
                                                 CF
require a level of regional spending power  wr      , pCF
                                                       r |pr , Er [q ] defined by

                                          CF
                                      U  wr  , pCF                                CF   CF
                                                r |pr , Er [q ] , pr = U (Er [q ]wr , pr ),                                                (18)

where U is defined in (6).20
  Given  h and  defined in (17) and (18), we calculate the respective welfare changes relative to 2011 as



                     h                h wr
                                         CF
                                            , pCF
                                               r |pr , q
                                                                                         CF
                                                                                        wr  , pCF
                                                                                                r |pr , Er [q ]
                    Wr (q )                              -1         and      Wr                                 - 1.                       (19)
                                          qwr,2011                                         Er [q ]wr2011

             h
Hence, Wr      (q ) is the change in income that an individual with human capital q living in district r in 2011 would
                                                                                                     h
require to achieve the same level of utility in the counterfactual allocation. If, for example, Wr     (q ) = -20%, the
consumer would be indifferent between giving up 20% of her income in 2011 and an allocation in which productivity
in a particular sector did not grow between 1987 and 2011. Similarly, Wr is the change in regional income required
to achieve the same utilitarian welfare in district r.
    Because these expressions vary across individuals and locations, they allow us to quantify the unequal effects of
sectoral productivity growth. To gauge the welfare consequences at the aggregate level, we also report the change
in aggregate welfare W , which we compute as

                                       CF
                                 r    wr  , pCF
                                              r |pr , Er [q ] Lr 2011                           Er [q ]wr2011 Lr2011
                    W =                                               -1=              Wr                                .
                                       r Er [q ]wr 2011 Lr 2011                    r            r Er [q ]wr 2011 Lr 2011


Results: Sources of Welfare Growth in India (1987 - 2011)

We now set to zero--for each sector--the distribution of productivity growth since 1987 shown in Table 6, recalculate
the equilibrium, and then use the expressions above to calculate the implied welfare changes at the aggregate (W ),
20   Using equations (17) and (2) and (18) and (6) we get that
                                                                                                                     1/
                                                                       CF
                                                                     qwr                                      pCF
                           h      CF
                                 wr  , pCF |pr , q      =                    s  -         p s            ~s ln rs
                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                     
                                        r                             pCF                  rs                        
                                                                       rs                                      prs
                                                                      prs

     The expression for the aggregate variation  wr   CF , pCF |p , E [q ] differs only in two ways: it uses E [q ] instead of q and is evaluated
                                                            r    r   r                                        r
     using the scaled preference parameter s  U in lieu of the primitive parameter   ~s .


                                                                        27
                                                                 Sources of Growth in India (1987-2011)
                                                                                                             2011
                                                      0



                                                     -10



                                                     -20



                                  Welfare Loss (%)   -30




                                                                                                             1987
                                                     -64

                                                           Agriculture   Cons. Serv.   Industry   Human Capital




Figure 8: Aggregate Welfare Effects. The figure displays the average percentage welfare losses W asso-
ciated with counterfactually setting productivity in agriculture, CS, and industry, as well as the level of human
capital, to their respective levels in 1987 in all Indian districts. For comparison, the figure also shows the welfare
loss of resetting all productivities and human capital to their 1987 level.

                                 h
regional (Wr ), and individual (Wr (q )) level.

Aggregate Effects. We first discuss the aggregate effects. Figure 8, which displays the change in aggregate
welfare attributable to the different sectors, displays the first important results of our analysis: a substantial part
of economic development in India since 1987 was indeed service led. On average, the Indian population would have
been willing to reduce their income in 2011 by 26% in lieu of giving up the observed productivity growth originating
in the CS sector. To put this number into perspective, the equivalent variation of the entirety of Indian income
growth since 1987 is 64%. Hence, productivity growth in the CS sector accounts for roughly one third of the entire
increase in economic well-being.
    Figure 8 also shows that agricultural productivity was another important source of welfare improvement between
1987 and 2011. The salience of agriculture is hardly surprising given its large employment share in India. The
relatively small welfare effects of productivity growth in the industrial sector is more surprising. The corresponding
equivalent variation of productivity growth amounts to about 17%.21 Hence, we find service-led growth has a larger
welfare effect than productivity growth in the industrial sector. Finally, for comparison, we also report the welfare
consequences of human-capital accumulation. At least as measured in the quantity of schooling, these welfare gains
are relatively modest, namely a mere 9% of 2011 income.
    In sum, Figure 8 shows service-led growth played an important role for economic development in India since
1987. In Section 7, we scrutinize this finding through a battery of sensitivity checks and show that the importance
of service-led growth is a robust result.

Heterogeneous Effects. A centerpiece of our contribution is the quantification of the unequal effects of economic
growth. Our analysis captures this inequality in two ways. First, as shown in Table 6, we estimate that regions
differed in the productivity growth they experienced since 1987. Second, the non-homothetic nature of preferences
21   We return below to the decomposition of the effects within the industrial sector--manufacturing versus PS.


                                                                                  28
                            Panel a: Heterogeneity Across Districts                                                                   Panel b: Heterogeneity Across the Income Ladder
                                                                                                                       2011                                                                                                                       2011
                       0                                                                                                                               0




                      -10                                                                                                                             -10
   Welfare Loss (%)




                                                                                                                                   Welfare Loss (%)
                      -20                                                                                                                             -20




                      -30                                                                                                                             -30




                      -40                                                                                                                             -40

                             1st 2nd 3rd 4th   5th   1st 2nd 3rd 4th   5th   1st 2nd 3rd 4th   5th   1st 2nd 3rd 4th   5th                                  10 25 50 75 90 95 99   10 25 50 75 90 95 99   10 25 50 75 90 95 99   10 25 50 75 90 95 99

                              Agriculture             Cons. Serv.               Industry             Human Capital                                            Agriculture           Cons. Serv.               Industry           Human Capital



Figure 9: The Heterogeneous Welfare Impact of Service-Led Growth. The figure displays the average
percentage welfare losses associated with counterfactually setting productivity in agriculture, CS, and industry, as
well as human capital, at the respective 1987 level, broken down by urbanization quintile in 2011 (Panel (a)) and
by the 10th, 20th, 50th, 75th, 90th, 95th, and 99th percentile of the income distribution in 2011 (Panel (b)).


implies consumers on different levels of the income ladder care differently about sectoral productivity growth:
growth in CS and industrial goods is particularly beneficial for the rich, whereas growth in the agricultural sector
mostly benefits the poor. Using the notation in (19), the former is mostly reflected in the regional welfare change
                                                                             h
Wr , the latter mostly in the welfare change at the individual level Wr        (q ).
    We first look at the spatial dimension and group districts by quintiles of the urbanization rate in 2011. We then
calculate the (income-weighted) average welfare changes Wr within each urbanization quintile. These results are
shown in the left panel of Figure 9.
    The welfare consequences of productivity growth vary widely across space. Unsurprisingly, agricultural produc-
tivity growth is pro-rural. On average, households in the lowest quintile of urbanization are prepared to sacrifice
24% of their 2011 income to avoid going back to the 1987 productivity level in agriculture. This positive welfare
change declines sharply in the top quintile, where productivity growth in agriculture is only worth 16% of the 2011
income. By contrast, productivity growth in CS and the industrial sector were decidedly pro-urban. This pattern
is most pronounced for the CS sector whose productivity growth is worth 42% of the 2011 income for the most
urbanized quintile.
    Although these differences in the spatial incidence of sectoral productivity growth are partly driven by differences
in productivity growth, they also reflect differences in income distribution. Because the population of cities is, on
average, richer, their welfare is particularly reliant on the price of CS. The right panel of Figure 9 decomposes the
welfare effects across the Indian income distribution. We focus on the 10th, 20th, 50th, 75th, 90th, 95th, and 99th
percentiles. As expected, the benefits of productivity growth in CS and (to a lesser extent) industry are sharply
increasing in income, whereas the opposite is true for agriculture. Interestingly, the welfare change for the top
99% attributable to CS productivity growth is smaller than for the average of the top quintile of the urbanization
distribution, because not all the rich people live in cities.
    In summary, the welfare effects of growth are heavily skewed. In urban areas and for rich households, the
standards of living grew mostly because of productivity growth in CS and--to a lesser extent--in the industrial



                                                                                                                              29
sector. By contrast, technical progress in agriculture is the main source of welfare gains for the poor, living in rural
districts.

Decomposing the Effects of Productivity Growth within the Industrial Sector.
    We have so far presented the welfare consequences of resetting productivity in the industrial sector to its 1987
level. As highlighted in Proposition 1, in our model, industrial productivity is not a primitive but is determined by
the productivity of the manufacturing and the PS sector, and we can decompose the effect of industrial productivity
growth into that of the two sectors. As we show in more detail in Section B-10 in the Appendix, when we implement
this decomposition, we find productivity growth in the manufacturing sector accounts for the vast majority of the
welfare impact of industrial growth. In our baseline calibration, productivity growth originating in the PS sector
plays a minor role and accounts for less than 5% of the aggregate welfare gain of industrial productivity growth.
    Our methodology infers a small role for PS productivity for two reasons. First, in the Indian micro data, the
PS employment share is relatively small. Hence, productivity growth originating in that sector tends to have a
quantitatively small effect. We expect this result to be different in more advanced economies, where PS play a
quantitatively more important role (Eckert et al., 2020). Second, the decomposition depends on the parameters of
the production function, in particular,  , which (see equation (10)) governs the importance of PS as an input of
production and determines the share of PS workers in the long run.
    Our results are robust with respect to both of these concerns. First, in Section 7.2, we explicitly address
the concern that our methodology underestimates the employment share in PS, given the observation of a fast
development in service industries such as ICT and show all our results are qualitatively robust to reasonable
measurement choices that give a more prominent role for PS employment. Second, in Section B-10 in the Appendix,
we study the extent to which our results depend on different calibrations of the production function, in particular,
 . The effect of PS productivity growth remains small and accounts for at most one fifth of growth in the industrial
sector.


6.2       Service Led Growth and Structural Change
Sectoral productivity growth is not only the driver of welfare growth, but is also at the heart of the sectoral
reallocation of employment, that is, the structural transformation. We report these employment effects in Figure
10. Each of the three panels focuses on one sector and depicts the counterfactual sectoral employment share if
productivity growth in agriculture (green bars), CS (orange bars), and the industrial sector (blue bars) had been
zero since 1987. The dashed horizontal lines show the actual employment share in 1987 and 2011, for reference.22
    Figure 10 has a clear message: productivity growth in CS was responsible for the largest part of the observed
structural transformation. As seen in the left panel, in the absence of productivity growth in CS, the agricultural
employment share would have been 60% instead of 50%. Hence, CS productivity growth accounts for more than
half of the decline in agricultural employment between 1987 and 2011. The other panels show that employment in
both CS and industry would have been lower if productivity had not grown in the CS sector.
    Still, Figure 10 highlights an important role for service-biased growth: even in the absence of productivity growth
in the CS sector, the employment share of CS would have grown by five percentage points between 1987 and 2011.
However, its expansion would have been less spectacular than observed in the data.
    The reason productivity in CS markedly affects agricultural employment is the following. In the absence of
productivity growth, Indian consumers would be poorer and CS would be relatively more expensive. Given our
22   The figure shows results for employment in effective units of labor, which we label employment with a slight abuse of terminology.


                                                                    30
                                                      2011




 Panel a: Agricultural Employment                                       Panel c: CS Employment                                 Panel b: Industrial Employment
 .72




                                                             .4




                                                                                                                         .2
       Empl. share in 1987




                                                             .35
                                                                                                                                                                               2011
 .64




                                                                   Empl. share in 2011
                                                                                                                  2011




                                                                                                                         .18
                                                                                                                                Empl. share in 2011




                                                             .3
 .56




                                                             .25
       Empl. share in 2011




                                                                                                                         .16
 .48




                                                                                                                                Empl. share in 1987




                                                             .2
                                                                   Empl. share in 1987




                                                             .15




                                                                                                                         .14
 .4




           Agriculture       Cons. Serv.   Industry                    Agriculture       Cons. Serv.   Industry                     Agriculture       Cons. Serv.   Industry




Figure 10: Sectoral Productivity Growth and Structural Change. Each panel in the figure shows the
counterfactual employment shares in the one sector corresponding to setting the productivity in agriculture, CS, and
industry (i.e., manufacturing and PS) at their respective 1987 levels. The dashed horizontal lines show employment
in 1987 and 2011, for reference.


estimated demand system, both forces push toward an increase in the demand for agricultural goods. The income
effect increases agricultural demand because food is a necessity. The substitution effect complements this force
because we estimate food and CS to be slight substitutes.
    By contrast, productivity growth in agriculture (green bars) appears to have marginally increased employment
in agriculture and slowed down employment growth in industry and CS. This finding runs against the view that
productivity growth in agriculture is a precondition for industrialization. It is instead in line with the findings of
Foster and Rosenzweig (2004) on the effects of the Green Revolution and those of Kelly et al. (2020), who document
a negative effect of agricultural productivity on the Industrial revolution across British regions.

    In conclusion, service-led growth explains the lion's share of India's structural transformation between 1987
and 2011. Not only would India's consumers be substantially worse off in welfare terms, but India would also still
resemble a much more agricultural economy, with industrial and service employment playing a less important role.



7        Robustness
In this section, we perform a robustness analysis of our results. We focus on the results concerning welfare reported
in Figures 8 and 9.23 We focus on three aspects. First, in Section 7.1, we study the sensitivity of the results to
changes in the structural parameters. Next, in Section 7.2, we address some measurement issues. Finally, in Section
7.3, we discuss alternative modeling choices.


7.1          Sensitivity to Structural Parameters
Consider, first, the parameters governing preferences and skills. On the preference side, we focus on the asymptotic
expenditure share on food F and the income elasticity .24 For the distribution of skills, we focus on the Mincerian
returns  and the tail parameter of the skill distribution  . All results are based on re-estimating the entire model.
23   The results for the structural transformation are available upon request.
24   The other parameters F and CS are point identified in our theory.




                                                                                             31
        Panel a: Long-Run Share of Agriculture F                                                                                     Panel b: Income Elasticity 
                               -10                                                                                          -10

                                                                                                                                                                        Consumer Services


                                                                         Industry
                                                                                                                                                                                    Industry




                                                                                                         Welfare Loss (%)
                                                                                                                            -20
            Welfare Loss (%)




                               -20                                       Agriculture
                                                                                                                                                                                  Agriculture

                                                                         Consumer Services


                               -30                                                                                          -30




                               -40                                                                                          -40
                                      0.01      0.02              0.03                 0.04                                    0.2          0.3         0.4         0.5              0.6          0.7


                                                       F




                                 Panel c: Return to Education                                                                        Panel d: Skill distribution 
                               -10                                                                                          -10




                                                                           Industry

                                                                                                                                                                              Industry
                                                                           Agriculture
            Welfare Loss (%)




                                                                                                         Welfare Loss (%)
                               -20                                                                                          -20
                                                                                                                                                                              Agriculture

                                                                           Consumer Services

                                                                                                                                                                              Consumer Services
                               -30                                                                                          -30




                               -40                                                                                          -40
                                     0.06    0.07          0.08               0.09            0.1                              1.5      2         2.5         3   3.5         4            4.5    5




Figure 11: Robustness Analysis. Panels (a), (b), (c), and (d) show the aggregate welfare effects as a function of
the preference parameters F , , the Mincerian rates of return to education , and the tail parameter of the skill
distribution  . The vertical dashed line corresponds to the parameter value in our benchmark analysis.


Preferences. The parameter F was calibrated so that the asymptotic GDP share of agriculture is 1%, corre-
sponding to the output share of the US farming sector in 2017. However, the GDP share of agriculture is larger than
1% in many European countries, at about 2% in Italy and France, and 3% in Spain. Therefore, considering a range
of larger values of F is useful. Panel (a) of Figure 11 shows the implied welfare impact of sectoral productivity
growth is essentially independent of F .
    Panel (b) of Figure 11 focuses on the income elasticity . We expect our results to be sensitive to this parameter.
In particular, a high income elasticity attributes a large share of the growth of the CS sector to income effects,
scaling back productivity growth. Conversely, a low income elasticity would require large productivity growth to
explain the observed expansion of the CS sector. Consequently, we expect the welfare effects of service-led growth
to decrease in . The results shown in Panel (b) of Figure 11 confirm our expectation and show that changing 
yields significant quantitative differences. For instance, if we set  = 0.7, the aggregate welfare effect falls to a mere
10%. However, recall that the highest estimate of the food income elasticity was 0.366 (see Table 3) and that the
parameter  approximately coincided with this elasticity. Figure 11 shows that for any  < 0.5, a large share of
Indian growth is service led. Hence, for growth to be preeminently service biased, the income elasticity should be
much higher than what the household-level data suggest.




                                                                                                    32
                                                    Aggregate Effects                     Effects by Urbanization       Quantile
                                          Agriculture   CS     Industry        HC     Agriculture         CS               Industry
                                                                                      1st     5th    1st      5th         1st    5th
     Baseline                                -20.9       -26.5      -17.4     -8.7   -23.5 -16.3 -17.1 -41.6             -12.8 -23.2
                                                               Alternative measurement choices (Section 7.2)
     Double PS                               -20.9       -23.1      -20.2     -8.7   -22.5 -17.8 -19.4 -30.1             -14.7    -27.1
     ICT & Business to PS                    -21.2       -20.2      -18.8     -8.6   -23.3 -17.6 -19.9 -23.8             -13.3    -25.9
     Construction to manufacturing           -20.2       -24.0      -22.6     -8.7   -26.3 -12.3     -3.8    -50.3       -13.1    -33.3
                                                              Alternative modelling assumptions (Section 7.3)
     Open economy                            -21.0       -23.4      -14.3     -8.3   -23.5 -16.5 -16.8 -34.9             -10.6    -18.4
     Open economy (large ICT)                -20.4       -19.3      -14.2     -8.3   -22.8 -16.4 -18.5 -22.7             -10.5    -17.8
     Imperfect skill substitution            -24.9       -26.5      -16.6    -16.2 -29.5 -18.4 -11.9 -45.3               -11.6    -22.5

Table 7: The importance of service-led growth: Robustness. In this table, we report a summary of our
results from the robustness tests described in more detail in the main text. In the first four columns, we report the
aggregate welfare loss in the absence of productivity growth (cols 1 - 3) or human-capital accumulation (col 4). In
the remaining columns, we report the welfare loss for the 1st and 5th quintile of the urbanization distribution.



Skills. In the lower panels of Figure 11, we focus on the determinants of human capital. Our estimate of the
return to education  based on micro data is an annual 5.6% return. This estimate is on the lower end of typical
Mincerian regressions. A potential concern is that we use data on consumption that might reflect consumption
sharing within households with different skills and education levels. This might lead to attenuation bias. For this
reason, we consider alternative calibrations in which the return to education is higher, up to an annual 10% that
is an upper bound to the range of the typical estimates. As seen in Panel (c) of Figure 11, our main results are
not sensitive to this parameter. The only exception is that a higher return to education increases the importance
of human capital.
    Panel (d) of Figure 11 shows the effect of the tail of the skill distribution  . This parameter mostly affects our
decomposition of productivity growth into agriculture and CS: the higher the  , the higher the importance of CS
growth relative to agricultural productivity. This result reflects the importance of nonhomothetic demand. The
smaller  , the higher the income inequality. And because higher inequality increases aggregate demand for CS for
a given average wage, less productivity growth is "required" to explain the increase in CS employment if  were
small. Figure 11 shows this intuition is borne out but that the effects are quantitatively moderate.


7.2       Measurement: Revisiting the PS-CS Split
Our classification of service employment into PS and CS hinges on whether firms in the service sector sell mostly
to firms or consumers. For our baseline analysis, we use firm-level information contained in the service survey in
this regard. According to this classification, the vast majority of service employment indeed caters to consumers.
Even though sectors that sell in significant proportions to firms--such as ICT and business services--grow very
quickly, the majority of the service sector continues to be in consumer-oriented industries such wholesale, retail,
and restaurants.25
25   To corroborate our results, we also measured aggregate employment from the Economic Census 2013; that is, we focused on the
     industry of firms rather than of the employees. In the Economic Census, industries such as wholesale, retail, restaurants, health and
     community services account for 37.9% of total employment, which compares with approximately 6.5% for financial, business, and
     ICT services. Note that even these sectors serve in part consumers as many lawyers (who are part of the business service industries)
     and banks sell their services to households.




                                                                    33
    Although we consider our data-driven approach an accurate way to separate CS from PS, our procedure could
underestimate the PS sector if firms report sales to small firms as sales to individuals. To gauge the quantitative
importance of such measurement concerns, we consider two alternative classifications. First, we assume the (human-
capital-adjusted) employment share of PS is twice as large as in our benchmark estimate in each service industry
shown in Figure 4. Second, we assume the entire ICT and business service industries serve manufacturing firms
(while retaining our baseline approach for the remaining service industries). We regard both alternatives as generous
upper bounds for the importance of PS employment.
    The results are shown in rows 2 and 3 of Table 7. The first four columns report the aggregate welfare effect
(W ), shown in Figure 8. The last six columns focus on the spatial heterogeneity (Wr ), shown in Figure 9. For
parsimony, we only report the top and bottom urbanization quantiles. As expected, the importance of productivity
growth in CS decreases when we attribute a larger share of the expanding service sector to PS. This is especially
important for the most urban locations, because the spatial concentration of PS exceeds the one of CS. However,
in all cases, Indian growth continues to be preeminently service led.
    Finally, we explore the importance of the construction sector. Recall that we attributed construction to the
service sector, given its non-tradable nature. Because, traditionally, construction is absorbed in the manufacturing
sector, we also redid our analysis under this alternative measurement choice. We report the result in row 4 of Table
7. Although this reclassification reduces the importance of CS and increases the importance of the industrial sector,
we still find CS to be the most important contributor to Indian growth. Construction plays a particularly important
role for the spatial heterogeneity, because it is relatively pro rural. If we do not count the construction sector as
part of the service sector, the spatial incidence of service-led growth is even more pro urban than in our baseline
estimate. Specifically, the welfare effect of productivity growth in CS remains the same in the most urbanized
districts, whereas it turns minuscule in the most rural districts.


7.3     Alternative Modeling Assumptions
Given the accounting nature of our methodology, a natural question concerns the extent to which our results are sen-
sitive to our specific modeling assumptions. In this section, we consider two alternatives. First we extend our model
to allow for international trade. Second, we consider an environment where skills are imperfectly substitutable.

7.3.1   Open Economy

Thus far, we have treated India as a closed economy. However, international trade, in particular exports of ICT
services, has become increasingly important for India. In this section, we therefore extend our model to an open-
economy environment. For brevity, we only summarize the main features of the extended model. The technical
analysis can be found in Appendix Section A-5.
    We assume consumers, both in India and in the rest of the world, consume industrial goods sourced from many
countries. Different national varieties, which are in turn CES aggregates of regional varieties, enter into a CES
utility function as imperfect substitutes. To capture that India might have a specific comparative advantage in ICT
services, we assume India exports both domestic goods and ICT services. For simplicity, we assume ICT services
are not sold in the Indian domestic market. In our estimation, we assume balanced trade, but we allow India to
run a trade deficit in goods and a surplus in ICT services, which is in line with the empirical observation.
    To calibrate this model, we need information on the revenue of ICT services, the exports and imports of goods,
and an estimate of the trade elasticity. We measure ICT revenue from the income share of ICT workers. We classify


                                                         34
as ICT service workers all those employed in the following service industries: (i) telecommunications, (ii) computer
programming, (iii) consultancy and related activities software publishing, and (iv) information-service activities. In
our NSS data, these activities constitute 0.72% of total employment in 2011 (in 1987, it was a less than 0.1%). ICT
workers earn, on average, higher wages than other workers. When one considers the earning share, they account for
1.56% of total earnings in 2011 (in 1987, it was 0.11%). Given the small size of the ICT sector in 1987, we assume
it was zero and target the earnings share in 2011. In terms of exports, according to the World Bank, the export
of goods and merchandise increased from 11.3 billions (4.1% of GDP) in 1987 to 302.9 billions (16.6% of GDP) in
current USD. The manufacturing sector accounted for 66% of such merchandise exports in 1987 and for 62% in
2011. According to the OECD, the domestic value added in gross exports amounts to 83.9% of exports for India
and we assume this percentage to be constant over time. In accordance with these data, we assume the value-added
export of trade increased from 13.9% in 1987 to 53.6% in 2011 as a share of the GDP in the manufacturing sector.
Finally, we set the trade elasticity to 5 (Simonovska and Waugh, 2014).
    The results of quantifying the sources of growth in this context are contained in rows 6 and 7 of Table 7. In row
6, we report the results from the measurement choices outlined above. In row 7, we report the results when the ICT
sector is twice as large as actually observed. Expectedly, such choices reduce the importance of the CS, because
they reduce measured employment growth in these industries. Again, this is particularly relevant for cities, which
saw the fastest increase in ICT employment. Nevertheless, CS continue to play an important role for aggregate
growth and for urban areas in particular. Adding foreign trade does not alter the result that Indian growth is
largely service led.

7.3.2       Imperfect Substitution and Skill Bias in Technology

In our model, we allow for individual heterogeneity in human capital but maintain that workers endowed with
different efficiency units are perfect substitutes for one another. In this section, we generalize our model by assuming
workers with different educational attainments are imperfect substitutes in production (see Section B-11 in the
Appendix for details). As we showed in Table 2, agricultural workers have, on average, lower educational attainment
that those employed in service industries. Thus, an increase in the skill endowment could be responsible for the
reallocation of workers from agriculture to CS (see, e,.g., Porzio et al. (2020) or Schoellman and Hendricks (2020)).
By ignoring such skill-based specialization, our Ricardian model could exaggerate the importance of technology for
the development of the service sector.

   For simplicity, we work with two skill groups and define workers to be skilled if they have completed secondary
school. We assume the production functions to be of the usual CES form:
                                                                                
                                                      -1                   -1   -1
                                                -                    +     
                               Yrs = Arst      Hrst        +   Zrst Hrst               for s = F, CS, G,

where H + and H - denote high- and low-skilled workers, respectively. Note that the technology admits differences
in both TFP Arst and skill bias Zrst across sector-districts and time.26 We assume the elasticity of substitution 
to be constant across sector-districts and externally calibrate  = 1.8, which is in the consensus region (see, e.g.,
Ciccone and Peri (2005) and Gancia et al. (2013)). Our conclusions do not hinge on the particular calibration of .
26   Allowing the skill bias of technology to vary across space is important. If Z were constant across districts, the model would predict
     skill premia to be lower in skill-rich regions. However, this assumption contradicts the observation that both the relative supply of
     skills and the skill premium are positively correlated with urbanization.




                                                                    35
    We continue to allow for heterogeneous productivities across workers of the same educational group. A worker's
wage is a draw from a skill-specific Pareto distribution with the same tail parameter as in our baseline analysis.27
As in our baseline analysis, this model is exactly identified, and for given structural parameters, we can rationalize
the data of sectoral earnings shares by skill group and average earnings by skill group for each region in India by
choice of Arst and Zrst (see Section B-11 in the Appendix).
    The results of this extension are reported in the last row of Table 7. Because productivity growth is now
parametrized by changes in factor-neutral productivity Arst and the skill bias Zrst , we set the respective growth
rates in both sectors to zero. The quantitative role for the CS sector is very similar to the one of our baseline
calibration. Interestingly, human capital now plays a more important role, owing to the increasing supply of
high-skilled labor over time.
    This extension also allows us to uncover additional facts about the skill bias in technology. In Figure 12, we
plot our estimates of the skill bias Zrst as binned scatter plots. First, across districts, Zrs increases in the level
of urbanization for all sectors. This increase reflects the empirical observation that the skill premium is higher in
urban than in rural districts. Second, we find evidence for skill-biased technical change: over time, Zrs increases
in all sectors. Although our accounting approach cannot uncover causal links, these patterns are consistent with
models of directed technical change and directed technology adoption such as Acemoglu and Zilibotti (2001) and
Gancia et al. (2013), where firms adopt more skill-intensive technologies in response to the wider availability of
skilled workers.

                    Panel a: Agriculture                                Panel b: Consumer Services                            Panel c: Industry
                                                             2
          -1




                                                                                                                    1
                                                             1




                                                                                                                    0
          -2




                                                          log ZCS




                                                                                                                 log ZG
 log ZF




                                                              0




                                                                                                                  -1
          -3




                                                             -1




                                                                                                                    -2
          -4




                                                                                                                    -3
                                                             -2




               0       .2          .4           .6   .8             0         .2          .4           .6   .8            0    .2          .4           .6   .8
                            Urbanization rate                                      Urbanization rate                                Urbanization rate

                             1987       2011                                        1987       2011                                  1987       2011




Figure 12: Skill Bias of Technology. The figure shows a binned scatter plot of ZrF , ZrCS , and ZrG as a
function of the urbanization rate in 1987 (dashed line and "+" markers) and 2011 (solid line dots).



8                  Conclusion
Although an expanding service sector is often seen as a rich-country phenomenon, tertiarization is well underway
in most developing countries. In particular, rising employment in consumer services such as retail and restaurants
accounts for the bulk of the decline in agricultural employment while industrial employment is often stagnant.
Are these patterns a sign that services can be a source of productivity growth even at low levels of economic
development? Or is rising service employment simply a corollary of rising incomes if services are luxury goods? In
short: Is growth service led or service biased?
27   Separately identifying the lower bound of the Pareto distribution of human-capital draws from the level of the technology parameters
     is impossible. Therefore, we normalize the lower bound to unity for both skill groups. Because we are only interested in changes over
     time in TFP, this normalization is immaterial.



                                                                                         36
    In this paper, we developed a methodology to answer this question. Our approach is in the spirit of development
accounting but uses the restrictions imposed by a spatial equilibrium model. The estimated model allows us to
determine the importance of different sectors as an engine of growth and structural transformation. Moreover,
it lends itself to a quantitative analysis of both the aggregate welfare effects of growth and its distributional
consequences.
    At the core of our identification strategy are consumers' preferences, in particular, the income elasticity of
aggregate service demand. The higher this elasticity, the more service-biased economic growth is. Conversely, if the
income elasticity of consumer demand is limited, rising employment in the consumer service sector is a sign that
growth was service led. Given the importance of this parameter, we infer it directly using Indian household data.
Importantly, we show that the income elasticity of consumers' observable demand system over final expenditure
coincides with the one defined over value added that is relevant in our theory.
    Our analysis delivers two main results. First and foremost, Indian growth was to a large extent service led.
Quantitatively, productivity growth in sectors such as retail, hospitality, or transportation account for one third of
welfare growth between 1987 and 2011. Second, the welfare impact of service-led growth was strikingly unequal
and benefitted mostly wealth individuals in urbanized locations. The reasons are that service productivity grew
particularly fast in urban areas and that richer consumers care more about the consumption of services owing to
nonhomothetic preferences.
    We also document that productivity growth in consumer services was the main driver of the structural transfor-
mation and accounts for almost half of the decline in agricultural employment. By contrast, technical progress in
agriculture, did not promote structural change. This result is in line with a growing body of literature ­ including
Kelly et al. (2020), Moscona (2019), or Foster and Rosenzweig (2004) ­ who document similar findings for India,
within and across countries, and for the British Industrial Revolution.
    Our approach has several limitations that we hope to overcome in future research. Two are particularly impor-
tant. First, owing to our accounting approach, we took consumer service productivity as exogenous. Understanding
the exact nature of productivity growth and how it materializes seems to us a question of first-order importance,
in particular as far as potential policy-implications are concerned. Second, knowing whether service-led growth is
unique to the Indian experience or also important in other developing countries would be interesting. If service-led
growth is indeed an integral part of the growth trajectory of developing countries today, the absence of employment
growth in the manufacturing sector might be less concerning than previously thought.

References
Acemoglu, D. and F. Zilibotti: 2001, `Productivity Differences'. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2), 563­606.

Aghion, P., R. Burgess, S. Redding, and F. Zilibotti: 2005, `Entry Liberalization and Inequality in Industrial Performance'.
  Journal of the European Economic Association 3(2-3), 291­302.

Aghion, P., R. Burgess, S. Redding, and F. Zilibotti: 2008, `The Unequal Effects of Liberalization: Evidence from Dismantling
  the License Raj in India'. American Economic Review 98(4), 1397­1412.

Akcigit, U., H. Alp, and M. Peters: 2020, `Lack of Selection and Limits to Delegation: Firm Dynamics in Developing
  Countries'. Forthcoming in the American Economic Review.

Alder, S., T. Boppart, and A. Muller: 2019, `A Theory of Structural Change that Can Fit the Data'. CEPR DP13469.

Allen, T. and C. Arkolakis: 2014, `Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy'. Quarterly Journal of Economics
  129(3), 1085­1140.



                                                             37
Amirapu, A. and A. Subramanian: 2015, `Manufacturing or Services? An Indian Illustration of a Development Dilemma'.
 Centre for Global Development Working Paper 409.

Basu, K.: 2008, `The Enigma of India'. Journal of Economic Literature 46(2), 396­406.

Basu, K. and A. Maertens: 2007, `The Pattern and Causes of Economic Growth in India'. Oxford Review of Economic Policy
  23(2), 143­167.

Baumol, W.: 1967, `Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of the Urban Crisis'. American Economic Review
  57(3), 415­426.

Boppart, T.: 2014, `Structural Change and the Kaldor Facts in a Growth Model With Relative Price Effects and Non-Gorman
  Preferences'. Econometrica 82(6), 2167­2196.

Buera, F. J. and J. P. Kaboski: 2012, `The Rise of the Service Economy'. American Economic Review 102(6), 2540­69.

Caselli, F.: 2005, `Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences'. In: P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (eds.): Handbook of
  Economic Growth, Vol. 1A. Elsevier B.V., Chapt. 9, pp. 679­741.

Chatterjee, S. and E. Giannone: 2021, `Unequal Global Convergence'. Working Paper.

Cheremukhin, A., M. Golosov, S. Guriev, and A. Tsyvinski: 2015, `The economy of People's Republic of China from 1953'.
  NBER Working Paper 21397.

Cheremukhin, A., M. Golosov, S. Guriev, and A. Tsyvinski: 2017, `The industrialization and economic development of Russia
  through the lens of a neoclassical growth model'. Review of Economic Studies 84(2), 613­649.

Ciccone, A. and G. Peri: 2005, `Long-Run Substitutability Between More and Less Educated Workers: Evidence from U.S.
  States, 1950-1990'. Review of Economics and Statistics 87(4), 652­663.

Comin, D., D. Lashkari, and M. Mestieri: 2020, `Structural Change with Long-Run Income and Price Effects'. Forthcoming
  in Econometrica.

Cravino, J. and S. Sotelo: 2019, `Trade-induced structural change and the skill premium'. American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics 11(3), 289­326.

Duarte, M. and D. Restuccia: 2010, `The Role of the Structural Transformation in Aggregate Productivity*'. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 125(1), 129­173.

Duarte, M. and D. Restuccia: 2019, `Relative Prices and Sectoral Productivity'. Journal of the European Economic Associ-
  ation 18(3), 1400­1443.

Eckert, F., S. Ganapati, and C. Walsh: 2020, `Skilled Scalable Services: The New Urban Bias in Economic Growth'.
  Minneapolis Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Institute Working Papaer 25.

Eckert, F. and M. Peters: 2020, `Spatial Structural Change'. Working Paper.

Eichengreen, B. and P. Gupta: 2011, `The Service Sector as India's Road to Economic Growth'. India Policy Forum, National
  Council of Applied Economic Research 7(1), 1­42.

Erumban, A. A., D. K. Das, S. Aggarwal, and P. C. Das: 2019, `Structural change and economic growth in India'. Structural
  Change and Economic Dynamics 51, 186­202.

Foellmi, R. and J. Zweim¨
                        uller: 2006, `Income Distribution and Demand-Induced Innovations'. Review of Economic Studies
  73(4), 941­960.

Foster, A. and M. Rosenzweig: 1996, `Technical Change and Human-Capital Returns and Investments: Evidence from the
  Green Revolution'. American Economic Review 86(4), 931­953.

Foster, A. and M. Rosenzweig: 2004, `Agricultural Productivity Growth, Rural Economic Diversity, and Economic Reforms:
  India, 1970­2000'. Economic Development and Cultural Change 52(3), 509­542.




                                                           38
Gancia, G., , A. M¨uller, and F. Zilibotti: 2013, `Structural Development Accounting'. In: D. Acemoglu, M. Arellano,
  and E. Dekel (eds.): Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications (Tenth World Congress of the
  Econometric Society). Cambridge University Press, pp. 373­418.

Garcia-Santana, M., J. Pijoan-Mas, and L. Villacorta: 2020, `Investment Demand and Structural Change'. Mimeo, CEMFI.

Ghose, A.: 2014, `India's Services Led Growth'. Institute for Human Development New Delhi, Working Paper 01/2014.

Goldberg, P., A. K. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova: 2010, `Imported Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product
  Growth: Evidence from India'. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(4), 1727­1767.

Gollin, D., R. Jedwab, and D. Vollrath: 2015, `Urbanization with and without industrialization'. Journal of Economic
  Growth 21, 1573­7020.

Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. Waugh: 2014, `The Agricultural Productivity Gap'. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(2),
  939­993.

Gordon, J. and P. Gupta: 2005, `Understanding India's Services Revolution'. In: W. Tseng and C. David (eds.): India's and
  China's Recent Experience with Reform and Growth. Procyclicality of Financial Systems in Asia. Palgrave Macmillan,
  London, pp. 49­84.

Hall, R. and C. Jones: 1999, `Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Ouput Per Worker Than Others?'. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 114(1), 83­116.

Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi: 2013, `Two Perspectives on Preferences and Structural Transformation'.
  American Economic Review 103(7), 2752­89.

Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi: 2014, `Growth and Structural Transformation'. In: Handbook of economic
  growth, Vol. 2. Elsevier, pp. 855­941.

Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi: 2020, `Structural Change in Investment and Consumption--A Unified
  Analysis'. Review of Economic Studies.

Hobijn, B., T. Schoellman, and A. Vindas: 2019, `Structural Transformation by Cohort'. Mimeo, Arizona State University.

Hsieh, C.-T. and E. Rossi-Hansberg: 2019, `The Industrial Revolution in Services'. NBER Working Paper No. 25968.

Kelly, M., J. Mokyr, and C. O'Grada: 2020, `The Mechanics of the Industrial Revolution'. CEPR DP14884.

Kochhar, K., U. Kumar, R. Rajan, A. Subramanian, and I. Tokatlidis: 2006, `India's Pattern of Development: What
  Happened, What Follows?'. Journal of Monetary Economics 53(5), 981­1019.

Kongsamut, P., S. Rebelo, and D. Xie: 2001, `Beyond balanced growth'. The Review of Economic Studies 68(4), 869­882.

Majid, N.: 2019, `Structural Change and Employment in India'. ILO/SIDA Partnership on Employment WP No.1.

Martin, L., S. Nataraj, and A. Harrison: 2017, `In with the Big, Out with the Small: Removing Small-Scale Reservations in
 India'. American Economic Review 107(2), 354­386.

Matsuyama, K.: 2000, `A Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods under Nonhomothetic Preferences: Demand Com-
 plementarities, Income Distribution, and North-South Trade'. Journal of Political Economy 108(6), 1093­1120.

Matsuyama, K.: 2019, `Engel's Law in the Global Economy: Demand-Induced Patterns of Structural Change, Innovation,
 and Trade'. Econometrica 87(2), 497­528.

McMillan, M. and D. Rodrik: 2011, `Globalization, Structural Change, and Productivity Growth'. In: M. Bacchetta and M.
 Jansen (eds.): Making Globalization Socially Sustainable. International Labor Organization, pp. 49­84.

Mitra, D. and B. P. Ural: 2008, `Indian Manufacturing: A Slow Sector in a Rapidly Growing Economy'. Journal of
  International Trade & Economic Development 17(4), 525­559.

Moscona, J.: 2019, `Agricultural Development and Structural Change, Within and Across Countries'. Working Paper, MIT.



                                                           39
Muellbauer, J.: 1976, `Community Preferences and the Representative Consumer'. Econometrica 44(5), 979­999.

Mukherjee, A.: 2013, `The Service Sector in India'. Asian Development Bank Economics Working Paper Series No. 352.

Ngai, L. R. and C. A. Pissarides: 2007, `Structural Change in a Multisector Model of Growth'. American Economic Review
  97(1), 429­443.

Porzio, T., F. Rossi, and G. Santangelo: 2020, `The Human Side of Structural Transformation'. CEPR DP15110.

Redding, S. J. and E. Rossi-Hansberg: 2017, `Quantitative Spatial Economics'. Annual Review of Economics 9(1), 21­58.

Rodrik, D.: 2015, `Premature Industrialization'. Mimeo, Harvard Kennedy School.

Sato, R.: 2014, `The Most General Class of CES Functions'. Econometrica 43, 999­1003.

Schoellman, T. and L. Hendricks: 2020, `Skilled Labor Productivity and Cross-Country Income Differences'. Mimeo, Federal
  Reserve of Minneapolis.

Simonovska, I. and M. E. Waugh: 2014, `The elasticity of trade: Estimates and evidence'. Journal of international Economics
  92(1), 34­50.

Singh, A. and S. Dasgupta: 2016, `Will Services Be the New Engine of Economic Growth in India?'. WP11176 eSocialSciences.




                                                            40
                  APPENDIX A: TECHNICAL DETAILS
   In this section, we discuss the technical material referred to in the text.


A-1        Derivation of the expenditure shares s (e, p) (Equation (3))
Roy's Identity implies that the expenditure share on sector s is given by
                                                                V (e(p,u),p)
                                                                    ps       ps
                                                 s (e, p) = -   V (e(p,u),p)
                                                                                .
                                                                     e       e

Using the indirect utility function in (2), s (e, p) is given by
                                                                                   -
                                                                         e
                                               s (e, p) = s + s            s
                                                                        s pst


A-2       Equilibrium in the Industrial Sector
In this section we characterize the equilibrium in the industrial sector. The technical details are contained in the
Online Appendix. As highlighted in Proposition 1, we have to distinguish two cases. In particular, recall the
definition
                                                              
                                                  (AP S )          .                                           (A-1)
                                                           fO AP S
Henceforth, we simply write  . Below we will show that some active firms do not hire lawyers if and only if
                                                              
                                                                .                                               (A-2)
                                                             1-
Note that  is deceasing in AP S (see (A-1)). Hence, condition (A-2) requires the productivity of lawyers AP S to be
low enough.

Firm-level allocations
We first solve for the firm-level allocations, i.e. firm profits, firm employment and the productivity cutoff z  . Let
pG denote the price of the industrial good. If active, firm zi solves the maximization problem
                                               1--                              
               (zi ) =       max           pG zi  HP M i (AP S HP Si + ) - w (HP M i + HP Si ) - fO w .         (A-3)
                         HP M i ,HP Si 0

where fO w denotes the overhead costs. Note that we explicitly impose the constraint that HP Si  0. Firms
operate if and only if  (zi )  0. We denote the productivity threshold by z  , i.e.,  (z  ) = 0. Under condition (11),
z  > AM , that is there is a range of low-productivity firms that choose to be inactive.

                                                                         
Proposition 2. Suppose that   1-       , where  is given in (A-1). Let z denote the endogenous productivity
                                     
threshold, such that firms with zi  z produce in equilibrium. Let zL denote the cutoff where firms start hiring
producer services. Then:
  1. The productivity threshold z  is given by
                                                                                         1
                                                                            1-         1--
                                                     w 1         
                                              z =                  fO                        .                  (A-4)
                                                     pG         1-


                                                            A-1
  2. The producer service cutoff zL is given by
                                                                            1-

                                                              1-           1--
                                                 zL = z                          > z                             (A-5)
                                                               

  3. Optimal factor demands are given by

                                                              0              if zi < zL
                                             HP S (zi ) =         -zL                   ,                        (A-6)
                                                               zi zL
                                                                      fO     if zi  zL

     and                                                                   1--
                                                                            1-
                                                                    zi
                                       HP M (zi ) =        fO       zL              if zi < zL
                                                                                                 .               (A-7)
                                                              zi
                                                              zL fO                 if zi  zL

  4. Firm-level profits are given by
                                                              1--
                                            
                                                               1-
                                                 1-      zi
                                                                         - 1 fO w        if zi < zL
                                            
                                                         zL
                                  (zi ) =                                                             .          (A-8)
                                                          1--         zi
                                              1+                           - 1 fO w      if zi  zL
                                            
                                                                      zL


Proof. See Section OA-1.1 in the Online Appendix.
                                                                                                            
Note that (A-5) determines zL directly as a function of z  . Moreover, under our assumption that  > 1-        indeed
                                                                          
z  < zL and all firms with zi  [z  , zL ] do not hire lawyers. As   1- , we have z   zL . Note also that the
profit function in (A-8) is concave in z as long firms do not hire lawyers but linear in z once they hire lawyers.
                                      
Proposition 3. Suppose that  < 1-        , where  is given in (A-1). Let z
                                                                         ~ denote the endogenous productivity
threshold, such that firm with zi  z
                                   ~ will produce in equilibrium. Then:
  1. The productivity threshold is given by
                                                          1                                
                                 1             w        1--
                                                               1      1--
                                                                               1         1--
                            z
                            ~=                                                                   fO (1 -  ) .    (A-9)
                               1--             pG                             AP S

  2. Optimal factor demands are given by
                                                                        zi
                                        HP M i      =        fO (1 -  )
                                                         1--            z
                                                                        ~
                                                                        zi  
                                        HP Si       =        fO (1 -  ) -       .
                                                         1--            z
                                                                        ~  AP S

  3. Firm-level profits are given by
                                                                    z-z~
                                             (zi ) =  (zi ) =            fO (1 -  ) w.                          (A-10)
                                                                     z
                                                                     ~
Proof. See Section OA-1.1 in the Online Appendix.

Free Entry and the Equilibrium Wage
Free entry requires that the cost of entry are equal to the expected profits, i.e.

                                            fE w = E [ ] =           (x) f (x) dx.


                                                              A-2
                                                                                w
This condition allows us to solve for the equilibrium real wage                 pG .

                                           
Proposition 4. Suppose that               1- .   Then
                                                                                  1-
                                                                                 1-
                       zL               (1 -  -  )                   1-             -
                                                                                                       fO
                                  =                                                           +                                           (A-11)
                       AM              + (1 - ) ( - 1)                                             - 1 fE
                                                                                                  (1-)
                                                                                                                          
                               
                       z                (1 -  -  )     1 + 1                                      1--
                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                              (1-)(-1)+
                                                                                                                           fO ,
                                  =                                                                              1--                      (A-12)
                       AM              + (1 - ) ( - 1)    -1                     1-                                        fE

and
w            zL     1--
                                         1-
         =                     (AP S )                                                                                                    (A-13)
pG            
                                                              (1-)
                                                                                                          1-
                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                           1-
                    (1 -  -  )     1 + 1                      1--              (1-)(-1)+
                                                                                                   fO                --             1-
         =                                                                 -      1--                             A1
                                                                                                                   M                         .
                                                                                                                                        (A-14)
                   + (1 - ) ( - 1)    -1            1-                                             fE                                fO

                        
Suppose that  <        1- .   Then

                                                        
                                                   z
                                                   ~                  1 fO
                                                              =              (1 -  ) ,                                                    (A-15)
                                                  AM                  - 1 fE

and
                                          1--
             w           ~ (1 -  -  )
                         z                                        
                   =                              (AP S ) ()                                                                              (A-16)
             pG            fO (1 -  )
                                                        1--                               -1
                                                                                           (1-- )                               
                                      1--      1 1        
                                                                          1                                    --                    
                   =   (1 -  -  )                                                                            A1
                                                                                                              M                    () .   (A-17)
                                               - 1 fE                 fO (1 -  )                                          fO 

Proof. See Section OA-1.3 in the Online Appendix.

    Proposition 4 characterizes the cutoffs and the real wage in terms of parameters. In particular, all cutoffs zL
                                                                                zL
are independent of the wage w. Note also that  is decreasing in AP S so that A    PS
                                                                                      < 0, i.e. if lawyers become
                                                                     
                                                                   z       1
more productive, the cutoff to hire lawyers declines. Moreover, AP S > 0. Because  is decreasing in AP S , the
real wage is increasing in AP S (see Section OA-1.5 in the Online Appendix).

Aggregate Labor Allocations
Now consider aggregate employment. In our economy, workers in the manufacturing sector are used for production
work (HP M ), to provide PS (HP S ), pay for overhead (HOM ) and generate new business ideas (HEM ). Hence, labor
market clearing requires that
                                        HG = HP S + HP M + HEM + HOM .

1   Note that we assumed that z  > AM . Hence, we need to impose that
                                                                               (1-)
                                                                                                             
                                   (1 -  -  )     1 + 1                        1--        -
                                                                                              (1-)(-1)+
                                                                                                 1--          fO > 1
                                                                                       
                                 + (1 - ) ( - 1)       -1 1-                                                  fE




                                                                     A-3
Proposition 5. The number of entry and production workers is given by
                                                          1--
                                             HEM        =     HG
                                                            
                                             HP M       = HG

independent of  . The number of firms, M, is given by
                                                        1 -  -  HG
                                                M=                 .
                                                                fE
independent of  . The number of lawyers and overhead workers is given by
                                           ( )  +(-1)(1-)                                
                                         1+ ( )           HG                   if       1-
                               HP S =                   -1                               
                                           - (1 -  -  )  1-            HG      if  <    1-

and
                                             1           +(-1)(1-)                    
                                           1+ ( )   ×              HG        if      1-
                                 HOM =                    -1 1                        
                                                                                            ,
                                           (1 -  -       )  1- HG            if  <   1-

where                                                            1-
                                                                1-
                                         1                         -       (-1)(1-)+
                                    ( )                                -     1--        .
                                         -1         1-
Proof. See Section OA-1.4 in the Online Appendix.
   Proposition 5 implies that HP S is increasing in AP S , whereas HOM is decreasing in AP S . Interestingly, their
sum is independent of AP S , i.e.

                                    HOM + HP S               + ( - 1) (1 - )
                                               =                                 fE .
                                       M                       1--

Proposition 5 also implies that the endogenous number of firms that are created, M , is independent of AP S
conditional on total industrial employment HG . But the number of ideas, that actually produce, M (1 - F (z  ), is
decreasing in AP S as the production cutoff z  is increasing in AP S . Hence, improvements in the productivity of
lawyers induce selection by truncating the productivity distribution. Note that all these allocations are independent
of aggregate manufacturing productivity AM . This is in contrast to the micro-level, where employment shares vary
systematically with firm productivity z . In particular, (A-6) and (A-7) imply that for firms that hire lawyers (i.e.
zi  zL ) we have
                                              HP S (z )            zi
                                                        =     1-       ,
                                             HP M (z )            zL
i.e. more productive firms have a higher employment share of lawyers relative to production workers. However, the
aggregate employment share of production workers hired by (large) firms who hire a positive share of lawyers (i.e.
zi > zL ) is given by
                                           z zL
                                                 HP M (z ) dG (z )    
                                                                     = .
                                            z zL
                                                 HP S ( z ) dG ( z )  
Hence, even though there is micro-heterogeneity in the intensity of hiring lawyers, the aggregate employment share
of lawyers (among firms who hire lawyers) is constant and depends on the tail of the productivity distribution . A
thicker tail, i.e.  smaller, increases the aggregate employment share of lawyers by shifting resources towards large
firms, which are lawyer intensive.
    Figure A-1 depicts the allocation of employment as a function of  = AP     S fO
                                                                                     for both cases discussed above.
                                                                     
Note that all employments are continuous at the threshold  =        1- .



                                                             A-4
                                                  All firms hire lawyers              Some firms do not hire lawyers



                                         




                                                                                                                       LPM
                                         

                                                                                                                       LOM



                                        
                                        
                                   1--                                                                                 LEM
                                       
                            ( - 1)(1 -  - )                                                                            LPS
                                   

                                                                                                                                
                                                                                        1                                =
                                                                               1-                                             APS fO




                                              Figure A-1: Aggregate labor allocations


Aggregate Manufacturing Productivity
The free entry condition ensures that the industrial sector as a whole does not generate any profits. Hence, aggregate
revenue is equal to aggregate labor payments
                                                    pG YG = wHG .
Proposition 6. Let aggregate productivity in the goods producing sector AG be defined by
                                                                                    YG
                                                                       AG              .
                                                                                    HG
Then,                                         -1
                                               (1-- )
                                                                   1            --
                           Q2
                                       1
                                                                              A1                                                 if  <    
                                      1-                                       M                                                         1-
                                                                                                 1--
                    AG =                                                   -
                                                                               (1-)(-1)+                                                       ,
                                                                                  1--                          --
                                              1             1-
                                                                                                             A1                  if       
                           
                           Q1         1+                      
                           
                                              -1 1-                                                           M                          1-
                           

where                                                                                 1--
                                                                                                                              1-
                                                (1 -  -  )     fO                       
                                                                                                               1-
                             Q1 =                                                                
                                               + (1 - ) ( - 1) fE                                               fO
and                                                                                                                          (-1)(1-)+
                                                                                      1--

                                                   1--                1 1               
                                                                                                                  1               
                      Q2 =  (1 -  -  )                                                            ()                                       .
                                                                      - 1 fE                                     fO
   Proposition 6 follows directly from the fact that AG = w/pG and the solution for w/pG from Proposition 4.
The importance of Proposition 6 is that it shows that the manufacturing sector is characterized by an aggregate
production function for the industrial good sector, where total productivity in industrial production AG is fully
determined from parameters: the productivity of lawyers AP S (encapsulated in  ), the level of productivity AM ,
the overhead cost fO and the entry cost fE . Note that AG is continuous in  and satisfies
                                                   1--                                                   1--                           (-1)(1-)+
                       ( - 1) (1 - )                 
                                                                                1-- 1                      
                                                                                                                        1-                  
                                                                                                                                                      --
         lim AG =                                                          
                                                                                                                                                   A1
                                                                                                                                                    M
                       + (1 - ) ( - 1)                                            - 1 fE                                 fO


                                                                               A-5
                                      Aggregate                            All firms hire lawyers          Some firms do not hire lawyers
                                    Productivity AG




                                                         Z




                                                   1--
                               ( - 1) (1 - )
                            (  + (1 - ) ( - 1) )
                                                     
                                                         Z




                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                 1                          =
                                                         1--
                                                                        (  - 1)(1 - ) +              1-                                         APS fO
                                          1-- 1                 1-
                                      (     - 1 fE )           ( fO )
                                                                                 
                                                           
                             Z   




                                                    Figure A-2: Aggregate productivity AG


and                                                                                                                                (-1)(1-)+
                                                                                                     1--
                                                                            1-- 1                      
                                                                                                                     1-                 
                                                                                                                                                           --
                  AG  =                       =                                                                                                          A1
                                                                                                                                                          M   .
                           1-                                                 - 1 fE                                  fO
                                                                                                                    
Figure A-2 depicts aggregate productivity AG as a function of  =                                                  AP S fO      for both cases discussed above.


A-3      Estimation of Productivity Fundamentals and Structural Param-
         eters (Sections 5.2 and 5.1)
In this section we describe the details of our strategy to estimate the productivity fundamentals {Arst } and two
structural parameters, CS and F .
                                                   D                                                              D
    Consider a single time period. We observe wr      r
                                                        , HrF , HrG , HrCS r . We indicate the observed wages by wr
to distinguish them from the model wages wr as we did not pick a numeraire yet - see below.

Step 1: Estimating relative food productivity and relative manufacturing productivity It is useful to
write productivities as
                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                                   -1
                                                         ArF             = AF arF with                           arF = 1
                                                                                                          r =1
                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                                   -1
                                                         ArG             = AG arG with                           arG = 1.
                                                                                                          r =1




                                                                                               A-6
Here As denotes the level of sectoral productivities and ars denotes the relative productivity of region r. Using the
market clearing conditions in (7), it is easy to show that
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                HrF wr
                                                       arF    =          R
                                                                                                                                          (A-18)
                                                                                         
                                                                                 (HrF ) wr
                                                                         r =1
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                HrG wr
                                                       arG    =          R
                                                                                                                                          (A-19)
                                                                                         
                                                                                 (HrG ) wr
                                                                         r =1

Note arF and arG are insensitive to the level of wr .

Step 2: Estimating AF and AG                      The two prices of the tradable goods are
                                                                          1                                          1
                                                                    1-   1-                                  1-     1-
                                                           wr                       1                  wr
                                pF t     =                                       =
                                                   r
                                                           ArF                     AF         r
                                                                                                       arF
                                                                          1                                          1
                                                                    1-   1-                                  1-     1-
                                                           wr                       1                  wr
                                pGt      =                                       =                                       .
                                                   r
                                                           ArG                     AG         r
                                                                                                       arG
                                     1                                    1
                               1-   1-                              1-   1-
                        wr                                   wr
Note that          r    arF                 and        r     arG                   are observable from (A-18) and (A-19). Hence, let us
write
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                         1-       1-
                                                                                 wr
                                                        w
                                                        s                                                                                 (A-20)
                                                                         r
                                                                                 ars

where w s is known. The superscript "w " indicates that this object is homogenous of degree one in the level of
wages. To determine AF and AG we use two restrictions:
  1. First we choose the manufacturing good as the numeraire. This determines AG because pGt = 1 implies that
     AG = w  G . Note that an increase in w by a common factor increases AG by the same amount.

  2. Let the relative price of agricultural goods relative to manufacturing goods be pAG
                                                                                      t . Then

                                                                     pA
                                                                      t  A- 1 w
                                                                          F F      -1 w
                                                             pAG
                                                              t  =    G
                                                                        = - 1 w = AF F .
                                                                     pt  AG G

        Given pAG
               t , we can thus identify AF .

                                        R
Step 3: Estimating {ArCS }r=1 and the structural parameters CS and F To derive (A-18) and (A-19)
we used R - 1 equations for each sector. This means that we still have R equations for the non-tradable CS sector
and two aggregate resource constraints for the tradable goods. These are
                        HrCS                                                                  -
                                = CS + CS (p A CS     G
                                            At prCSt pGt ) (Ert [q ]wrt )                                                                 (A-21)
                         Hr
                                        R                                        
                                                                                                     -
                       wr HrF   =             A + A p A CS     G
                                                     At pCSjt pGt                   (Ert [q ]wrt )       wj Hj                            (A-22)
               r                       j =1
                                        R                                                                    
                                                                                                                              -
                       wr HrG   =             (1 - A - CS ) - (A + CS ) p A CS     G
                                                                         At pCSjt pGt                            (Ert [q ]wrt )   wj Hj   (A-23)
               r                       j =1



                                                                             A-7
   Equation (A-23) is redundant, it is implied by (A-21) and (A-22) due to Walras' Law. Substituting the numeraire
assumption pGt = 1, pAt = pAG
                           t , where pt
                                         AG
                                             is the observed relative price and prCSt = Awrt
                                                                                         rCSt
                                                                                              yields
                                                                                        CS
                         HrCS                                       A         wrt                                -
                                    = CS + CS pAG
                                               t                                                (Ert [q ]wrt )                             (A-24)
                          Hr                                                 ArCS
                                                 R                                     R               CS
                                                                                 A              wjt                       1-
                        wr HrF      = A              wj Hj + A pAG
                                                                t                                            (Ert [q ])- wjt Hj .          (A-25)
                    r                         j =1                                    j =1
                                                                                               ACSj

For a given year these are R +1 equations in R productivities {ArCS } and 4 structural parameters (CS , F , F , CS )
(recall that we take  as given because we estimate it from the expenditure shares). If we have T years, we have
T R + 4 unknowns and T R + T equations. Thus, by insisting that preferences are constant over time, we add
over-identifying restrictions to our analysis as we add additional years.
    Note that (A-24) implies that
                                                           CS
                                       A          wrt                        1                 HrCS                       
                                pAG
                                 t                                 =-               CS -                (Ert [q ]wrt ) .
                                                 ArCS                    CS                     Hr

Substituting this into (A-25) yields
                                                            R                          R
                                                                                 F                     HrCS
                                    wr HrF       = F              wr Hr -                      CS -                  wrt Hr .              (A-26)
                             r                             r =1
                                                                                 CS   r =1
                                                                                                        Hr

Given the data on {wr , Hrs }, this is - for a given year - a single equation in three unknowns: F ,  F
                                                                                                     CS
                                                                                                        and CS . This
leaves us with R equations for consumer service employment. From (A-24) it is apparent that CS is not separately
identified from the level of productivity in the consumer service sector: holding CS and  fixed, the data on wages
wrt and employment shares HH    rCS
                                 r
                                     identifies CS A-   CS
                                                      rCS    . Hence, under the assumption that consumer services are
a luxury, we can wlog normalize CS = -1. For a given choice of F we can therefore use (A-26) in 1987 and 2011
to uniquely solve for CS and F .


A-4      The Elasticity of Substitution
The Allen Uzawa elasticity of substitution between goods s and k is given by
                                                                          2 e(p,V )
                                                                         ps pk e (p, V )
                                                         EOSsk =         e(p,V ) e(p,V )
                                                                                         .
                                                                            ps      pk

The expenditure function is given by
                                                                                      1/

                                     e (p, V )       =     V +          ~s ln ps             1/                  ps .
                                                                                                                   s

                                                                    s                             s{F,G,CS }

This implies that
                                                                   1/
                                                                                                             1
                e (p, V )                                                                                      ~s                     1
                                =       V +          ~s ln ps           1/                     ps
                                                                                                  s
                                                                                                                                + s
                 ps                              s
                                                                                                      V +        s   ~s ln ps         ps
                                                                                 s{F,G,CS }
                                                            1
                                                              ~s                        1
                                = e (p, V )                                  + s           .
                                                     V +     s    ~s ln ps              ps



                                                                          A-8
This also implies that
                                                                                          1 1
     2 e (p, V )       e (p, V )              1
                                                ~s                     1                 ps   ~s ~k p1
                                                                                                     k
                   =                                          + s         - e (p, V )                      2
    ps pk               pk          V +        s   ~s ln ps
                                                                       ps             (V + s    ~s ln ps )
                                                       1                                   1                                1
                                 1 1                     ~k                                  ~s                               ~s 1
                                                                                                                                   ~k
                   = e (p, V )                                         + k                                 + s   -                         2    .
                                 pk ps       V +        s   ~s ln ps             V +        s   ~s ln ps
                                                                                                                     (V +     s   ~s ln ps )
                                                                                                                                  

Now note that
                                                                                                      -1
                                    1
                                      ~k                           1
                                                     + k      = ~k           V +         ~s ln ps          + k
                            V +      s   ~s ln ps                                    s
                                                                                                      -
                                                                                e (p, V )
                                                              = ~k                                         + k = k .
                                                                              s{F,G,CS }     ps
                                                                                                s




Hence,

                       e (p, V )                    1
                                     = e (p, V ) s
                         ps                        ps
                       2                                            1               1
                        e (p, V )                1 1                  ~s              ~k
                                     = e (p, V )        k s - 
                       ps pk                     pk ps          V + s  ~s ln ps V + s  ~s ln ps
                                                 1 1
                                     = e (p, V )       {k s -  (s - s ) (k - k )} .
                                                 pk ps
This implies that

                                              e (p, V ) p1 1
                                                         k ps
                                                              {k s -  (s - s ) (k - k )} e (p, V )
                           EOSsk         =                                    1
                                                                  e (p, V ) s p s
                                                                                  e (p, V ) k p1
                                                                                               k

                                                      (s - s ) (k - k )
                                         =    1-                        .
                                                           s k

A-5       Open economy
In this model we present the formal analysis for the open economy extension discussed in Section 7.3.1.

A-5.1      Environment and Equilibrium
We assume that the consumption of the physical good of consumers in India is a combination of domestic and
imported goods with a constant elasticity of substitution  :
                                                                                             
                                                                  -1            -1           -1
                                                                                
                                                    CG =       CG,D + CG,ROW                      .

Here, CG,D and CG,ROW are the physical quantities of the domestic and imported physical good,  is a taste
parameter capturing the preference for the imported good, and  is the elasticity of substitution that we interpret
as a trade elasticity.
    Letting pG,D and pG,ROW denote the respective prices, the price index of the bundle CG is given by
                                                                                            1
                                                            -     1-                       1-
                                                     PG = p1
                                                           G,D +  pG,ROW                          .                                            (A-27)




                                                                        A-9
                                                                               1-
                                                      pG,D CG           PG,D
The expenditure share on Indian goods is               PG CG    =        PG          . Combining this expression with Equation (A-27)
yields the expenditure shares

                                                                                                         1-
                                                                                       PG,D
                                                  pG,D CG,D                    -      pG,ROW
                                                                    =                                     1- ,
                                                    PG CG                                   PG,D
                                                                          1+   -           pG,ROW
                                          pG,ROW CG,ROW                                    1
                                                                    =                                     1- .
                                              PG CG                                         PG,D
                                                                          1 + -            pG,ROW

For simplicity we subsume trade costs in the relative price of foreign goods.

    The Indian economy is assumed to export both domestic goods and a special category of services that is traded
internationally: ICT exports. Consider first the export of goods. We model total spending on Indian goods (in
term of domestic goods) from the rest of the world (ROW) as
                                                                                      1-
                                                                           PG,D
                                                                -         pG,ROW
                                                 XG,D =                                    1- G ,
                                                                              PG,D
                                                            1 + -            pG,ROW


i.e. XG,D are total exports from India, G is a demand shifter (for goods) and pG,ROW denotes the price of goods
in the ROW. For simplicity we assume the price elasticity of exports and imports to be the same and equal to  . .
     Consider, next, the exported ICT services.2 We assume that the ROW buys a bundle of regional varieties ICT
services                                                              
                                                                    R                           -1
                                                                                      -1
                                                  YICT t =              (yrICT t )    
                                                                                                     ,
                                                                r =1

where yrICT t denotes the quantity of services produced in region r and exported to the rest of the world. ICT
services are produced in region r according to the production function yrICT t = ArICT t Hrt . Hence, the price of
ICT services is given by
                                                                  1                                               1
                                                                 1-                                      1-      1-
                                                        -                                  wrt
                                    pICT t =          p1
                                                       rICT t            =                                            .
                                                  r                            r
                                                                                       ArICT t
As we do for goods, we model the import demand for ICT services as
                                                                   -
                                                          XICT = p1
                                                                  ICT t ICT .

Again, any trade costs are subsumed in the demand shifter ICT .

Equilibrium
The equilibrium with trade is pinned down by the following equilibrium conditions:

     1. Market clearing for agricultural goods:
                                                                                                                      
                                                                   1-  -1                            R
                                                                 wr    ArF
                                        wr HrF     =            R     1-  -1
                                                                                           ×             jF wj Hj 
                                                                    w
                                                                j =1 j   AjF                      j =1
2   For simplicity, we assume that ICT services are not sold in the domestic market but only internationally.




                                                                        A-10
  2. Market clearing for manufacturing goods:
                                  1-  -1
                                 wr ArG
             wr HrG    =        R       1-  -1
                                                     ×
                                j =1   wj AjG
                                                                                                                                
                                               1   1-                                                                        
                                      1-  -1
                             - ( j wj AjG ) 1-
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                     1-
                                                                                                                     1       
                                                                                                                       -
                                      pG,ROW                            R                                                    
                                                                                                          1-  -1 
                                                                                                                             
                            
                                                 1-                          jG wj Hj +                  wj AjG            G 
                                             1                                                                               
                                    1-  -1 1-
                             - ( j wj AjG )                           j =1                       j
                                                                                                                             
                                    pG,ROW           +1                                                                      
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                          Total exports      
                                                 Domestic spending

                                                         Aggregate demand for physical goods


  3. Market clearing for local CS:

                                                    wr HrCS = rCS wr Hr .

  4. Market clearing for local ICT services:
                                                                                           1-
                                                                                           1 -
                                              1-  -1
                                             wr ArICT                         1-  -1 
                           wr HrICT =        R       1-  -1
                                                                  ×          wj AjICT                     ICT
                                             j =1   wj AjICT             j

                                                                                   ICT exports


  5. Labor market clearing:

                                           HrF + HrG + HrCS + HrICT = Hr .

  6. Balanced Trade:

                            1-
                            1                                 1-
                                                              1               
                              -                                 -                                        R
                   1-  -1                         1-  -1                                                 j =1   jG wj Hj
                  wj AjG          G +            wj AjICT             ICT  =
                                                                          
                                                                                                                     1     1-
                                                                                                          1-  -1 1-
              j                              j                                              (            wj  AjG )
                                                                                     -               j
                                                                                                          pG,ROW                +1
                                       Exports
                                                                                                           Imports


    Letting x   pG,ROW 1- denote the (scaled) terms of trade, these are 5R + 1 equations in 5R + 1 unknowns
{x, {wr , HrF , HrG , HrCS , HrICT }r }. Again, we can pick a numeraire
                                                                               1
                                                                     1-       1-
                                                              wr
                                         pG,IN D =                                 = 1.
                                                         r
                                                              ArG

Given the productivities {ArF , ArG , ArCS , ArICT }r , the population distribution {Hr }r , the demand shilfters of the
foreign sector (ICT , G ) and the other preference parameters of the model, we can calculate {x, {wr , HrF , HrG , HrCS , HrICT }r }.




                                                             A-11
A-5.2          Identification of Productivity Fundamentals in the Open Economy Model
For the economy with trade we need to identify the following additional objects:
                                                                   R
                                                         [ArICT ]r=1 , G , ICT .

There are R + 2 unknowns. For these R + 2 unknowns we have the following conditions
     1. Relative ICT payments across localities for ICT exports:
                                                                             -1
                                                             wr HrICT  w1- A
                                                                      = r   rICT
                                                                        1-  -1
                                                             wj HjICT  wj  AjICT

         These are R - 1 equations to determine ArICT up to scale, i.e.
                                                                                            -1
                                                 ArICT = AICT arICT with                  arICT = 1
                                                                                      r

         yields
                                                                                            1
                                                                                            -1
                                                                         HrICT wr
                                                         arICT =                  
                                                                         j HjICT wj

         Because the level of ICT productivity AICT is not separately identified from the aggregate demand shifter
         ICT , without loss of generality we can set AICT = 1.3
     2. To identify ICT we use that
                                                                                                             1-
                                                                                                             1 -
                                                                1-  -1
                                                               wr ArICT                        1-  -1 
                                   wr LrICT     =              R       1-  -1
                                                                                              wj AjICT             ICT
                               r                     r         j =1   wj AjICT            j
                                                                          1-
                                                                          1 -

                                                              1-  -1 
                                                =            wj ajICT           ICT .                                              (A-28)
                                                         j


         The RHS is total value added of the ICT sector, which we can calculate directly in the data. Given that wj
         and ajICT is observed, we can calculate ICT .
     3. To identify G we use a moment about the share of manufacturing value added that is exported. Our model
        implies that:
                                  Total value added in manufacturing =     wr HrG
                                                                                                 r

         and                                                                                         1-
                                                                                                     1 -

                                                                                       1-  -1 
                                       Total value added of exports =                 wj AjG                 G
                                                                                  j

3   To see this, note that the equilibrium condition for ICT exports implies that
                                                              1-                                                    1-
                       1-  -1                                 1-               1-  -1                                  1-
                      wr ArICT                  1-  -1                        wr arICT                       1-  -1           -1
     wr HrICT =       R    1-  -1
                                               wj AjICT            ICT =      R    1-  -1
                                                                                                            wj ajICT        AICT ICT
                      j   wj AjICT         j                                  j   wj ajICT              j

    Hence, ICT and AICT are not separately identified.




                                                                       A-12
      Hence, the share of value added in the manufacturing sector is
                                                                 1-
                                                   1-  -1        1-
                                                                                   1-
                                                j wj AjG              G           PG,IN D G                G
                                  M1 =                                        =                    =                               (A-29)
                                                      r   wr HrG                      r   wr HrG         r wr HrG

      Hence, for a given moment of the export share of manufacturing M1 and data on {wj , LjG }j we can solve for
      G .


A-6       The Model with Imperfect Skill Substitution
In Section 7.3.2 we extended our analysis to a more general production function, where high and low skilled workers
are imperfect substitutes. In this section we describe the details of this exercise.

A-6.1      Environment and Equilibrium
Suppose that the technology in sector s in region r is given by
                                                                                                
                                                                 -1                       -1    -1
                                                            -                  +          
                                         Yrs = Ars         Hrs        +   Zrs Hrs                    ,

                                                                                -    +
where Ars denotes factor neutral productivity, Zrs denotes the skill bias and Hrs (Hrs ) are the quantities of human
capital of low (high) skilled individuals. Again we assume that individuals are heterogenous. Specifically, people of
skill type j  {-, +} draw their efficiency level from a pareto with the same shape, i.e.
                                                                                  
                                                  j
                                                                       qj
                                                                        rt             j
                                            P    qi   k =1-                           Frt (k ) .
                                                                          k

                                                                                             i,j    j j
Total income of an individual i of skill type j in region r at time t is therefore given by yrt  = wrt qi , where the skill
        j
price wrt is now skill-specific. The aggregate expenditure share on goods from sector s goods in region r is then
given by

                                  L-
                                   rt   h   -          -    -          +
                                        s qwrt , prt qwrt dFrt (q ) + Lrt                 h      +        +    +
                                                                                           s qwrt , prt qwrt dFrt (q )
                    rst                                                                                                ,
                                              L-       -    -          +
                                                 rt qwrt dFrt (q ) + Lrt
                                                                                            +
                                                                                          qwrt   +
                                                                                               dFrt (q )
              -
where hs qwrt , prt denotes the sectoral expenditure share at the individual level. Substituting the expression for
      -                                i,j
hs qwrt , prt and using the fact that yrt is also pareto distributed yields

                                                                 -                          -                              -
                                      -1               1                  -
             rst    = s + ~s                             s            sY,
                                                                       rt
                                                                             - -
                                                                            wrt q rt            + 1 - sY,
                                                                                                       rt
                                                                                                          +      + +
                                                                                                                wrt q rt       .
                                    - (1 - )          s ps

          -          L-   - -
                      rt wrt q
where sY,
       rt   =   L-   - -    +
                             rt
                                + +     is the income share of low skilled individuals in region r at time t. Hence, the
                 rt wrt q +Lrt wrt q
                       rt          rt
sectoral expenditure share is given by

                                             rst = s q - w- , q + w+ , sY,- , prt ,
                                                       rt rt rt rt rt

                                                                                                           -      +
i.e. sectoral spending varies at the regional level because of (i) differences in regional factor prices wrt and wrt , (ii)
                                                                                                         Y,-
differences in the prices of non-tradable goods prCSt and (iii) differences in the skill composition srt .




                                                                   A-13
Equilibrium The equilibrium is characterized by the following conditions. The CES structure and perfect com-
petition imply that prices are given by
                                                                                                1
                                              1           -      1-      -1  +           1-    1-
                                    prs =                wrt          + Zrs wrt                     .
                                             Ars
The relative skill demand for sector s in region ris given by
                                               + +                             +      1-
                                              wrt Hrst -1                     wrt
                                               - - = Zrt                       -           .
                                              wrt Hrst                        wrt

The CES demand system across regional varieties implies the market clearing conditions
                                                             1-        R
                                                   prs
                   - -
                  wrt         + +
                      Hrst + wrt Hrst    =                        ×          s q - w- , q + w+ , sY,- , pjt wrt Lrt ,
                                                                                 jt jt jt jt jt
                                                   ps                 j =1

                                                                         1
                                                         R              1-
                                                     1-
where wrt denotes average income and ps =      r =1 prs     . The market clearing condition for non-tradable CS
implies
                           - -
                         wrt          + +
                             HrCSt + wrt HrCSt = CS q -   w- , q + w+ , sY,- , pjt wrt Lrt .
                                                        jt jt jt jt jt
                                                                                                         (A-30)

Finally, labor market clearing implies
                                      j     j     j      j
                                     HrF + HrG + HrCS = Hr for j  {-, +} .
                                                       -     +                                      -      +
These equations uniquely determine the regional wages wrt , wrt and the sectoral labor allocations Hrst , Hrst .

A-6.2     Measurement and Equilibrium Accounting
As before we use these equations and the observable data to infer the productivity vector {Arst , Zrst } for each
region-sector pair. To connect our data to the objects in the model, we make the following measurement choices:
  1. We classify individuals into high and low skill workers by their years of schooling. We assume workers with at
     least secondary schooling are high skill workers. In Figure A-3 we show the share of high skilled employment
     as a function of the urbanization rate. In rural regions, only 20% of workers are high-skilled. In cities, this
     share is twice as large.
  2. As in our baseline model, we assume a Mincerian return  = 5.6% per year of schooling within skill groups.
                                                             -       +
     This allows us to measure the aggregate skill supplies Hrt and Hrt for each region.
  3. As in our baseline model, we use the observed sectoral earnings shares by skill group to measure sectoral labor
     supplies. Specifically, for each skill group j = {-, +} and sector s, we calculate

                                              j              i   1 [i  j and i  s] wi    j
                                             Hrst =                                   × Hrt
                                                                      i 1 [i  j ] w i

     where wi is the wage of individual i.
                                                     j                 1       Lj     j          j
  4. We then calculate the regional skill prices as wr =              Lj
                                                                                rt
                                                                               i=1   yrti where yrti denotes total income of individual
                                                                       rt
     i in region rat time t in skill group j .

These data are sufficient to uniquely solve for {Arst , Zrst } and to perform the counterfactual analysis reported in
Section 7.3.2.




                                                                   A-14
                                                    .4
                                     Share of High Skilled Employment
                                       .25          .3
                                                    .2         .35




                                                                        1   2               3              4   5
                                                                                Quintile of Urbanization




Figure A-3: Share of high skilled employment by urbanization. The figure shows the share of employment
with at least secondary schooling for different quantiles of urbanization.


              APPENDIX B: DATA AND MEASUREMENT
      In this section, we discuss the data and empirical issues discussed in the text.


B-1         Data Sources
Our analysis relies on four data sets:

     1. The national sample survey (NSS)
     2. The Economic Census (EC)
     3. The Service Sector in India: 2006-2007
     4. The Informal Non-Agricultural Enterprises Survey 1999-2000 (INAES)
     5. The Household Expenditure survey

      In this section we describe these datasets in detail.

B-1.1        National Sample Survey (NSS)
The National Sample Survey (NSS) is a representative survey conducted by the Government of India to collect
socio-economic data at the household level since 1950. Each round of the survey consists of several schedules that
cover different topics like "consumer expenditure", "employment and unemployment", "participation in education",
etc. We focus on the "consumer expenditure" module and the "employment and unemployment" module and use
data from rounds 43, 55, 60, 64, 66 and 68 of NSS, which span the years 1987 to 2011. The survey covers the
entirety of India except a few regions due to unfavorable field conditions.4
    We use the "employment and unemployment" module to measure sectoral employment shares and total earnings.
An individual is defined as being employed if his/her usual principal activity is one of the following: (i) worked
in household enterprises (self-employed); (ii) worked as helper in household enterprises; (iii) worked as regular
4   For example, Ladakh and Kargil districts of Jammu & Kashmir, some interior villages of Nagaland, and villages in Andaman and
    Nicobar Islands are not covered in some rounds of the survey.



                                                                                     B-1
salaried/wage employee; (iv) worked as casual wage labour in public works; (v) worked as casual wage labour in
other types of work. We describe the details of our sectoral employment classification in Section B-2 below.
    As our measure of income we focus on total expenditure. More specifically, we measure total household ex-
penditure and divide it by household size. We do so to properly account for the relative income of self-employed
of informally employed employees. In the main analysis, we winsorize the expenditure data at 98th percentiles to
account for measurement error.
    As we describe in more detail in Section B-1.5, the NSS provides two measures of expenditure. The so-called
uniform reference period (URP) measure simply measures total expenditure as expenditure within the last 30 days.
The mixed reference period (MRP) measure asks respondents for the total expenditure within the last year for
a subset of durable goods to account for the lumpiness of purchases. For all years except 1987, expenditure is
reported using the MRP classification. To make the results comparable across years, we merge the expenditure
module (described in Section B-1.5) with the employment module in 1987 at the household-level and use the MRP
measure contained in the expenditure module. In practice, this choice is inconsequential because the different
measures are highly correlated. In Table B-1 we report the correlation between the monthly per capita expenditure
(MPCE) measure reported in the employment module, the MPCE URP measure reported in the expenditure module
and the URP and MRP measures after winsorizing. This correlation exceeds 0.9 for all measures and our results
do not hinge on which measure we use for 1987.

                                                 MPCE            MPCE          MPCE URP       MPCE MRP
                                               Employment      Expenditure      Authors'        Authors'
                                                 module          module        calculation     calculation
        MPCE    (Employment module)                 1
        MPCE    URP (Expenditure module)          0.968              1
        MPCE    URP (authors' calculation)        0.967            0.998            1
        MPCE    MRP (authors' calculation)        0.916            0.939          0.941             1

Table B-1: Correlation Matrix of different expenditure measures. The table shows the correlation
between household expenditure reported in the NSS employment schedule, NSS expenditure schedule, and calculated
by authors. We trim the top 1% and bottom 1% of observations.


    To measure human capital, we utilize information on educational attainment. We classify individual's education
into four levels: (i) less than primary; (ii) primary, upper primary, and middle; (iii) secondary; (iv) more than
secondary. We then associate different years of schooling to each category to estimate annual returns. Building on
the official classification in India, we attribute 0, 3, 6, and 9 years respectively.
    The "consumer expenditure" module collects information on households' consumption of various kinds of food,
entertainment, sundry articles, consumer services and housing expenses during last 30 days and consumption of
clothing, bedding, footwear, education and medical goods and services, and various durable goods during last 365
days. We measure total monthly household consumer expenditure as the sum of of all monthly-based expenditures
and 30/365 of yearly-based expenditure.
    In Table B-2 we report the summary statistics about the sample size of the NSS in the different years. Depending
on the year, our data comprises between 60,000 and 120,000 household and between 300,000 and 600,000 individuals.

B-1.2     Economic Census
The India Economic Census (EC) is a complete count of all establishments, i.e. production units engaged in
production or distribution of goods and services not for the purpose of sole consumption, located within the country.
The Censuses were conducted in the years 1977, 1980, 1990, 1998, 2005, 2013, 2019. The micro-level data in 1990,
1998, 2005, 2013 are publicly available.
   The EC collects information such as firms' location, industry, ownership, employment, source of financing and
the owner's social group. It covers all economic sectors excluding crop production and plantation. The EC in 2005
and 2013 exclude some public sectors like public administration, defense and social security. In terms of geography,


                                                        B-2
                                        Round        Year         Households      Individuals
                                         43        1987-1988       126,353          654,903
                                         55        1999-2000       107,215          596,688
                                         60          2004           59,042          303,233
                                         64        2007-2008       125,578          572,254
                                         66        2009-2010       100,957          459,784
                                         68        2011-2012       101,717          456,970

                              Table B-2: National Sample Survey: Summary statistics.


the EC covers all States and Union Territories of the country except for the year 1990, which covers all states except
Jammu and Kashmir.
    In Table B-3 we report some summary statistics of the EC in various years. In the most recent year, 2013,
the EC has information on almost 60m firms. As expected, the majority of such firms is very small. Average
employment is around 2 and 55% firms have a single employee. The share of firms with more than 100 employees
is 0.06%.

                            Year    Number            Total               Employment distribution
                                     of firms     employment       Avg.       1   empl. < 5 > 100
                            1990    24216790        74570280       3.08    53.77%    91.24%     0.13%
                            1998    30348881        83308504       2.75    51.18%    91.71%     0.11%
                            2005    41826989       100904120       2.41    55.76%    93.17%     0.12%
                            2013    58495359       131293872       2.24    55.47%    93.44%     0.06%


Table B-3: The Economic Census: Summary Statistics. The table report the number of firms, total employ-
ment, average employment and the share of firms with 1, less than 5 and more than 100 employees.



B-1.3         Service Sector in India: 2006-2007
The Service Sector in India (2006-2007) dataset is part of an integrated survey by the NSSO (National Sample
Survey Organisation) in its 63rd round. In the 57th round (2001-2002), the dataset was called "Unorganized
Service Sector". With the inclusion of the financial sector and large firms, the dataset was renamed as "Service
Sector in India" and is designed to be representative for India's service sector. In Table B-4 we compare this Service
Survey with the Economic Census for a variety of subsectors within the service sector. Table B-4 shows that the
service survey is consistent with the EC, i.e. average firm size and the share of firms with less than 5 employees are
quite comparable in most subsectors.
    The Service Survey covers a broad range of service sectors, including hotels and restaurants (Section H of
NIC 04); transport, storage and communication (I); financial intermediation (J); real estate, renting and business
activities (K); education (M); health and social work (N) and other community, social and personal service activities
(O). Excluded are the following subsectors: railways transportation, air transport, pipeline transport; monetary
intermediation (central banks, commercial banks, etc); trade unions; government and public sector enterprises and
firms that appeared in the Annual Survey of Industries frame (ASI 2004-2005). In terms of geography, the survey
covers the whole of Indian Union except for 4 districts and some remote villages.5 The survey was conducted in a
total number of 5573 villages and 7698 urban blocks. A total of 190,282 enterprises were ultimately surveyed.
    For our analysis we use two pieces of information: the number of employees and whether the main customer is
another firm or a household.
5   The survey covered the whole of India except (i) Leh (Ladakh), Kargil, Punch and the Rajauri districts of Jammu & Kashmir, (ii)
    interior villages situated beyond 5 km of a bus route in Nagaland, (iii) villages of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, that remain
    inaccessible throughout the year.




                                                                 B-3
    NIC2004                        Sector                             Number of firms        Average employment       Less than 5 employees
                                                                    EC    Service Survey     EC    Service Survey     EC     Service Survey
       55       Hotels and restaurants                           1499101       30744         2.52       2.49          90%         91%
       60       Land transport; transport via pipelines          1317904       41065         1.67        1.24         97%         99%
       61       Water transport                                    7914          174         4.35       1.92          0.90        0.98
       63       Transport activities; travel agencies             188474        2101         3.40       3.33          86%         85%
       64       Post and telecommunications                       723119       22885         2.06       1.41          96%         99%
      65-67     Financial intermediation                          293489       16331         5.61       3.81          69%         82%
       70       Real estate activities                            70128         3648        2.18        1.64          93%         96%
       71       Renting of machinery and household goods          365246        5387         2.00        1.77         94%         97%
       72       Computer and related activities                    66414        1060         6.01       13.45         83%         86%
       73       Research and development                           2097           5         16.66       4.58          66%         89%
       74       Other business activities                         519696       10610        2.81        1.92          90%         95%
       85       Health and social work                            783644       11930         3.39       1.99          88%         95%
       91       Activities of membership organizations           1002996        2837         1.82        1.32         94%         98%
       92       Recreational, cultural and sporting activities    222061        2698         2.95        2.91         85%         82%
       93       Other service activities                         1419685       26132         1.74       1.54          97%         99%



Table B-4: Economic Census and Service Survey. The table reports statistics about firms' number and
employment from the Economic Census 2005 and Service Survey 2006.


B-1.4         Informal Non-Agricultural Enterprises Survey 1999-2000 (INAES)
We use this dataset to allocate employment in the construction sector to either consumer or producer services.
The Informal Non-Agricultural Enterprises Survey is part of the 55th survey round of the NSSO. It covers all
informal enterprises in the non-agricultural sector of the economy, excluding those engaged in mining, quarrying
and electricity, gas and water supply.6 The Informal Non-Agricultural Enterprises Survey collects information on
operational characteristics, expenses, value-added, fixed asset, loan and factor income. For our analysis we use two
pieces of information: the number of employees and whether the main customer is another firm or a household.

B-1.5         Household Expenditure Survey
To estimate the expenditure elasticity  we rely on data on consumer expenditure. This data is contained in
the National Sample Survey, Round 68, Schedule 1.0. The dataset reports detailed information on a large set of
spending categories. In Table B-5 we report the broad classifications. The data also contains a finer allocation of
spending within each category. For the purpose of this paper, we rely only on the classification in Table B-5.
    We classify consumers' spending on food as categories 1 - 17. We classify spending on consumer services as all
spending in the consumer service category (category 24) and on entertainment (category 20). In Tables B-6 and
B-7 we report the more detailed classification of the consumer service and entertainment spending categories.
    Spending on category c is measured as spending within a particular reference period. For all categories, subject
report total spending during the last 30 days. For durable goods, and medical and educational spending (i.e.
categories 29-34), the subjects additionally report total spending in the last year. This second concept of expenditure
aims to account for the lumpiness of purchases. For this group we therefore take 1/12 of annual spending as our
measure of monthly expenditure. We measure total spending as the sum of all spending across all categories to
calculate the spending share on food and consumer services.
    In Table B-8 we report a selected set of summary statistics for the main variables of interest. In total we
have expenditure data for slghtly more than 100,000 households. In the first two rows we show the distribution of
household expenditure for the case of measuring durable spending at the monthly frequency (the uniform reference
6   The organized sector comprises all factories registered under Sections 2(m)(i) and 2(m)(ii) of the Factories Act, 1948, where 2(m)(i)
    includes manufacturing factories which employ 10 or more workers with electric power, and 2(m)(ii) includes manufacturing factories
    which 20 or more without electric power. The unorganized sector comprises all factories not covered in the organized sector. The
    informal sector is a subset of the unorganized sector. The unorganized sector includes four types of enterprises: (i) unincorporated
    proprietary enterprises; (ii) partnership enterprises;(iii) enterprises run by cooperative societies, trusts, private; (iv) public limited
    companies. The informal sector only includes firms in category (i) and (ii).



                                                                      B-4
     No.   Description              No.   Description                           No.   Description
      1    Cereals                  13    Served processed food                 25    Conveyance
      2    Cereal substitute        14    Packaged processed food               26    Rent
      3    Pulses and products      15    Pan                                   27    Consumer taxes and cesses
      4    Milk and milk products   16    Tobacco                               28    Sub-total (1 ­ 27)
      5    Salt and sugar           17    Intoxicants                           29    Clothing
      6    Edible oil               18    Fuel and light                        30    Bedding
      7    Egg, fish and meat       19    Medical (non-institutional)           31    Footwear
      8    Vegetables               20    Entertainment                         32    education
      9    Fruits (fresh)           21    Minor durable-type goods              33    Medical (institutional)
     10    Fruits (dry)             22    Toilet articles                       34    Durable goods
     11    Spices                   23    Other household consumables           35    Sub-total (29 ­ 34)
     12    Beverages                24    Consumer services excl. conveyance


Table B-5: Broad classification of NSS expenditure survey. The table report the classification of broad
expenditure items in the Expenditure Survey.




              No.   Description                   No.     Description
              480   Domestic servant/cook         490     Postage and telegram
              481   Attendant                     491     Miscellaneous expenses
              482   Sweeper                       492     Priest
              483   Barber, beautician, etc.      493     Legal expenses
              484   Washerman, laundry, ironing   494     Repair charges for non-durables
              485   Tailor                        495     Pet animals (incl. birds, fish)
              486   Grinding charges              496     Internet expenses
              487   Telephone charges: landline   497     Other consumer services excluding conveyance
              488   Telephone charges: mobile


Table B-6: Expenditure items within consumer services. This table reports the detailed expenditure items
within the category consumer services (category 24 in Table B-5)




                 No.   Description                         No.   Description
                 430   Cinema, theatre                     435   Photography
                 431   Mela, fair, picnic                  436   VCD/ DVD hire (incl. instrument)
                 432   Sports goods, toys, etc.            437   Cable TV
                 433   Club fees                           438   Other entertainment
                 434   Goods for recreation and hobbies


Table B-7: Expenditure items within entertainment. This table reports the detailed expenditure items
within the category entertainment (category 20 in Table B-5)




                                                          B-5
period URP ) and or at the annual frequency (the mixed reference period MRP ). Table B-8 shows that the disperion
is spending is much higher for URP case, especially in the right tail. We therefore use the MRP measure as our
measure of total expenditure.
    Table B-8 also reports a set of statistics for the distribution of food shares and consumer service spending shares.
The full distribution is shown in Figure B-1. There is ample cross-sectional dispersion. Through the lens of our
theory, this dispersion is generated through heterogeneity in income and relative prices.

                       Panel a: Food share                                                Panel b: Consumer service share




                                                                           15
   3




                                                                           10
   2




                                                                           5
   1
   0




                                                                           0
       0          .2         .4             .6         .8        1              0             .2                .4                 .6        .8
                          Food expenditure share                                                Consumer service expenditure share



Figure B-1: Distributon of food and consumer service expenditure shares. The figure shows the
unconditional distribution of the expenditure shares for food (left panel) and consumer services (right panel).

   .

                                                      N      mean      sd           min   median       p90           p95            max
           Household expenditure (URP )            101,662   8,226   12,784         40     6,264      14,475        19,081       1,239,930
           Household expenditure (MRP )            101,662   8,316   7,438          44     6,572      14,960        19,433        339,832
           Household size                          101,662   4.57     2.25           1       4           7            9              39
           Food expenditure share                  101,662   0.49     0.13           0     0.50        0.64          0.68             1
           CS expenditure share                    101,662   0.06     0.04           0     0.06        0.11          0.14           0.67


Table B-8: NSS expenditure survey: Summary statistics. The table reports selected summary statistics
from the NSS expenditure survey.

    For our regression analysis reported in Tables 3 and 5 we control for additional household level of covariates.
We control for the size of the household and the number of (potential) workers in the household which we define as
all individuals between age 15 and 65. We also control for additional household demographics, namely
   · the type of the household, which for rural areas is one of (i) self-employed in agriculture, (ii) self-employed
     in non-agriculture, (iii) regular wage/salary earner, (iv) casual worker in agriculture and (v) casual worker
     in non-agriculture, (vi) other and in urban areas one of (i) self-employed (ii) regular wage/salary earner, (iii)
     casual worker, (vi) other;
   · the household's religion, which is one of Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, Sikhism, Jainism, Buddhism, Zoroas-
     trianism and other;
   · the household's social group, which is one of the following: scheduled tribe, scheduled case, backward class
     and other.
Finally, the survey also reports whether the household is eligible to receive a rationing card.

                                                                     B-6
B-2      Classification of Industries
At the heart of our analysis is the sectoral composition of regional employment. In our theory we distinguish between
four sectors: Agriculture, Manufacturing, Consumer Services and Producer Services. To map these concepts to
sectors in the data, we first construct six broad industries (see Section B-2.1). In a second step we then attribute
employment in services and construction to consumer and producer services respectively - see Section B-2.2.

B-2.1     Broad Industry Classification
We initially divide economic activities into six industries:
  1. Agriculture
  2. Manufacturing
  3. Construction and Utilities
  4. Services
  5. Information and Communications Technology (ICT)
  6. Public Administration and Education.
To do so we rely on India's official classification system National Industrial Classification (NIC). We report our
classification of industries in Table B-9.

        Industry              NIC 2008                                     Description
        Agriculture           01-03         Agriculture, forestry and fishing
                              05-09         Mining of coal and lignite
       Manufacturing
                              10-33         Manufacturing
                              35            Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply
  Construction & Utilities    36-39         Water supply; sewerage, waste management and remediation activities
                              41-43         Construction
                              45-47         Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles
                              49-53         Transportation and storage
                              55-56         Accommodation and Food service activities
                              581           Publishing of books, periodicals and other publishing activities
                              64-66         Financial and insurance activities
          Services            68            Real estate activities
                              69-75         Professional, scientific and technical activities
                              77-82         Administrative and support service activities
                              86-88         Human health and social work activities
                              90-93         Arts, entertainment and recreation
                              94-96         Other service activities
                              97            Activities of households as employers of domestic personnel
           ICT                582-63        Information and communication
   Public Administration      84            Public administration and defence; compulsory social security
            &                 85            Education
         Education            99            Activities of extraterritorial organizations and bodies

 Table B-9: Industrial Classification. The table reports the industrial classification into six broad sectors.

   Because the NIC classification system changes over time, we construct a concordance table between 2-digit
industries of different versions of the NIC based on official NIC documents and detailed sector descriptions. This
concordance system allows to compare sectoral employment patterns over time. Our crosswalk is reported in Table
B-10.

                                                          B-7
                          sector                                        NIC-1987                     NIC-1998 & NIC-2004                        NIC-2008
                                                                                    Agriculture
       Agriculture and hunting                                            00-04                                01                                   01
       Forestry and logging                                                05                                  02                                   02
       Fishing and aquaculture                                             06                                  05                                   03
                                                                                     Manufacturing
       Coal, lignite, and peat                                                10                                 10                               05, 0892
       Crude petroleum and natural gas                                      11,19                                11                                06, 091
       Metal ores                                                         12, 13, 14                           12,13                                  07
       Other mining and quarrying                                             15                                 14                        08(except0892), 099
       Food products                                                   20,21, 220-224                            15                                 10, 11
       Tobacco products                                                    225-229                              16                                    12
       Textiles and wearing apparel                                         23 24                             17, 18                               13, 14
       Leather products                                                29(except 292)                            19                                   15
       Wood products                                                 27(except 276-277)                          20                                   16
       Paper products, printing and publishing                                28                              21, 22                             17, 18, 581
       Refined petroleum                                                   314-319                               23                                   19
       Chemicals                                                              30                                 24                                20, 21
       Rubber and plastics products                                 310-313(except3134)                          25                                   22
       Other non-metallic mineral products                                    32                                 26                                   23
       Basic metals                                                    33(except338)                             27                                   24
       Fabricated metal                                           34(except342), 352, 391                    28, 2927                             25, 3311
       Machinery and equipment                         35-36(except352), 390, 392, 393, 395, 396, 399   29-32 (except2927)   261-264, 268, 27, 28, 3312, 3314, 3319, 332, 9512
       Medical, precision and optical instruments                          380-382                               33                         265-267, 325, 3313
       Transport equipment                                                 37, 397                            34, 35                            29, 30, 3315
       Furniture                                                     276, 277, 3134, 342                        361                                   31
       Other manufacturing                                                 383-389                              369                            32(except325)
                                                                                Construction & Utilities
       Electricity, gas, steam supply                                     40, 41, 43                             40                                 35
       Water supply                                                           42                                 41                                 36
       Sewerage and waste treatment                                     338, 6892, 91                          37,90                            37, 38, 39
       Construction                                                         50, 51                               45                             41, 42, 43
                                                                                         Services
       Wholesale                                               398, 60-64, 682, 686, 890, 974          50, 51(except51901)                        45, 46
       Retail                                                   65-68(except682,686,6892)              52(except526,52591)                          47
       Repair services                                                 97(except974)                            526                                952
       Land transport                                                         70                                 60                                 49
       Water transport                                                        71                                 61                                 50
       Air transport                                                          72                                 62                                 51
       Supporting and auxiliary transport activities          730, 731, 732, 737, 738, 739, 74                   63                               52, 79
       Post and telecommunications                                            75                                 64                               53, 61
       Hotels                                                                691                                551                                 55
       Restaurants                                                           690                                552                                 56
       Computer and related activities                                  394, 892, 897                         72, 922                       582, 62, 63, 9511
       Financial service                                                      80                              65, 67                              64, 66
       Insurance and pension                                                  81                                 66                                 65
       Real estate activities                                                 82                                 70                                 68
       Legal activities                                                       83                               7411                                691
       Accounting                                                            891                               7412                                692
       Business and management consultancy                                   893                            7413, 7414                           70, 732
       Architecture and engineering                                        894, 895                             742                                 71
       Research and development                                              922                                 73                                 72
       Advertising                                                           896                                743                                731
       Other business activities                                           898, 899                             749                         74, 78, 80, 81, 82
       Renting                                                     733, 734, 735, 736, 85                        71                                 77
       Health and social work                                              93, 941                               85                           75, 86, 87, 88
       Recreational cultural and sporting activities                          95                          92(except922)                     59, 60, 90, 91, 93
       Gambling                                                               84                           51901, 52591                             92
       Membership organizations                                        94(except941)                             91                                 94
       Personal service                                                     96, 99                            93, 95                              96, 97
       goods-producing activities for own use                               #N/A                                96                                 981
       services-producing activities for own use                            #N/A                                 97                                982
                                                                        Public Administration & Education
       Public administration and defence                                      90                                 75                                 84
       Education                                                           920-921                               80                                 85
       Extraterritorial organizations                                         98                                 99                                 99


Table B-10: Concordance between 2-digit industry Classes. The table report the classification of NIC
codes in different years to the broad sectoral categories of Table B-9.




                                                                                       B-8
                                                                                    .4
                                        Share of employment of firms selling to firms
                                              .1        .2    0       .3




                                                                                         1   2   3     4      5    6-10    11-20   21-50   51+
                                                                                                     Number of employees




Figure B-2: Producer service share by firm size. The figure shows the share of service firms whose main
customer are other firms (as opposed to private individuals) with breakdown by firm size.


B-2.2         Attributing Employment to Producer and Consumer Services
Our theory highlights the difference between PS, that are inputs in the production of goods, and CS, that are bought
directly by consumers and are luxuries. In terms of the data, see Table B-9, financial and insurance activities (NIC
codes 64-66) are examples of the former while retail trade (NIC codes 45-47) is an example of the latter.
     In order to arrive at a systematic classification, we rely on the Service Survey (see Section B-1.3) that reports
the identify of the main buyer of a given firm. We therefore refer to firms that sell to other firms as PS-firms and
firms that sell to consumers as CS-firms.
     Ideally, we would calculate the employment share of PS-firms in each subsector of the service sectors and in
each region. The regional variation is important because our theory stresses that CS and PS productivity varies at
the regional level. Given the large number of regions and subsection, the sample size of the Service Survey is not
sufficiently large to estimate these averages precisely.
     We therefore generate the regional variation in employment shares by using regional variation in the firm-size
distribution and differences in the employment share of PS firms by firm size. Empirically, large firms are - within
their subsector - much more likely to sell to firms. To see this, consider Figure B-2 where we depict the employment
share of PS firms as a function of firm size in the raw data. In Table B-11 we show that the same pattern is presents
within two- and three-digit industries and whether or not we use sampling weights. In particular, we regress a
dummy variable for whether the firm sells mainly to other firms on different firm size dummies. The coefficients
are generally positive and increasing.
     To exploit this size-dependence, we adopt the following procedure:

     1. For each 2-digit subsector k within the service sector listed in Table B-9 and size bin b we calculate the
        employment share of PS firms as
                                               PS       f (k,b) 1 {f  P S } lf
                                              kb  =                            .
                                                               f (k,b) lf

         Here, f denotes a firm, 1 {f  P S } is an indicator that takes the value 1 if firm f is a PS firm and lf denotes
         firm employment. In practice we take three size bins, namely "1 or 2 employees", "3-20 employees" and "more
         than 20" employees. We always weigh observations with the sampling weights provided in the Service Survey.7
7   In some industries, there are not enough firms with more then 20 employees to estimate kb  P S precisely. If there are less than 5 firms

    and kbP S is smaller than  P S in the pre-ceding size bin (i.e.  P S <  P S ), we set  P S =  P S . Hence, for cells with few firms we
                               kb                                   k3     k2             k3      k2
    impose the the share of PS firms is monotonic in firm size.




                                                                                                           B-9
                                                     Probability of selling to firms
               2 employees                0.013         0.014           0.014          0.016
                                           (0.001)       (0.002)         (0.001)        (0.002)
               3 employees                0.030         0.028           0.028          0.029
                                           (0.002)       (0.006)         (0.002)        (0.005)
               4 employees                0.055         0.063           0.049          0.059
                                           (0.004)       (0.011)         (0.004)        (0.011)
               5 employees                0.080         0.074           0.070          0.072
                                           (0.006)       (0.011)         (0.006)        (0.010)
               6-10 employees             0.090         0.062           0.080          0.057
                                           (0.005)       (0.007)         (0.005)        (0.007)
               11-20 employees            0.085         0.042           0.074          0.039
                                           (0.006)       (0.008)         (0.006)        (0.008)
               21-50 employees            0.192         0.106           0.164          0.099
                                           (0.016)       (0.026)         (0.016)        (0.025)
               more than 50 employees     0.345         0.159           0.304          0.137
                                           (0.023)       (0.044)         (0.022)        (0.034)
               Industry FE (2 digit)         Yes           Yes
               Industry FE (3 digit)                                       Yes           Yes
               Sampling weights              No            Yes             No            Yes
               N                           173743        173743          173743        173743
               R2                           0.100         0.077           0.133         0.104

Table B-11: Corporate Customers and Firm Size. Notes: Columns 1 and 2 (3 and 4) control for two (three)
digit industry fixed effects. Columns 2 and 4 weigh each observation by the sampling weights. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     B-10
  2. We then use the Economic Census (see Section B-1.2) and calculate the share of employment of firms in size
     bin b in subsector k in region r as
                                                        f (k,b,r ) lf
                                                kbr =
                                                         f (k,r ) lf

  3. We then combine these two objects to calculate the share of employment of PS firms in region r in subsector
     k as
                                                 sP S
                                                  rk =
                                                                 PS
                                                            kbr kb
                                                                b

  4. Finally, we use sP S
                      rk to calculate the share of employment in PS and CS in region r as


                                 PS       k   sP S N SS
                                               rk lrk               CS       k   1 - sP  S N SS
                                                                                       rk lrk
                                 r    =        N SS
                                                          and       r    =          N SS
                                                                                                ,
                                              lrk                                  lrk
            N SS
     where lrk   denotes total employment in subsector k in region r as measured from NSS.

    Five subsectors within the service sector are not covered by the Service Survey. Table B-12 reports our approach
to attribute the employment in these subsectors to the PS or CS sector respectively.

             NIC2004                    Industry                                      Approach
             22          Publishing, printing and reproduction           Attribute all employment to PS
                         of recorded media
             50          Sale, maintenance and repair of motor           Use average PS share (at firm-size
                         vehicles and motorcycles; retail sale of        bin level) from other sectors for
                         automotive fuel                                 which we have information
             51          Wholesale trade and commission trade,           Use average PS share (at firm-size
                         except of motor vehicles and motorcy-           bin level) from other sectors for
                         cles                                            which we have information
             52          Retail trade, except of motor vehicles          Attribute all employment to CS
                         and motorcycles; repair of personal and
                         household goods
             62          Air transport                                   Attribute all employment to PS

Table B-12: Imputation of PS employment. This table reports our imputation of PS and CS employment for
subsectors that are not covered by the service survey.



B-2.3     Attributing employment in Construction & Utilities to PS and CS and the
          Public Sector
As explained in the text we also attribute employment in construction and utilities to either CS or PS. We follow
a similar strategy as for the service sector. To do so, we use the Informal Non-Agricultural Enterprises Survey
1999-2000 (see Section B-1.4).
    From the description of National Industry Classification, some subsectors are clearly for public purposes. We
therefore classify 5-digit level industries within the construction sector into public and private. The results are
reported in Table B-13.
    We drop for our analysis all subsectors, that we classify as public. These account for roughly 9.2% of total
construction employment (see below). For all subsectors attributed to the private sector, we estimate the CS and
PS share based on the information in the Informal Non-Agricultural Enterprises Survey. The survey has information
on firms in the construction sector and reports the identify of the main buyer of the firm. In particular, we observe
in the data whether the firm sells to (i) the government, (ii) a cooperative or marketing society, (iii) a private
enterprise, (iv) a contractor or intermediary, (v) a private individual and (vi) others. We associate all firms that

                                                          B-11
         NIC-2004                                                            Description                                                         Public/Private
          45101     Site preparation in connection with mining                                                                                      Public
          45102     Site preparation other than in connection with mining                                                                           Public
          45201     General construction (including alteration, addition, repair and maintenance) of residential buildings.                         Private
          45202     General construction (including alteration, addition, repair and maintenance) of non-residential buildings.                     Private
          45203     Construction and maintenance of roads, rail-beds, bridges, tunnels, pipelines, rope-ways, ports, harbours and runways etc.      Public
          45204     Construction/erection and maintenance of power, telecommunication and transmission lines                                        Public
          45205     Construction and maintenance of waterways and water reservoirs                                                                  Public
          45206     Construction and maintenance of hydro-electric projects                                                                         Public
          45207     Construction and maintenance of power plants, other than hydro-electric power plants                                            Public
          45208     Construction and maintenance of industrial plants other than power plants                                                       Private
          45209     Construction n.e.c. including special trade construction                                                                        Private
          45301     Plumbing and drainage                                                                                                           Private
          45302     Installation of heating and air-conditioning systems, antennas, elevators and escalators                                        Private
          45303     Electrical installation work for constructions                                                                                  Private
          45309     "Other building installation n.e.c.                                                                                             Private
          45401     Setting of wall and floor tiles or covering with other materials like parquet, carpets, wall paper etc.                         Private
          45402     Glazing, plastering, painting and decorating, floor sanding and other similar finishing work                                    Private
          45403     Finish carpentry such as fixing of doors, windows, panels etc. and other building finishing work n.e.c.                         Private
          45500     Renting of construction or demolition equipment with operator                                                                   Private


Table B-13: Classification of the construction sector. The table reports how we classify different subsec-
tors in the construction sector as either public or private sectors.


answer (ii), (iii) or (iv) with PS firms and all firms that answer (v) with CS firms. We then calculate the PS share
of a given private subsector as total PS employment relative to total CS and PS employment in the respective
subsector, i.e. for subsector k we calculate the PS share as

                                                             PS              f k   1 {f  P S } lf
                                                             k  =                                        ,
                                                                                      f k lf

where lf denotes firm employment and 1 {f  P S } is an indicator for whether firm f is a PS firm.
    In Table B-14 we report the relative employment shares of public employment (as classified in Table B-13), CS
and PS in the construction sector as a whole. The share of public employment is around 10% with a slight bump in
2009, presumably a consequence of the financial crisis in 2008. Among the private subsectors, 12.9% of employment
is associated with the provision of producer services.

                                                                                1999         2004        2007        2009
                                         Public employment                      0.073        0.102       0.073       0.136
                                         CS employment share                    0.806        0.781       0.809       0.755
                                         PS employment share                    0.121        0.116       0.118       0.109
                                         PS/(PS+CS)                             0.131        0.130       0.127       0.126

Table B-14: Composition of the construction sector. The table shows the relative employment shares of
PS, CS and public employment in the construction sector in different years. We associate public employment to
sectors classified as "public" in Table B-13. The classification of employment in the private subsectors to CS and
PS is explained in the main text. The last row reports the relative employment share of PS within the private
subsectors.


    To calculate total employment in PS and CS industries within the private subsectors of the construction sector
                                                      PS
at the regional level, we apply the 5-digit PS shares k  to the NSS employment data and calculate total as
                                                           P S N SS                                            P S N SS
                                        PS           k   k    lrk                       CS           k   1 - k     lrk
                                        r    =            N SS
                                                                          and           r    =              N SS
                                                                                                                        .
                                                         lrk                                               lrk

Note that the regional variation in PS and CS shares within the construction sector only arises because regions
differ in the relative size of the different private subsectors listed in Table B-13.



                                                                               B-12
B-2.4        Top-coding of CS and PS employment shares
Our model implies that regional CS expenditure shares (and hence employment shares) are bounded from above by
CS . Similarly, our model implies that the share of producer service employment ("lawyers") relative to production
workers is bounded from above by  . Given our estimated of CS = 0.69 and  = 0.7 reported in Table 4, 16 districts
violate this requirement and we topcode them in our analysis. Topcoding such districts is entirely inconsequential
because these districts are very small. In Table B-15 we report the aggregate population share of such districts by
year. As can be seen, in almost all years, such districts account for less than 1% of the total population in India in
almost all years.

                                                  Total share of population
                                     Year    CS empl. share >CS PS empl. share >
                                     1987           0.0013                  0.0075
                                     2011           0.0018                  0.0092

Table B-15: Employment Shares of Top-Coded Districts. The table reports the aggregate population share
of all districts whose employment share in CS exceeds CS (column 1) or  (column 2).



B-3          Geography: Harmonizing Regional Borders
In this section we describe our procedure to harmonize the geographical boundaries to construct a consistent panel
of time-invariant localities. This need arises because the borders of numerous Indian districts have changed between
1987 and 2011. This is for example seen in the left panel of Figure B-3 that plots the districts' boundaries in 2004
and 2011. The purple line represents the boundaries in 2004, the red line represents the boundaries in 2011.
    The most common type of regional re-districting is a partition where one district has been separated into several
districts in the subsequent years. The second type is a border move, where the shared border between two districts
changes. The third is a merge, where two districts are merged into a single district. In Figure B-4 we plot two
examples of such changes. The left panel shows a partition, where a district has been cut in half. The right district
shows a border move, where one districts expands on behalf of the other district.
    In order to carry out the analysis on a panel of districts with a consistent geography, we construct regions that
have consistent borders in 1987 and 2011. To keep the number of regions as large as possible, a region is always
the smallest area that covers a single district or a set of districts with consistent borders over time. For instance,
in the case of a partition, the region is constructed as the district in the pre-partition year. In the case of a border
move, a region is constructed as the union of two districts. We construct a regional map with consistent borders
from 1987 to 2011. The right panel of Figure shows the official Indian districts in the year 2011 (dashed red lines)
and the time-invariant geographical units, that we for simplicity also refer to as districts (solid blue lines).


B-4          The relative price of agricultural goods
Our estimation uses the relative price of agricultural goods (relative to manufacturing goods) to identify the rel-
ative productivity in the agricultural sector (relative to manufacturing). The Ministry of Planning and Program
Implementation (MOSPI) of the Government of India reports value added by 2-digit sectors at current prices and
constant prices from 1950-20138 We then construct the sectoral price index by
                                                         GDP at current pricei
                                                  pi =                                                                      (B-1)
                                                         GDP at constant pricei
8   The data is available at http://www.mospi.gov.in/data. See "Summary of macro economic aggregates at current prices, 1950-51 to
    2013-14" and "Summary of macro economic aggregates at constant(2004-05) prices, 1950-51 to 2013-14".




                                                               B-13
Figure B-3: District Borders in India: 1987 - 2011. The left figure plots the districts' boundaries in 2004 and
2011. The purple line represents the boundaries in 2004 and the red line represents the boundaries in 2011. The
right figure shows the official Indian districts in the year 2011 (dashed red lines) and the time-invariant geographical
units we construct (solid blue lines) upon which our analysis is based.


and normalize both price indexes in the year 2005 to unity. We then calculate the relative price of agricultural
products as
                                                           pagri
                                              prelative =                                                 (B-2)
                                                          pmanu
To check the validity of our results, we also use two additional data sources to calculate the relative price. The first
is the GGDC 10-Sector Database9 , which provides long-run data on sectoral productivity performance in Africa,
Asia, and Latin America. This data set reports the annual series of value-added at current national prices and
value-added at constant 2005 national prices. We follow the same procedures to calculate the relative price.
    The second is the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) reported by Office of the Economic Advisor10 . The WPI tracks
ex-factory price for manufactured products and market price for agricultural commodities. One issue with this is
that the base year (and the basket of goods) changes during different time periods. Two series are relevant to our
research. The first one is the series with the base year 1993, which is available from 1994 to 2009. The second
one is the series with the base year 2004, which is available from 2005 to 2016. Again, we use the same method to
calculate the relative price, and normalized the relative prize in the year 2005 to 1.
    In Figure B-5 we plot the relative price of agricultural goods to manufacturing goods. Since the pattern from
the different data sources are very similar, we use the results based on MOPSI in our analysis.


B-5         Estimating the expenditure elasticity ()
In Table 3 in the main text we reported the estimated elasticity of agricultural expenditure shares with respect
to total expenditure. In Figure B-6 we show the estimated Engel curve for the year 2011 graphically. As implied
by the PIGL preference specification, the relationship is approximately linear for a large part of the expenditure
distribution.
9   The data is available at https://www.rug.nl/ggdc/productivity/10-sector
10   The data is available at https://eaindustry.nic.in/




                                                              B-14
Figure B-4: Two Types of Boundary Change. The figure shows an example of a partition (left panel) and a
border move (right panel).
                                          1.6
                                          1.4
                                p_A/p_M
                                          1.2
                                          1
                                          .8




                                                1980   1985         1990   1995      2000        2005        2010       2015
                                                                                  year

                                                        MOSPI              GGDC             WPI (1993)              WPI (2004)




Figure B-5: Relative price of agricultural to manufacturing goods. The figure shows the relative price
of agricultural products as calculated in (B-1) and (B-2) from the different sources mentioned in the main text.
"MOSPI" refers to the data from the Indian Government is used in our analysis. "GGDC" stems from GGDC
10-Sector Database. "WPI (1993)" and "WPI (2004)" are based on the Wholesale Price Index with a 1993 base
year and a 2004 base year respectively.


Value added versus Final Expenditure
Our estimation of  relies on individual-level expenditure data. This data refers to consumer spending on final
goods. Our theory, in contrast, is described in terms of value added. This raises the question whether we can
identify the preference parameters of our value-added preferences from the data on final expenditure.
    As shown in Herrendorf et al. (2013), the relevant parameters of consumers' preferences over final goods are
in general distinct from the preference parameters consistent with the value-added interpretation. However, as we
show now, this is less of a concern for the case of the income elasticity , which is the only parameter we estimate
using data on expenditure.
    To see this, suppose the consumer preferences over final goods are also of the PIGL form and given
                                                                                        F E
                                      FE                        1            e                                FE
                                V                (e, q ) =                      FE               -           ~s
                                                                                                                 ln qj .         (B-3)
                                                              F E             s
                                                                           s qj                          s

Here qj denotes the price of the final good of sector s  {F, CS, G} and we denote the parameters with the
superscript "F E " to highlight that these are parameters of the final expenditure specification. The associated


                                                                            B-15
                                            -.4
                                            -.6
                                      log foodshare
                                            -.8
                                            -1
                                            -1.2




                                                      7.5     8          8.5            9             9.5        10
                                                                           log expenditure




Figure B-6: Engel curves in India. The figure shows a binscatter plot of the log food shares and log expenditure
for the year 2011 at the individual household level after absorbing district fixed effects.


expenditure share to (B-3) is given by
                                                                                                      -F E
                                                                                               e
                                                      F
                                                      s
                                                        E           FE
                                                          (e, q ) = s  + FE 
                                                                        ~s                      F E
                                                                                                             .                          (B-4)
                                                                                                  j
                                                                                             j qj

                                                                       FE
The micro-data on expenditure in principle identifies the parameters j     j
                                                                             , F E .
   To map these preference parameters to the demand system in terms of value added, we have have the technology
to transform sectoral value added into final goods. Suppose first that the mapping from value added to final
expenditure is given by a Cobb-Douglas technology

                                                             FE                        VA       js
                                                            ys  =                     yjs             ,                                 (B-5)
                                                                      j (A,CS,G)


where j js = 1 for all s.11 Here ys   FE                                                        VA
                                          is the total quantity of final goods in sector s and yjs is the value added
content of sector j in the production of sector s goods. Hence, the matrix [js ]js describes the input output matrix
of the economy.
    The specification in (B-5) implies that js is the cost share of sector j value added in the production of final
goods in sector s

                                                              pV A VA      FE FE
                                                               j yjs = js qs ys .
                                                                                    js
Furthermore, final good prices qs are given byqs =                      j   pV
                                                                             j
                                                                               A
                                                                                         . Total value added of sector j is therefore given by

                                                      pV A VA
                                                       j cj   =        pV A VA
                                                                        j cjs =
                                                                                                   FE FE
                                                                                               js qs cs .
                                                                  s                      s
11   Below we generalize our argument to a more general CES technology.




                                                                            B-16
This implies that the value added share of sector j is given by

                         pV A VA
                          j cj
                                                   FE FE
                                                  qs  cs
                 V
                 j
                   A
                     =             =         js          =                 js F
                                                                              j
                                                                                E
                             e           s
                                                     e                s
                                                                                                  -F E
                                                                                                          
                                                FE   FE                             e
                                   =         js s  +~s                                  F E
                                                                                                          
                                                                               m qm
                                                                                   m
                                         s
                                                                                                                           -F E
                                                FE                   FE                                    e
                                   =         js s  +             js ~s  ×                                         FE
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                          pV A jm m
                                         s                  s                                 m       j    j
                                                                                                                           -F E
                                                FE                   FE                                   e
                                   =         js s       +        js ~s             ×                                  FE
                                                                                                                   sm m
                                                                                                                                  .
                                         s                  s                                 s   (pV A
                                                                                                    s )
                                                                                                               m



Now define
                                                                             FE
                                                  j                       js s
                                                                  s
                                                                              FE
                                                   ~j                     js ~s
                                                                  s
                                                         = F E

as the cost-share weighted averages of the respective final good parameters. Then,
                                                                                          -
                                                                              e
                                         V
                                         j
                                           A
                                             = j + ~j                         V A j
                                                                                                  .                                   (B-6)
                                                                          s (ps )

Note that (B-6) is exactly the value added demand system of our theory. In particular, the elasticity parameter 
coincides exactly with the elasticity parameter of the final expenditure demand system in (B-4) and hence can be
estimated from the data on final expenditure. This is not the case for the other preference parameters     ~j and j .
                                                                                                            FE
In particular, knowledge of the input-output matrix [js ] is required to translate the final good share s       s
                                                                                                                  into
the value added shares [s ]. We therefore do not attempt to also estimate F or    ~F from the expenditure data but
only estimate .
    The Cobb-Douglas specification in (B-5) is particularly convenient because it gives rise to the exact value added
demand system of our theory. However, the results that the expenditure income elasticity F E and the value added
elasticity  are closely linked is more general. Suppose that the final good production function in (B-5) is given by
the more general CES form
                                                                         -s
                                                                            1                 s
                                                                                   s -1
                                        FE                       1/s
                                       ys    =          (bjs )            (cjs )   s                  .
                                                    j




                                                            B-17
Following the same steps as above, we then find that
                                1-s
                     bjs pV
                          j
                            A
V
j
  A
      =                          1-s   F
                                       s
                                         E
                             VA
           s         m bms (pm )
                                                                     -F E 
                                1-s
                     bjs pV
                          j
                            A
                                        FE  FE                 e
      =                                s + ~s                             
                             V A 1-s                            j FE      
            s        m bms (pm )                             j qj
                                                                                                  -F E 
                       V A 1-s F E                      V A 1-s F E
                s bjs pj        s                s bjs pj        ~s                         1            -F E
      =                                   +                                  ×                         ×e
                                                                                                       
                          VA  1- s                         VA 1 - s                          j FE
                  m bms (pm )                      m bms (pm )                            j qj
                                                                                                   FE    -
                       V A 1-s F E                      VA      1-s     FE                                             -F E
                s bjs pj        s                s bjs pj              ~s                     1                e
      =                                   +                                  ×                               ×
                                                                                                             
                          V A 1-s                                  1-s                         FE
                                                                                               j
                  m bms (pm )                        m bms   (pV A
                                                               m )                            qj
                                                                                          j
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                              F E
                       V A 1-s F E                      V A 1-s F E                                                  1-j      1-j
                s bjs pj        s                s bjs pj        ~s                                             FE
                                                                                                                j                      -F E
      =                                   +                                  ×                     bsj   pV A
                                                                                                                                    ×e      .
                                                                                                                                    
                          VA  1- s                         VA 1 - s                                       s
                  m bms (pm )                      m bms (pm )                   j            s


Hence, define
                                                            1-s
                                             s bjs   pV
                                                      j
                                                        A         FE
                                                                  s
                j     pV
                       s
                         A
                                  jrt =                         1-s
                                                m bms   (pV A
                                                          m )
                                                                                                                       F E
                                                    VA      1-s    FE                                            1-j   1-j
                                             s bjs pj             ~s                                      FE
                                                                                                        A j
                ~j    pV
                       s
                         A
                                 ~jrt =                       1-s       ×                 bsj        pV
                                                                                                      s                       ,
                                                m bms   (pV A
                                                          m )                j       s


where the dependence on sectoral prices pV  A
                                          srt implies that these functions vary across sectors, region and time.
The value added expenditure shares are therefore given by
                                                                                 FE
                                                V
                                                j
                                                  A
                                                    =  jrt + ~jrt × e-                .                                                 (B-7)

Hence, the derived demand system has the same functional form as the value added demand system in our theory.
In particular, the final good expenditure elasticity F E again emerges as the value added expenditure elasticity.
However, in contrast to (B-6), the "parameters"  jrt and   ~jrt explicitly depend on value added prices and hence
vary across locations and time. Recall that we target the parameter  from the regression

                                             ln i
                                                F rt = F rt +  × ln eirt + uirt ,

i.e. we also identify the parameter  from the cross-sectional variation within locations as dictated by (B-7).




                                                                B-18
B-6              The Elasticity of Substitution and the Income Elasticity of Ex-
                 penditure Shares
For the class of PIGL preferences, the elasticity of substitution is not a structural parameter but depends on relative
prices and total expenditure. The Allen Uzawa elasticity of substitution between goods s and k is given by
                                                                              2 e(p,V )
                                                                             ps pk e (p, V )
                                                                   EOSsk =   e(p,V ) e(p,V )
                                                                                             ,
                                                                                ps      pk

where e (p, V ) denotes the expenditure function. As we show in Section A-4 in the Appendix, our preference
specification implies that

                                                                             (s - s ) (k - k )
                                                           EOSsk = 1 -                         .
                                                                                  s k
In the left panel of Figure B-7 we report the implied elasticities of substitution as a function of the regional urban-
ization.12 The substitution elasticities are relative to close to unity. Goods and consumer services are complements,
in particular in poor, rural districts. Food and consumer services are slightly more substitutable than implied by a
Cobb Douglas utility function. In the right panel we depict the elasticity of sectoral expenditure shares with respect
to income. In our model, this elasticity if given by
                                                                     ln s     s - s
                                                                          = -       .
                                                                     ln e       s
Quantitatively, our estimated model predicts that the expenditure elasticity for agricultural products is close to
-0.3. This is expected because   -0.3. The expenditure elasticities on goods and consumer services are both
positive and between 0.2 and 0.5. The consumer service elasticity is particularly large in rural regions, that are on
average poor and unproductive in consumer services.

                     Panel a: Elasticity of Substitution                                             Panel b: Expenditure Elasticity
           1.6




                                                                                           .6
           1.4




                                                                                           .4
           1.2




                                                                                           .2
           1




                                                                                           0
           .8




                                                                                           -.2
           .6




                                                                                           -.4




                 1           2               3                 4        5                        1         2              3             4   5
                                   Urbanization Quantile                                                        Urbanization Quantile

                                 Food and Consumer Services                                                       Food
                                 Goods and Consumer Services                                                      Consumer Services
                                 Food and Goods                                                                   Goods




Figure B-7: Elasticities of Substitution and Expenditure Elasticities. The figure plots the elasticity
of the substitution between the three goods (left panel) and the elasticity of expenditure shares with respect to
expenditure (right panel) by urbanization quintile in 2011.

12   More specifically, for each urban quintile we calculate the population weighted average of the respective regional elasticity of substi-
     tution for the region's representative household.




                                                                               B-19
B-7      Estimating the shape of the human capital distribution ( )
We estimate the tail parameter of the distribution of efficiency units  from the distribution of income. Our
model implies that total income and expenditure of individual h is given by eh     h
                                                                             rt = q wrt , where q follows a Pareto
distribution
                                                           q rt
                                                frt (q ) =  +1
                                                          q
This implies that
                                         ln (frt (q )) = ln(q rt
                                                                 ) - ( + 1) ln(q ).                              (B-8)
Hence, we estimate  from a regression of the (log of the) upper tail density on log efficiency units which we calculate
     h   eh
as qrt = wrt
           rt
              . In Table B-16 we report the estimated  based on (B-8). We report both the estimate based on the
full sample (column 1) and the estimates by urbanization quintile (columns 2 - 6). We also report our estimates
based on two measures of earnings: total expenditure by capita (which we use as our earnings measure for our main
analysis) and total incomes, which is also reported in the NSS data.
    Table B-16 contains two results. First, the estimated tail parameter for the aggregate economy is slightly below
3, stable across years and does not depend on the exact measure of earnings. Second, the estimated tail parameter
is declining in the urbanization rate indicating that urban locations have higher inequality. Our estimates also
indicate that inequality was lower in 2011 than in 1987. For our quantitative model we set  to an average value of
3. In Section 7 we show that our results are robust to a variety of choices for  . Hence, for simplicity, we abstract
from the heterogeneity in  across urbanization quantiles.

                                 Variable       Full Sample           Quintiles   of Urbanization
                                                                   1st   2nd       3rd   4th    5th
                                 Income             2.82           3.11 3.06       3.25 2.93 2.92
                       1987
                               Expenditure          2.84           3.64 3.57       3.21 3.03 2.79
                                 Income             2.85           4.04 3.47       3.13 2.90 2.71
                       2011
                               Expenditure          2.90           3.80 3.57       3.16 2.96 2.63

Table B-16: Identification of  . The table reports the estimate of  based on (B-8). In the first columns we
report the estimates for the years 1987 and 2011. In the remaining columns we perform our estimation separately
for different quantiles of the urbanization distribution.



B-8      Estimating the shape of the productivity distribution ()
We identify the shape parameter  of the productivity distribution from the tail of the employment distribution.
Our model implies that total employment of a firm with productivity z is given by
                                                           +          z
                        l (z ) = LP S (z ) + LP M (z ) =      (AP S ) f0 -  (AP S ) f0 .
                                                                     zL
This implies that the employment distribution is given by

                                                                         (AP S )f0     
                                                               ArM t +
                                                                           zL
                              Fl (l) = P (l (z )  l) = 1 -                                .
                                                                   l +  (AP S ) f0

Hence, for large firms (i.e. l  ), the tail of the employment distribution is exactly equal to .
   To estimate , note that

                                            ln (1 - Fl (l)) = C0 -  ln l,                                        (B-9)


                                                            B-20
                                           Firms with employment > 50th percentile                                     Firms with employment > 70th percentile



                        0




                                                                                                        0
                              -5




                                                                                                              -5
                 log (1-F(x))




                                                                                                 log (1-F(x))
                 -10




                                                                                                 -10
                        -15




                                                                                                        -15
                                       0            2        4         6    8        10                            0        2         4          6     8         10
                                                           log employment                                                            log employment




                                           Firms with employment > 80th percentile                                     Firms with employment > 90th percentile
                        0




                                                                                                        0
                              -5




                                                                                                              -5
                 log (1-F(x))




                                                                                                 log (1-F(x))
                 -10




                                                                                                 -10
                        -15




                                                                                                        -15

                                   0            2           4          6    8        10                            0        2         4          6     8         10
                                                           log employment                                                            log employment




Figure B-8: Identification of . The figures depicts the relationship between ln(1 - Fl (x)) and ln x for different
cutoffs of the employment distribution. We consider all firms with employment exceeding the 50%, 70%, 80% and
90% quantile. For each sample we consider a grid of 200 points the log employment distribution. The slope of the
relationship coincides with  (see (B-9)).

                                                        
where C0 = ln ArM t +       f0
                          zL      . Hence, we estimate  from a regression of the log of the upper tail probability on
log employment.
    In Figure B-8 we depict the empirical relationship of (B-9) for the different sub samples of tail of the employment
distribution. Specifically, we consider a grid of 200 points of the log employment distribution ln l, calculate Fl (l)
for these grid points and then plot ln (1 - Fl (l)) against ln l. We consider four samples, namely all firms with
employment exceeding the 50%, 70%, 80% and 90% quantiles.
    Equation (B-9) implies that the relationship should be linear and that the slope should be equal -. Figure
B-8 shows that the employment distribution in India indeed has a pareto tail and that the estimated slope does not
depend markedly on the employment cutoff for the employment distribution.
    In Table B-17 we report these results in a regression format. The four columns refer to the different subsamples
of the tail of the employment distribution. We estimate a pareto tail of 1.42. Reassuringly, the slope is very precisely
estimated and the estimates are almost identical across the different samples. We also find the economic magnitude
plausible. The firm size distribution in the US is often found to have a tail of around 1.1. Given that the importance
of large firms is larger in rich countries, an estimate of 1.42 strikes us as plausible.


B-9      Outliers In Quantitative Analysis
For our quantitative analysis in Section 6 we winsorize a small number of outliers. For a small number of regions
we estimate very large changes in CS productivity. Intuitively, because CS employment in our model is bounded
by CS from above, our theory can only rationalize employment shares close to CS with an exceedingly high level


                                                                                          B-21
                                                        (1)            (2)       (3)        (4)
                                                      > 50%         > 70%      > 80%      > 90%
                           log employment            -1.426        -1.420     -1.418     -1.414
                                                      (0.010)        (0.011    (0.011)    (0.012)
                           Industry FE                  Yes            Yes       Yes        Yes
                           R2                          0.991          0.989     0.989      0.987
                           Standard errors in parentheses
                              p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01

Table B-17: Estimation of . The table reports the estimates of the tail of the productivity distribution . In
the different columns we restrict the sample to firms with a size exceeding the 50%, 70%, 80% and 90% quantile of
the size distribution.

                                                                   Regional welfare changes (%)
                                  Min         1%          2%      3%     5%     95% 97% 98%           99%       Max
     Agriculture                 -45.9       -30.1       -28.9   -27.2 -24.9 -4.3 -3.0        -1.2     4.5       29.3
     Industry                    -45.9       -33.1       -28.9   -27.2 -24.9 -4.3 -3.0        -1.2     4.5       29.3
     Cons. Serv.                 -98.5       -97.4       -95.1   -91.6 -84.9 23.1 59.9 338.6         2099.8   3.9 × 104
     Cons. Serv. (Baseline)      -96.4       -96.1       -94.2   -91.5 -84.9 23.1 49.7 62.4          109.9      144.4

Table B-18: Distribution of Welfare Losses. The table reports the lower and upper percentiles of the regional
distributions of sectoral welfare losses.



of CS productivity.
    This is seen Table B-19 where we report the upper and lower quantiles of the regional distribution of welfare
changes for the different counterfactuals. Consider for example the agricultural sector. If agricultural productivity
had not grown since 1987, the most adversely affected region would have seen its welfare decline by 56.9% in terms
of an equivalent variation. Conversely, some regions would have gained. The region benefitting the most would have
seen an increase in welfare by 57.2%. The last row of Table B-19 shows that some regions would have seen very
large gains if CS productivity had not grown. These are regions where CS productivity declined between 1978 and
2011. As explained above, this pattern is entirely driven by few districts being close to the theoretical threshold of
CS . For comparison, in the last row we also report the estimated distribution of the welfare effects in our baseline
analysis, where we truncate the productivity growth distribution at the top and bottom 3%. This has large effects
on the distribution of welfare effects in the right tail of the distribution.
    These extreme values at the bottom of the regional productivity growth distribution have aggregate effects.
For our baseline analysis we trim the top and bottom 3% of the productivity growth distribution and set regional
productivity growth in such regions to the 3% and 97% quantile respectively. In Table B-19 we report the change in
aggregate in the absence of CS productivity growth as a function of this trimming cutoff. Without any trimming,
the aggregate effect is 32%, i.e. is positive due to the extreme outliers reported in Table B-19. Once such outliers
are truncated, we recover our baseline results of a welfare loss of about -25%. In the last row of Table B-19 we report
the aggregate employment share of the affected districts. The changes in the aggregate effects of CS growth are not
driven by few large districts but by a small number of small districts with very large changes in CS productivity.


B-10       Decomposing the Effects of Productivity Growth Within the In-
           dustrial Sector: Details
In this section we provide more details concerning the decomposition of productivity growth in the industrial sector
into its two components: manufacturing productivity ArM t and PS productivity ArP St . In the left panel of Figure



                                                                  B-22
                                                                        Trimming cutoff
                                                 No trimming      1%        2%      3%                   4%           5%
                       Welfare Loss                 32.1%       -5.6%     -20.9% -25.3%                -26.3%       -26.4%
                     Employment Share                  0         1.2%      1.4%    3.2%                 4.2%         6.7%

Table B-19: Welfare Losses with Different Trimming Cut-offs. The table reports the aggregate welfare
effects of productivity growth in the CS sector for different trimming rules. A trimming cutoff x% means that we
set the x% highest and lowest productivity growth rates to x% and 1 - x% respectively.



          Panel a: Decomposition of industrial growth                             Panel b:Decomposition as a function of 
          100




                                                                                       Decomposition of Industry for Different Beta




                                                                            100
          80




                                                                            80
          60




                                                                            60
          40




                                                                            40
                                                                            20
          20




                                                                            0
                                                                                       04            05            06                  07
          0




                         Manufacturing   Producer Service                                      Manufacturing        Producer Service




Figure B-9: Decomposition of Industrial Growth: Manufacturing vs Producer Services. The figure
decomposes the effect of industrial productivity growth (d ln ArGt ) into manufacturing (d ln ArM t ) and producer
service (ArP St ) growth. In the left panel we display the decomposition in our baseline calibration. In the right
panel we display the decomposition as a function of the PS share in the production function  .


B-9 we report the composition of the aggregate effect into the respective components in our baseline calibration.
Clearly, manufacturing productivity accounts for the lion share of industrial growth.13
    In the right panel, we study the sensitivity of our results with respect to  . In our baseline calibration, we
choose  = 0.7 based on the observation of a large employment share of PS in the United States. However, we
recognize that the calibration of  = 0.7 is subject to some uncertainty. For instance the asymptotic share of the
PS sector could be smaller in India than in the United States--as it is in other large economies such as China
and Germany. In the right panel of Figure B-9 we therefore replicate our decomposition as a function of  . The
lower  , the higher the role for producer services. Intuitively: the closer the observed equilibrium to its asymptotic
share of PS employment, the more sensitive are the employment allocations to AP S . Hence, even modest increases
in the PS intensity of production cause us to infer relative large changes in PS productivity. Still, manufacturing
productivity accounts for more than 80% of productivity growth in the industrial sector.
    For completeness, In Figure B-10, we decompose the welfare effect of the industrial sector into the manufacturing
and PS component by urbanization quintile. As with the aggregate results reported in Figure B-9, the quantitative
importance of producer service growth is small.


B-11            Details of Robustness Analysis (Section 7)
This section contains additional results for our robustness analysis in Section 7.
13   In this decomposition there is also a covariance component. Because the importance of this component is minuscule, we do not show
     it in Figure B-9.




                                                                 B-23
                                                         Decomposition of Industry
                                                             by urbanization quintile
                                 100


                                  80


                                  60


                                  40


                                  20


                                   0   1st   2nd   3rd     4th    5th         1st   2nd     3rd   4th   5th

                                             Manufacturing                              Prod. Serv.




Figure B-10: Decomposition of Industrial Growth by urbanization. This figure report the decomposition
of the aggregate welfare effect of productivity growth in the industrial sector between manufacturing (blue bars)
and PS (red bars) for different urbanization quintiles.


B-11.1      Sensitivity to Structural Parameters
In Figure B-11 we show the robustness of our results with respect to the elasticity of substitution across traded
varieties  (left panel) and the trade elasticity  used in the open economy extension of our theory (right panel).
The structure of the graphs is the same as in Figure 11 in the main text.
    The variety elasticity  has - quantitatively - a negligible effect on our results: the aggregate welfare effects of
sectoral productivity do not depend much on the assumed value of  . As far as the effects of consumer services is
concerned, they are - if anything - increasing in  , i.e. our benchmark value of  = 3 (which is on the low end of
the usual estimates) is conservative. The same is true for the trade elasticity  , shown in the right panel. Again, a
higher level of  increases the welfare gains of sectoral productivity growth but the quantitative effects are small.
We therefore conclude that our main results are robust to our choices of  and  .




                                                                  B-24
                                  Panel a: Variety Elasticity                                                  Panel b: Trade Elasticity 
                            -10                                                                      -10


                                                                                                                            Manufacturing
                                                        Manufacturing
         Welfare Loss (%)




                            -20




                                                                                  Welfare Loss (%)
                                                                                                     -20                    Agriculture
                                                        Agriculture

                                                                                                                            Consumer Services
                                                        Consumer Services

                            -30                                                                      -30




                            -40                                                                      -40
                                    3         4        5                6                                  4       4.5      5               5.5   6




Figure B-11: Robustness Analysis. Panels (a) and (b) show the welfare effects as a function of the variety
elasticity  and the trade elasticity  . The vertical dashed line corresponds to the parameter value in our benchmark
analysis.


                                   APPENDIX C: FIGURES AND TABLES
   In this section, we report additional tables and figures referred to in the main text.


C-1      Additional empirical results
Urbanization and Aggregate Growth
In Figure C-1 we report the time-series change in the urbanization rate (panel a) and in income per capita (panel
b). The urbanization rate is the share of the population living in urban areas according to the definition of the
NSS. The NSS defines an urban location in the following way: (i) all locations with a Municipality, Corporation or
Cantonment and locations defined as a town area, (ii) all other locations that satisfy the following criteria: (a) a
minimum population of 5000, (b) at least 75 percent of the male population are employed outside of agriculture,
and (c) a density of population of at least 1000 per square mile. This share increased from around 22% in 1987 to
29% in 2010. Income per capita, shown in the right panel, stems from the World Bank. Between 1987 and 2010,
income per capita increased by a factor of almost 3.

Urbanization and Income per Capita
For some of our analysis we choose urbanization as our measure of spatial heterogeneity. We do so as a descriptive
device and interpret urbanization as a broad proxy for regional economic development. Figure C-2 shows that there
is a strong positive correlation between urbanization and expenditure per capita in the NSS data in 2011.

Structural Change with Imperfect Substitution in Skills
Figure C-3 is the analogue of Figure 10 in the text for the extension of the model in Section 7.3.2.




                                                                            C-1
                                 Panel a: Urbanization                                                                                                                                Panel b: Economic Growth
                                           Urbanization Rate                                                                                                                                     Real GDP pc (log scale)




                                                                                                                                                      3 3.5 4 4.5
               .3
               .28




                                                                                                                                                      2.5
               .26




                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                      1.5
               .24




                                                                                                                                                      1
               .22




                     1985    1990          1995              2000                              2005               2010                                              1980                   1990             2000          2010                 2020
                                                   year                                                                                                                                                     year




Figure C-1: Economic Growth in India: 1987 - 2011. This figure shows the evolution of the urbanization rate
(Panel a) and income per capita (Panel b). The urbanization rate is the share of population living in urban areas
according to the definition of the NSS. Income per capita stems from World Bank.
                                                                                3000
                                                                      1000 1500 2000 2500
                                                                      Expenditure per Capita
                                                                                500




                                                                                                0                  .2           .4             .6                          .8                1
                                                                                                                                Urbanization rate



                                                               2011

Figure C-2: Expenditure per capita vs. Urbanization. The figure shows a scatter plot of the average
expenditure per capita in the NSS data across district-level urbanization rates in 2011.

              Panel a: Agriculture                                                                         Panel b: Industry                                                          Panel c: Consumer Services
 .72




                                                                                                                                                                                .4
                                                                        .2




       Empl. share in 1987
                                                                                                                                                                                .35




                                                                                                                                                                      2011
 .64




                                                                                               Empl. share in 2011                                                                    Empl. share in 2011                               2011
                                                                        .18




                                                                                                                                                                                .3
 .56




                                                                                                                                                                                .25




       Empl. share in 2011
                                                                        .16
 .48




                                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                               Empl. share in 1987                                                                    Empl. share in 1987
                                                                                                                                                                                .15
                                                                        .14
 .4




           Agriculture       Cons. Serv.          Industry                                          Agriculture          Cons. Serv.            Industry                                  Agriculture       Cons. Serv.      Industry




Figure C-3: Sectoral Productivity Growth and Structural Change with Imperfect Substitution
in Skills. This figure is the analogue of Figure 10 in the extension allowing for imperfect substitution across skilled
groups and for skill-biased technical change.




                                                                                                                                  C-2
