                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            GOVERNMENT POLICIES IN A GRANULAR GLOBAL ECONOMY

                                        Cecile Gaubert
                                        Oleg Itskhoki
                                       Maximilian Vogler

                                      Working Paper 28553
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28553


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




We thank Ezra Oberfield for his insightful discussion, and participants at the Carnegie-Rochester-
NYU Conference on Public Policy and the Virtual ITM seminar for helpful comments. Cecile
Gaubert gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Clausen Center at UC Berkeley. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Cecile Gaubert, Oleg Itskhoki, and Maximilian Vogler. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Government Policies in a Granular Global Economy
Cecile Gaubert, Oleg Itskhoki, and Maximilian Vogler
NBER Working Paper No. 28553
March 2021
JEL No. D43,F12,F13,L40,L52

                                         ABSTRACT

We use the granular model of international trade developed in Gaubert and Itskhoki (2020) to
study the rationale and implications of three types of government interventions typically targeted
at large individual firms -- antitrust, trade and industrial policies. We find that in antitrust
regulation, governments face an incentive to be overly lenient in accepting mergers of large
domestic firms, which acts akin to beggar-thy-neighbor trade policy in sectors with strong
comparative advantage. In trade policy, targeting large individual foreign exporters rather than
entire sectors is desirable from the point of view of a national government. Doing so minimizes
the pass-through of import tariffs into domestic consumer prices, placing a greater portion of the
burden on foreign producers. Finally, we show that subsidizing `national champions' is generally
suboptimal in closed economies as it leads to an excessive build-up of market power, but it may
become unilaterally welfare improving in open economies. We contrast unilaterally optimal
policies with the coordinated global optimal policy and emphasize the need for international
policy cooperation in these domains.

Cecile Gaubert                                  Maximilian Vogler
Department of Economics                         Princeton University
University of California, Berkeley              Department of Economics
687 Evans Hall                                  Princeton, NJ 08540
Berkeley, CA 94720                              USA
and NBER                                        mvogler@princeton.edu
cecile.gaubert@berkeley.edu

Oleg Itskhoki
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Bunche Hall, 315 Portola Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
itskhoki@econ.ucla.edu
1       Introduction
Large rms shape the landscape of national economies and even more so the patterns of inter-
national trade. Gaubert and Itskhoki (2020) show that "granular" forces (i.e., exports driven by
large individual rms) contribute signi cantly to comparative advantage and trade patterns
of countries. In this context, a number of micro-level policies targeted at individual rms may
end up having non-trivial aggregate consequences. This is true in particular when these poli-
cies impact large exporters. We observe that such policies are common with governments
taking policy actions that are sometimes very narrow and appear tailor-made to target indi-
vidual rms rather than industries. In particular, antitrust regulation, antidumping policies,
and international sanctions all target large individual foreign rms.1
    In this paper, we study the rationale for and consequences of such "granular" policies. We
are particularly interested in the impact these policies may have in a global economy. To do
so, we adopt the quantitative model of trade with granular rms developed and estimated
in Gaubert and Itskhoki (2020). We use the model to study the general equilibrium impact
of national policies in a granular open economy by evaluating their e ect on both the wel-
fare of the home country and that of its trade partners. Across sectors, the model features
classic Ricardian forces as in Dornbusch, Fischer, and Samuelson (1977); crucially, within sec-
tors, it features a discrete (but potentially large) number of heterogeneous rms that compete
oligopolistically. The model is quanti ed to match patterns of domestic sales and exports of
French manufacturing rms. In particular, the distribution of rm size is very skewed, so that
some large rms have sectoral market shares well above single digits even in sectors com-
prised of a large number of home and foreign rms. We use this framework to characterize
the qualitative and quantitative properties of various government interventions.
    We rst shed light on merger policy, by studying the potential merger of two domestic
  rms who are leaders in their sector. We nd that the desirability of such a merger, from
the perspective of the home government, depends crucially on how open the economy is. In
general, mergers lead to some cost savings and productivity gains; however, they also lead
to an increase in monopoly power, which reduces overall e ciency and leads to a transfer of
surplus from consumers to producers. In a relatively closed economy, the e ciency loss due
to an increase in monopoly power tends to make mergers undesirable.
    However, in a more open economy, mergers lead to a transfer of surplus to the merged
home rm which is done, in part, at the expense of the foreign consumer surplus. Therefore,
    1
     Recent examples of international antitrust regulations are the 2007 case of the European Commission (EC)
against Microsoft Corporation and the 2017 ne imposed by the EC on Google. A very recent case of a granular
trade war is the 292% tari imposed by the US on a particular jet produced by the Canadian Bombardier. "Granu-
lar" tactics are particularly widespread in antidumping retaliation (see Blonigen and Prusa 2008) and international
sanctions (as in the recent case of the US against the Chinese ZTE).


                                                        1
the more open the economy is, the more a given home merger is desirable from the point of
view of the home government, especially in sectors where home rms are export champions.
Contrasting the attitudes of the home and foreign governments towards the same domestic
mergers reveals an international con ict, whereby the home antitrust is excessively lenient
towards mergers in comparative advantage sectors. Finally, we compare unilateral optimal
decisions in merger policy to the coordinated global planner's solution. Our estimated model
suggests that the negative spillover e ects on the foreign country and aggregate welfare are
signi cant quantitatively, and are particularly pronounced in the most granular and open sec-
tors. This underlines the need for international cooperation over M&A policies to avoid an
excessive build-up of market power.
    In a second exercise, we turn to trade policy. We are interested in the incentives faced
by governments to impose an import tari on a single large foreign exporter, rather than
imposing it on all rms in a given sector. Narrow trade restrictions and antidumping duties
that target a narrow set of rms have indeed been regularly emphasized in the policy debate.
To make progress on this question, we assume that the foreign country is passive and does not
retaliate. In this context, all unilateral import tari s shift surplus towards the home economy,
and the corresponding cost is born by the foreign country (including the deadweight loss of
the policy).
    The question that we focus on is whether the breadth of tari imposition matters for
revenue-equivalent sets of tari s. Speci cally, we compare the welfare e ects of imposing two
di erent tari schemes designed to raise the same revenue -- a granular tari and a sector-
wide tari . We nd that, in a granular world, a country prefers to impose an import tari on
the largest foreign exporter, rather than imposing a uniform tari on all sectoral imports. This
is particularly true in sectors where its trade partner enjoys a granular comparative advantage.
The reason is that by taxing the largest foreign rm, a country takes advantage not only of the
general equilibrium terms-of-trade e ect, operating via a reduction in the foreign wage rate,
but also of the industry level terms-of-trade improvement due to the incomplete pass-through
of the tari as a result of markup adjustment by the large foreign rm.
    In the last exercise, we study industrial policies that subsidize national champions. We
show that they are generally suboptimal in closed economies due to an excessive build-up of
market power, yet may become welfare improving when used unilaterally in open economies.

Related literature We contribute to the literature that studies the in uence of large indi-
vidual rms on macro aggregates, referred to as "granularity" in the macro literature follow-
ing Gabaix (2011). This literature typically focuses on the positive question of what share
of aggregate uctuations is driven by idiosyncratic productivity shocks (see Acemoglu, Car-


                                               2
valho, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi 2012, Carvalho and Gabaix 2013, Carvalho and Grassi 2019,
Grassi 2017) or what share of trade ows can be traced to rm-level shocks (see di Giovanni
and Levchenko 2012, di Giovanni, Levchenko, and Méjean 2014, Gaubert and Itskhoki 2020).
We complement these studies by investigating, in contrast, the normative policy implications
of granularity.
     Our study is related to the vast literature on trade policy and market structure, summarized
in Helpman and Krugman (1989), Brander (1995) and Bagwell and Staiger (2004). In particular,
early contributions that study pro t-shifting motives for trade policy under oligopoly include
Dixit (1984), Brander and Spencer (1984) and Eaton and Grossman (1986). These papers focus
on stylized models with homogeneous rms. A more recent literature explores how optimal
trade policy is impacted by the presence of heterogeneous rms that self-select into export-
ing as in Melitz (2003) (see Demidova and Rodríguez-Clare 2013, Felbermayr, Jung, and Larch
2013, Bagwell and Lee 2020, Haaland and Venables 2016). These analyses all rely on monopo-
listically competitive models and study a uniform tari imposed on all rms. Closer to what
we do, Costinot, Rodríguez-Clare, and Werning (2020) study non-uniform tari s imposed on
heterogeneous rms in a Melitz (2003) framework. They keep the focus on a setup with mo-
nopolistic competition with constant markups; in contrast, our quantitative analysis features
strategic interactions between rms and variable markups. Our contribution to this literature
is to study granular trade policy in a quantitative model of oligopolistic competition with many
  rms, which captures the salient features of the market structure of modern manufacturing
industries.
     We also contribute to the literature studying merger policy. In international trade, merger
policy is often viewed as part of the toolkit that policymakers use to a ect foreign market
access (see e.g. Bagwell and Staiger 2004, Chapter 9), yet systematic studies of merger policies
in this context still remain scarce. Early contributions, focusing typically on homogeneous
  rms, have expanded the merger analysis from a closed economy context studied in IO to
open economies (Barros and Cabral 1994, Head and Ries 1997), as well as considered merger
and trade policy jointly Horn and Levinsohn (2001), Richardson (1999), De Stefano and Rys-
man (2010). Closer to our quantitative analysis, Breinlich, Nocke, and Schutz (2019) use a
two-country trade model with oligopolistic competition to study, in partial equilibrium, when
merger policy designed to minimize local consumer prices is too tough or too lenient from the
viewpoint of the foreign country. We set up our analysis in general equilibrium and consider a
more general welfare function, which accounts for producer surplus in addition to consumer
surplus. We decompose the contribution of each channel to the total welfare e ects of mergers.




                                               3
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the theoretical framework
of Gaubert and Itskhoki (2020) and its quanti cation, which serve as a basis for the policy
analysis that follows. Section 3 lays out how we evaluate granular policies in general equi-
librium in this context. Section 4 studies merger policy, Section 5 examines import tari s and
Section 6 discusses industrial policy. Section 7 concludes.


2     A Quanti ed Granular Model
This section sets up a granular model of international trade, following Gaubert and Itskhoki
(2020), and discusses its quanti cation.


2.1     Theoretical Framework
We study a two-country multi-sector model, which combines a Ricardian Dornbusch, Fischer,
and Samuelson (1977) model across sectors with the Eaton, Kortum, and Sotelo (2012) model of
granular rms within each sector.2 The two countries are Home and Foreign, which represents
the rest of the world. Households inelastically supply L and L units of labor at Home and in
Foreign, respectively, with L/L measuring the relative size of the home country. We describe
 rst the laissez-faire equilibrium in an economy without government policies.

Preferences There is a unit continuum of sectors z  [0, 1], with a nite number of product
varieties i  {1, .., Kz } in each sector. The numbers of varieties o ered in each country, Kz
                
at home and Kz   abroad, is endogenous, as described further below.
    Households have Cobb-Douglas preferences over consumption in each sector, which is
itself a CES aggregate of each product variety, that is:
                                 1                                                                
                                                                                Kz      -1        -1
              Q = exp                z log Qz dz        with       Qz =               qz,i
                                                                                        
                                                                                                       ,    (1)
                             0                                                  i=1


       1
and 0 z dz = 1. Parameters z measure expenditure shares on sectors z  [0, 1] and  > 1
is the within-sector elasticity of substitution, common across sectors.
    Using the properties of the CES demand aggregator, consumer expenditure on variety i in
sector z in the home market is given by:
                                                                                      1-
                                                                              pz,i
                     rz,i  pz,i qz,i = sz,i z Y            with     sz,i                     ,              (2)
                                                                              Pz
   2
     The Eaton, Kortum, and Sotelo (2012) model is a granular version of the Melitz (2003) model in its Chaney
(2008) formulation. The model nests as special cases both the DFS-Melitz model, as rms become in nitesimal, as
well as the Ricardian DFS model, as varieties of products become perfect substitutes and xed costs tend to zero.

                                                       4
                                                                      1/(1- )
                                                           Kz 1-
where pz,i is the price of variety i in sector z , Pz =    i=1 pz,i         is the sectoral price
index, sz,i is the within-sector market share of the product variety, and Y is aggregate income
(expenditure) at Home.

Production Each rm produces a distinct product variety using local labor as input. The
technology has constant returns to scale, yz,i = z,i z,i , where z,i denotes the productivity
of the rm that produces product i in sector z . The output of the rm can be marketed do-
mestically as well as exported. Exports incur an iceberg trade cost   1. The marginal cost
of supplying the home market is therefore constant and equal to:

                                      w/z,i , for a home variety,
                          cz,i =                                                                (3)
                                     w /z,i , for a foreign variety,


where w and w are the home and foreign wage rates, respectively. Symmetrically, the marginal
cost of serving the foreign market is denoted cz,i . In each market, we sort all potential sellers
in increasing order of their marginal cost cz,i (c  z,i in foreign). The index i therefore refers
to the marginal cost ranking of a rm in a given market, so that the same rm is in general
represented by di erent indexes in di erent markets.
    To access a given market, rms have to pay a xed cost F in units of labor of the destination
country. The xed cost is independent of the origin of the rm. As a result, the di erential
selection of domestic and foreign rms into the local market is driven only by iceberg trade
costs, not by a di erential xed cost to access the market, in order to simplify equilibrium
characterization.

Productivity draws We denote with Mz a potential (shadow) number of domestic products
in sector z . Mz is the realization of a Poisson random variable with parameter M¯ z . Each of
the Mz potential entrants takes an iid productivity draw z,i from a Pareto distribution with
shape parameter  and lower bound z . Given this structure, the combined parameter:

                                              ¯ z · 
                                          Tz  M                                                 (4)
                                                    z


is a su cient statistic that determines the expected productivity of a sector. Intuitively, a
sector is more productive either if it has more potential entrants (M  ¯ z ) or if the average pro-
ductivity of a potential entrant (proportional to z ) is high. Symmetrically, foreign expected
sectoral productivity in sector z is Tz , so that the ratio Tz /Tz determines the expected rela-
tive productivity of the two countries in sector z , a measure of the fundamental comparative
advantage.


                                                5
Market structure In a given market, entrants play an oligopolistic price setting game, fol-
lowing Atkeson and Burstein (2008). Firms are large in their own sectors, so that they inter-
nalize their in uence on the sectoral price index Pz when they maximize pro ts. On the other
hand, they are in nitesimal for the economy as a whole, hence take economy-wide aggre-
gates (w, Y ) as given.
    We consider both a Bertrand and a Cournot oligopolistic setting.3 The Nash equilibrium
in these oligopolistic games is a markup price setting rule:

                                                                        z,i
                         pz,i = µz,i · cz,i ,     where        µz,i                                            (5)
                                                                       z,i - 1
                                                 (1 - sz,i ) + sz,i ,           under Bertrand,
               and       z,i  (sz,i ) =                                  -1                                    (6)
                                                 -1 (1 - sz,i ) + sz,i        , under Cournot,

with the market share of the rm sz,i de ned in (2), and z,i  [1,  ] measuring the e ective
elasticity of residual demand for the product of the rm. Both Bertrand competition in prices
and Cournot competition in quantities result in the same qualitative patterns: the elasticity of
residual demand z,i is decreasing in the rm's market share sz,i , so that in turn the markup
µz,i increases with the rm's market share.
    Given the set of entrants and their marginal costs {cz,i }K z
                                                              i=1 , the equilibrium, characterized
by each rm's price and market share, is unique and has the property that prices pz,i increase
with marginal costs cz,i , while markups µz,i and market shares sz,i decrease with cz,i . We turn
next to characterizing the endogenous set of entrants in each market.

Entry Firms enter a market if they make a positive pro t there. Pro ts from serving the
home market, for instance, are given by:4

                                                          sz,i
                                    z,i  z (sz,i ) =              z Y - wF,                                    (7)
                                                          (sz,i )

where given the markup pricing (5), the elasticity (sz,i ) equals the ratio of revenues sz,i z Y
to operating pro ts (before subtracting the xed cost), and z,i monotonically increases in sz,i .
    The setup detailed above opens the possibility of multiplicity in entry patterns. In or-
der to select a unique equilibrium, we consider a sequential entry game. Speci cally, in each
market separately, rms with lower marginal costs of serving the market move rst and de-
   3
       Formally, in the case of Bertrand competition, for example, the pro t maximization problem of rm i in the
                                                                                    p- 
                                                                                     z,i
home market is to choose its price pz,i such that z,i = maxpz,i     pz,i - cz,i   Kz     1-   z Y - wF , taking as
                                                                                  j =1 pz,j
given the prices of its competitors {pz,j }j =i and (w, Y ). Under Cournot, the rm instead takes the quantities of
its competitors {qz,j }j =i de ned by (2) as given.
    4
      Notice that due to the linearity of the production function, each rm's pro t maximization problem is sepa-
rable across markets, and hence can be considered one market at a time.

                                                        6
cide whether or not to enter. With this equilibrium selection, the entry game has a unique
cuto equilibrium, so that only rms with marginal costs below some cuto enter the mar-
ket. This entry game results in the equilibrium number of entrants Kz , with z,i  0 for all
                                                                                         
i  {1, .., Kz }, and such that z,Kz +1 < 0 if the next rm were to enter. Similarly, Kz    is
the number of rms that enter in the foreign market, yet the sets of rms entering in the two
markets are in general not the same.

General equilibrium The general equilibrium vector contains wage rates and aggregate
incomes (w, w , Y, Y  ) such that labor markets clear in both countries and aggregate incomes
equal aggregate expenditures (which implies trade balance). In particular, in the home country
the latter condition holds if:
                                        Y = wL + ,                                         (8)

where  are aggregate pro ts of all home rms distributed to home households:
                                 1       Kz                       
                                                                 Kz
                       =                       z,i z (sz,i ) +         (1 -       
                                                                            z,i )z (sz,i ) dz,                (9)
                             0           i=1                     i=1


with pro t function z (sz,i ) de ned in (7); the indicator function z,i  {0, 1} is 1 if rm i is
of local origin in the home market, while  z,i plays the same role for the foreign market.
    Labor market clearing requires that aggregate labor income wL equals the total expendi-
ture of all rms on domestic labor:
                   1             Kz       sz,i                    
                                                                 Kz                    sz,i
       wL =            z Y           z,i          + z Y                (1 -   z,i )            + wF Kz dz.   (10)
               0                 i=1     µ(sz,i )                i=1                  µ(sz,i )


The three terms on the right-hand side of (10) correspond, respectively, to expenditure on do-
mestic labor for (i) production for the domestic market, (ii) production for the foreign market,
and (iii) entry of rms in the domestic market (of both home and foreign origin). A parallel
market clearing condition to (10) holds in the foreign country. We normalize w = 1 as the
numeraire.
                                                                                           
                                                                                     Kz
    Conditional on the sectoral equilibrium vectors Z  Kz , {sz,i }K          
                                                                       i=1 , Kz , {sz,i }i=1 z [0,1] ,
                                                                         z


the vector of general equilibrium quantities X  (w, w , Y, Y  ) solves conditions (8), (10) and
their foreign counterparts.5 In turn, given the aggregate equilibrium vector X, the solution
to the entry and price-setting game in each country-sector yields the sectoral equilibrium
vector Z. The resulting xed point (X, Z) is the equilibrium in the granular economy.
   5
    One of the four aggregate equilibrium conditions is redundant by Walras Law, and is replaced by the nu-
meraire normalization. Also note that in the closed economy conditions (8) and (10) are equivalent, and amount
                                         1
to Y /w = µ¯[L - F K ], where K = 0 Kz dz is the total number of rms serving the home economy and
       1       Kz                 -1
µ
¯=     0
           z   i=1 sz,i /µ(sz,i )      is the (harmonic) average markup.

                                                            7
2.2    Fundamental and granular comparative advantage
In our analysis, we focus on two sector-level characteristics: (i) a measure of the overall sec-
toral comparative advantage, and (ii) a measure of its granular component that extracts the
contribution to comparative advantage of the idiosyncratic productivities of large rms. The
 rst is captured by the sectoral home share abroad:
                                                      
                                      Xz             Kz
                               z           =               (1 -       
                                                                z,i )sz,i ,                    (11)
                                      z Y            i=1


where Xz is total home exports and z Y  is total foreign absorption in sector z . Therefore,    z
equals the cumulative market share of all home rms serving the foreign market, capturing
the export stance of home in sector z . It is a random variable that depends on the market
shares (hence the realized productivity draws) of Home rms in sector z in the foreign market.
Conveniently, this statistic is an observable measure of the e ective comparative advantage
of home in sector z , irrespective of the source of this comparative advantage.
    In our granular model, this sectoral outcome     z is driven by two forces: an expected value
based on sectoral characteristics and the contribution of idiosyncratic rm draws around this
expected value. Speci cally, the expectation of rms' productivities in the sector is formally
pinned down by the fundamental comparative advantage of the sector, Tz /Tz . Given Tz /Tz ,
the expected home share abroad is:

                                                           1
                                  E{z} =                               .                       (12)
                                             1 + (  ) · Tz /Tz

Across sectors, this expected share is increasing in Tz /Tz , while in all sectors it decreases with
trade costs  and the relative home wage   w/w .
    Furthermore, as our model features granularity, the home share           z is shaped in part by
idiosyncratic realizations of rm productivities, especially when the underlying productivity
distribution is fat-tailed. As a result, the realized export stance of a country-sector may di er
markedly from its expected value, driven by a handful of rms with outsized productivity
draws. We therefore decompose         z into its expected value based on sectoral characteristics
and the contribution of idiosyncratic rm draws around this expected value:

                                                    
                                        z = E{z } + z                                          (13)

We refer to                  
             z  z - E{z } as the granular residual that captures departures of realized
comparative advantage from its expectation, driven by outstanding rms (or the lack thereof).
In what follows, we study how welfare bene ts of government policies vary across sectors
with di erent overall and granular comparative advantage.

                                                 8
2.3     Model quanti cation
The model is estimated to match salient features of French rm-level data on domestic and
export sales, and in particular their variation across 119 manufacturing industries, as discussed
in detail in Gaubert and Itskhoki (2020). To quantify the model, we rst parameterize the
distribution of fundamental comparative advantage across sectors as a log-normal distribution:

                                         log Tz /Tz  N (µT , T
                                                             2
                                                               ),                                             (14)

where the mean parameter µT controls home's absolute advantage and the dispersion parame-
ter T controls the extent of the fundamental comparative advantage. With this parametriza-
tion, in order to quantify the model, we need to estimate the six parameters of the model,
  (, , , F, µT , T ), as well as calibrate the Cobb-Douglas shares z . We describe the es-
timation procedure and moment t in Appendix A.3, and we report the estimated parameters
in Table 1, which we use as the benchmark in our quantitative policy counterfactuals.

                                      Table 1: Estimated parameters
                      Parameter          Estimate     Std. error        Auxiliary variables
                                          5           --                       
                                                                        =      -1       1.096
                                          4.382       0.195
                                          1.342       0.101             w/w             1.130
                          F (×105 )       1.179       0.252             L /L            1.932
                          µT              0.095       0.150             Y  /Y           1.710
                          T               1.394       0.190             /Y              0.180

    We point out a few features of the estimated parameters. First, the combined parameter
  /( - 1) controls the Pareto shape of the sales distribution, and hence the strength of
granular forces. It is estimated to equal 1.096, corresponding to a somewhat thinner tail relative
to Zipf's law (see Gabaix 2009). We estimate µT to be positive, albeit small, implying an over-
all mild productivity advantage of French rms relative to their average foreign competitor,
consistent with a French wage rate w which is 13% higher than that in a typical French trade
partner w . The estimated value of T = 1.39 is large, suggesting that a one standard devia-
tion increase in fundamental comparative advantage across sectors corresponds to a four-fold
increase in the relative productivity Tz /Tz . We nd that the iceberg trade costs are  = 1.34,
broadly in line with the estimates in the literature (see Anderson and van Wincoop 2004).6
   6
    The estimated model implies that France is about two times smaller than the rest of the world in terms
of population. This is, of course, an abstraction of a two-country model with a common iceberg trade cost 
separating the two regions. The appropriate interpretation of L /L in the model is the relative size of the rest of
the world in which the individual countries are discounted by their economic distance to France (i.e., if countries
trade little with France, their population weight is heavily discounted).

                                                        9
Finally, the model implies an aggregate share of pro ts in GDP, /Y , equal to 18%, broadly in
line with the national income accounts.
    Armed with the estimated model, we are ready to study the impact of various policies in
this granular environment.


3       Evaluating Granular Policies
A range of policies speci cally target large rms, and our model is well-suited to study the
impact of such policies on trade ows and the welfare of countries. Indeed, this question
cannot be analyzed using standard `continuous' trade models where, even in the presence of
heterogeneity, every rm is in nitesimal. In contrast, in a granular model, rms are large and
their response to policy can a ect sectoral productivity and trade ows. In the rest of the
paper we explore in turn three di erent granular policies, while in this section we outline the
general methodology we follow to compute and decompose the welfare e ects of policies.

Welfare decomposition The welfare of a representative consumer at home is given by
                                                                   1
W = Y /P , where Y is aggregate home income and P = exp 0 z log Pz dz is the home
price index. In general, aggregate income can be decomposed as Y = wL ++ T R, where wL
is labor income,  is aggregate pro ts de ned in (9), and T R is government policy revenues
distributed lump-sum to workers. Since labor is supplied inelastically and the home wage is
the numeraire, the log-change in home welfare in response to a policy can be expressed as
follows:7
                                                        1
                       W^  d log Y = d + dT R -           z d log Pz dz,               (15)
                                   P    Y      Y      0

The three components in (15) correspond to the respective changes in producer surplus, gov-
ernment revenues, and consumer surplus in general equilibrium.
    We are interested in the general equilibrium impact of policies targeted at large rms, and
in particular, in contrasting the e ects they have in granular versus non-granular sectors.8 The
direct partial equilibrium e ect of a policy change in sector z is dz    +dT Rz
                                                                          zY
                                                                                - d log Pz z dz
and has an order of magnitude z dz . In addition, the general equilibrium impact of the policy
on (w, w , Y, Y  ) is also of the order z dz , which in turn a ects every sector z  [0, 1], and
hence needs to be taken into account on par with the direct e ect.9
    7
     Note that the change in the real wage is fully accounted for by the changes in the price level P since nominal
wage w = 1 by our choice of the numeraire; otherwise, there would be an additional term wL      Y d log w .
   8
     Note that all sectors are ex ante symmetric (aside from their expenditure size z ); however, ex post, sectors
                                                                
di er both in their fundamental comparative advantage Tz /Tz      and in the realized granular productivity draws,
which makes some sectors more granular than others (i.e., featuring relatively larger top rms).
   9
     Formally, the general equilibrium system composed of (8)­(10) and their foreign counterparts can be written
as a system of linear equations in the equilibrium vector (w, w , Y, Y  ). The coe cients in this system are


                                                        10
    Given that the model features a continuum of sectors, a policy that impacts a sector in
isolation has an in nitesimal aggregate e ect (indeed, proportional to z dz ). Thus, to capture
the overall quantitative general equilibrium e ect of a policy, we study a given policy change
in a positive measure of sectors Z that have similar levels of granularity and comparative
advantage. Concretely, we bin sectors into percentiles of granular residual  z de ned in (13) or
                                          
into percentiles of realized export share z de ned in (11). We then compute the corresponding
welfare impact W  ^ Z = d log(Y /P ) of the policy in bin Z , and report its average aggregate
welfare e ect, normalized by the size of set Z , given by:

                                          ^Z =          1       ^ Z.
                                          W                     W                                          (16)
                                                    z Z
                                                          z d z

In the limit, as sets Z become tight around individual sectors z , the aggregate welfare change
W^ can be decomposed into sectoral contributions W  ^ z :10

                                                         1
                                            ^ =
                                            W                  ^ z dz.
                                                             z W                                           (17)
                                                     0


               ^ z are the general-equilibrium aggregate welfare gradients of sectoral policies.
In this sense, W
    Finally, we consider the decomposition of the average welfare e ects W  ^ Z into the contri-
bution of changes in the consumer and producer surplus, according to (15). Quantitatively,
                                              ^ Z equal to 0.01 is equivalent to the welfare ef-
given the linearity of (15), a welfare impact W
fect of a 1% sectoral productivity improvement or, equivalently, a 1% reduction in the sectoral
price level holding income constant. We report the welfare e ects in these units.

Welfare approximation To guide intuition, we complement the quantitative evaluation of
policies with an analytical approximation, which for tractability we carry out in partial equi-
librium holding w and Y constant and taking the set of active rms Kz as given. Typically,
both the entry/exit margin and general equilibrium e ects partially mute the aggregate re-
sponse to policy changes, without changing the direction of the overall e ect. We set up the
welfare approximation in a closed economy, and then show how to accommodate an open
economy and the various speci c policies studied below.
    We consider a shock (e.g., a merger, an industrial policy, or a tari ) which leads productiv-
ity z,i and/or markup µz,i to change for a subset of rms, which in turn triggers an equilibrium
integrals of the sectoral allocations, and they shift by on order of magnitude z dz when sector z is shocked,
resulting in a corresponding shift in the equilibrium vector.
   10                                        ^ of a policy pro le   {z }z[0,1] , where z corresponds to a policy
      Formally, consider the aggregate e ect W
implemented in sector z ; (17) is the decomposition of W  ^ into the weighted average of the general equilibrium
                 ^
welfare e ects Wz of individual sectoral policies z .


                                                         11
adjustment of prices by all rms in the market. We denote by ^z,i the proportional change in
productivity. The markup is endogenous and we write its proportional change as:

                                                               z,i           ^z ),
                                          µ
                                          ^z,i = ^z,i -               pz,i - P
                                                                     (^                                                    (18)
                                                             1 - z,i

where by (6) and (2) the markup µz,i is a decreasing function of the relative price pz,i /Pz , and
                                                ^z,i is an exogenous markup shifter.11 Combin-
                                
we denote its elasticity with 1-z,i
                                 z,i
                                      0, and 
ing (18) with the price setting equation (5) in log changes, p ^z,i = µ
                                                                      ^z,i + c
                                                                             ^z,i , we can solve for
the equilibrium log deviation of the rm's price:

                                       ^z,i = (1 - z,i ) 
                                       p                 ^z,i -            ^z ,
                                                                ^z,i + z,i P                                               (19)

where we used c ^z,i = - ^z,i , since the wage rate w is held constant. Thus, z,i  [0, 1) is the
strategic complementarity elasticity with respect to competitor prices Pz , and 1 - z,i is the
cost pass-through elasticity (see Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings 2019).
    The log di erential of the sectoral price index is given by:

                     ^z =
                                 Kz                   1              Kz
                     P                 sz,i p
                                            ^z,i =                         sz,i (1 - z,i ) ^z,i - ^z,i ,                   (20)
                                 i=1                 1- ¯z           i=1


where the second equality substitutes in (19) and solves the xed point for P  ^z where  ¯z 
   Kz                        ^
   i=1 sz,i z,i . Note that -Pz captures the change in consumer surplus, which declines if the
weighted average of exogenous markup shifts outweighs productivity increases, resulting in
a higher sectoral price level.
    The producer surplus can in turn be approximated as:12

            dz            Kz    sz,i                 Kz    sz,i                                      ^z .
                                     ^z,i =
                                     µ                          ^z,i + (1 - z,i )[^
                                                                                  z,i - ^z,i ] + z,i P                     (21)
            z Y           i=1   µz,i                 i=1   µz,i

That is, producers capture a portion of the surplus from increased productivity, as they pass-
through the rest with lower prices to consumers, and also bene t from increased markups.
Note that the exogenous increase in markups for the rms directly a ected by the shock is
captured by (1 - z,i )^                 ^z is the indirect markup e ect from strategic comple-
                        z,i , while z,i P
mentarities in price setting for every rm in the industry.
  11
    For example, a merger between producers i and j (studied in Section 4) leads the new rm to set markup
based on the cumulative market share of the two products, which changes the perceived elasticity in (6) from
(sz,i ) to (sz,i + sz,j ). Then, formally, we have ^z,i =  (sz,i ) · sz,j and symmetrically ^z,j =  (sz,j ) · sz,i .
  12                                dz           Kz                  1           Kz                 Kz sz,i
       Indeed, using (7), we have   z Y   =d     i=1 sz,i     1-    µz,i    =    i=1       ^z,i +
                                                                                       z,i s                 ^z,i , where z,i 
                                                                                                    i=1 µz,i µ
z,i +wF       s                                                 K                                     Kz
 z Y     = z,i
             z,i
                                                        z
                 . By the de nition of market shares, i=1      ^z,i = 0, and therefore
                                                          sz,i s                                      i=1 z,i s^z,i is a second-
order covariance term, which we omit. Then (21) is obtain with the use of (18) and (19).


                                                               12
         Combining (20) and (21), we can write the change in the combined surplus (welfare) as:

                                  ^ z = dz - P
                                             ^z =
                                                                 Kz    sz,i        ¯z - 1 ^
                                                                                   µ
                                  W                                         ^z,i -
                                                                                         Pz ,                                    (22)
                                        z Y                      i=1   µz,i          µ
                                                                                     ¯z

with P ^z given by (20) and µ ¯z > 1 measuring the average markup in the economy;13 and if the
policy leads to government revenues, W    ^ z additionally features a dT Rz term. Intuitively, (22)
                                                                       z Y
splits the overall change in welfare into the direct e ect of the average productivity improve-
ment (weighted by the cost shares sz,i /µz,i ) and the redistributive e ect from the movement
in the price level in the presence of markup pricing µ¯z > 1 (a wedge between consumer prices
and producer costs resulting in a Harberger's triangle deadweight loss). Indeed, a change
in P^z has a non-zero welfare e ect, as it redistributes surplus between consumers and pro-
ducers, yet starting from an already distorted equilibrium. In an economy without markups
(µz,i  1), the overall welfare e ect simply reduces to the average improvement in productiv-
     ^ z = Kz sz,i 
ity, W                ^z,i . This summarizes the approach we take to the welfare approximation
              i=1
that we use in the context of speci c policies in an open economy below.


4         Mergers, Acquisitions and Antitrust
We are now ready to analyze quantitatively a series of policies typically targeted at large
 rms, with antitrust policy regulating mergers of rms with signi cant market power being
an obvious example. Speci cally, we are interested in the merger of large domestic rms and
under which conditions they can increase welfare at Home. Since these large domestic rms
are typically also large exporters (Melitz 2003), such a merger likely has nontrivial implications
for the foreign country as well. Does Foreign face an incentive to block the mergers of domestic
superstar rms? How much does trade openness shape these considerations?


4.1         Merger analysis: setup
Typically, rms engage in merger and acquisition activities in order to realize cost synergies,
to increase e ciency by transferring knowledge and best practices between entities, but also
to increase their market power. When evaluating the desirability of such mergers, the poli-
cymaker typically trades-o the risk of increased market power in the economy against the
e ciency bene ts associated with the merger. We capture these channels as follows. First,
we assume that, upon merging, the new rm continues to produce the two distinct product
                                              -1                  Kz                         Kz
    13                       ¯z
                                      1- ¯z                       i=1 sz,i z,i               i=1 sz,i (1-z,i )[^
                                                                                                               z,i -^z,i ]
         Speci cally, µ
                      ¯z =   µ
                             ¯z   +    ¯z
                                       µ                   ¯z 
                                                   , where µ     Kz sz,i             ¯z =
                                                                                 and µ      Kz sz,i                          .
                                                                 i=1 µz,i z,i               i=1 µz,i (1-z,i )[^z,i -^z,i ]




                                                                 13
lines previously produced by the two separate rms, but it now sets prices to maximize the
combined pro ts. As a consequence, the new rm's market power and markups increase.14
    Second, we allow the merger to result in e ciency gains, as the new rm can reduce both
  xed and variable costs. Speci cally, we assume that the merged rm incurs only one xed
cost rather than two; we note however that this assumption is largely inconsequential quan-
titatively, as xed costs are a very small fraction of revenues for the largest rms. Finally, we
allow the merger to generate productivity spillovers between the merged entities: the less pro-
ductive product inherits some of the e ciency of the more productive one, with the strength
of the spillover governed by the parameter  [0, 1]. Speci cally, the productivity of the
post-merger product, z,2 , is parameterized as:

                                        z,2 = z,1 + (1 - )z,2 ,

where z,i is the productivity of the pre-merger rm i  {1, 2}.
    Given this post-merger market structure and productivity distribution, we solve for the
new entry game and price-setting equilibrium in each sector. To get at the full welfare ef-
fect of a merger, we simulate it for a positive measure of sectors z  Z , and recompute the
corresponding general equilibrium, as discussed in Section 3.
    In our baseline analysis, we consider an economy where  = 1.34, as estimated in Table 1
for France, hence re ecting a fairly high level of trade openness typical of modern developed
economies. Harder to calibrate is the value of the productivity spillover: we choose a value of
  = 0.35, that is a merger closes a third of the productivity gap between the rst and the second
product. With this value of the spillover parameter we can illustrate some of the most inter-
esting policy trade-o s at play. We report the sensitivity of the analysis to alternative values
of the merger spillovers as well as the trade openness below. The rest of the model parameters
correspond to their benchmark values described in Table 1. We report results under Cournot
competition for concreteness; the results under Bertrand competition are qualitatively similar,
albeit somewhat attenuated quantitatively.


4.2     Welfare implications of a merger
The welfare consequences -- at home and abroad -- of merging the top two domestic rms in
a given sector are considerably di erent across sectors, as we report in Figure 1. We split all
sectors into deciles z  Z based on their overall comparative advantage (     z ; left panel) and
                           
its granular component (z ; right panel). We then report the welfare impact W    ^ Z (as de ned
  14
     Given CES demand, the optimal markups are the same for both products and depend on their cumulative
market share sz,1 + sz,2 in the new equilibrium, according to the same functional relationship as in (5) and (6).


                                                       14
            (a) Welfare e ects by z                                     (b) Welfare e ects by z
0.5%                                                       0.5%



0.3%                                                       0.3%



0.1%                                                       0.1%



-0.1%                                                      -0.1%



-0.3%                                                      -0.3%


        1   2   3    4    5   6    7    8    9   10                1   2    3   4    5    6   7    8    9   10



                                  Figure 1: Welfare e ects of mergers
Note: Welfare impact W ^ Z , as de ned in (16), at home and abroad, of a merger of the top two domestic rms, by
deciles Z of sectors z  [0, 1] sorted by overall home comparative advantage                                   
                                                                                z and its granular component z .



in (16)) from a merger of the top two home rms in each sector in these deciles for Home and
Foreign.
    For the bottom 80% of sectors, be it in terms of comparative advantage     z or in terms of
               
granularity z , both Home and Foreign bene t from these top mergers, due to the productivity
spillover. In each case, welfare gains are more modest for Foreign than for Home, as the market
shares of home rms are smaller in the foreign market due to trade costs. In stark contrast,
in sectors with the strongest (top 20%) comparative advantage or level of granularity, welfare
gains are considerably larger for Home and signi cantly negative for Foreign.
    What are the mechanisms behind the starkly heterogeneous results of Figure 1? A merger
has two e ects on economic outcomes. First, it increases productivity due to the spillover ,
which results in lower consumer prices. However, it also increases market power and markups,
which results in higher consumer prices and higher rm pro ts. This second e ect also has an
international distributive consequence in an open economy, as part of the reduction in Foreign
consumer surplus is redistributed towards Home through increased pro ts (producer surplus).
This is one reason for the di erential welfare e ects of the same merger in the two countries.
    More speci cally, in low-           
                                 z or z sectors, the largest domestic rms tend to account for
relatively small market shares, and especially so in the foreign market. In the model, consis-
tent with the empirical evidence on decreasing cost pass-through with rm size (see Amiti,
Itskhoki, and Konings 2019), markups are a convex function of market shares. As a result, the
market power increase from a merger is less important in sectors where merged rms have
relatively small market shares. Overall, the positive productivity e ect (that scales propor-


                                                      15
           (a) Impact of spillover strength                          (b) Impact of trade openess 
1.5%                                                      0.3%




  1%                                                      0.2%




0.5%                                                      0.1%




  0%                                                        0%




-0.5%                                                     -0.1%

          0.1     0.2    0.3     0.4    0.5   0.6                 1.35   1.45    1.55   1.65    1.75    1.85


        Figure 2: Impact of top mergers in comparative advantage sectors: the role of             and 
Note: Welfare impact of mergers in the top 20% of sectors in terms of Home's export intensity z . See notes to
Figure 1.


tionally with market shares) dominates the relatively more modest increase in market power
(which is convex in market shares). Furthermore, the net gains are felt more strongly at Home,
where the top two domestic rms have a more signi cant presence than abroad.
    Matters are di erent in the top sectors in terms of both granularity and overall comparative
advantage. In the foreign country, top domestic mergers now have signi cant negative welfare
e ects. The increased monopoly power of the top domestic rm destroys consumer surplus,
and is not su ciently compensated for by productivity gains of the merged rm. When the
increase in markups dominates the reduction in costs, foreign consumers lose surplus due to
increasing prices. The same e ect plays out in the home market as well, and Home's consumer
surplus declines too, but, crucially, it is more than o set by the increase in the producer surplus
of the merged domestic rms. Indeed, the merged entity increases pro ts both in the home and
the foreign market but channels them back to domestic workers. Through this mechanism,
mergers in an open economy have a "beggar-thy-neighbor" spillover on the trading partners.
This suggests a rationale for governments in open economies to be overly lenient towards
domestic mergers, especially in more granular industries with strong comparative advantage,
a topic we explore further below.
    Overall, the welfare consequences of a top domestic merger are not trivial. In this baseline
calibration, a merger between the top two rms in sectors with the strongest comparative
advantage has the same welfare e ect as a uniform 0.4% sectoral productivity increase at home
and a 0.35% sectoral productivity reduction abroad.
    Of course, these numbers hinge importantly on the strength of the productivity spillover .
We report their sensitivity to the intensity of the cost savings realized by a merger in the left

                                                     16
panel of Figure 2, focusing on mergers in the top 20% of sectors in terms of export share       z.
In short, greater increases welfare gains from mergers, both for Home and Foreign, but it
does so much more strongly for Home, where the market shares of these rms are higher.
If spillovers are limited, the mergers are particularly detrimental at Home, as the dominant
impact comes from the increased market power and markups of the combined entity. The
e ect is also negative abroad, but is less pronounced. In contrast, as productivity spillover
grows larger, Home starts to strongly bene t from mergers, while Foreign bene ts much less
and only when spillovers are very strong. The reason again is the transfer of foreign consumer
surplus into the pro ts of domestic rms.
    The level of trade openness, governed by the iceberg trade cost  , is also crucial to un-
derstand the results in Figure 1. At the current level of openness, or for even more open
economies, the mergers in high export intensive sectors tend to be bene cial at home but
detrimental abroad. In contrast, if we study countries that are su ciently closed (large  ),
we see in the right panel of Figure 2 that the consumer loss at Home will outweigh the pro-
ducer gain, resulting in a net loss in domestic welfare, while e ects on foreign welfare are still
negative yet very limited, because countries trade little. This highlights the essential role of
trade openness for the welfare analysis of granular mergers. Domestic mergers are particu-
larly contentious abroad if they happen in granular comparative advantage sectors, especially
if countries have a strong trade relationship.

Welfare approximation The quantitative e ects discussed above can be conveniently il-
lustrated using the welfare approximation introduced in (20)­(21) in Section 3. Since a merger
"shocks" the productivity and markups of only the largest combined home rm directly, the
consumer surplus e ect is given by -P       ^z = sz,1 1-z,1 [^z,1 -  ^z,1 ], where sz,1 corresponds
                                                       1-¯z
to the combined market share of the merged rm, and          ^z,1 and  ^z,1 capture the correspond-
ing markup and productivity shifts.15 A parallel expression captures the change in the con-
sumer surplus abroad, with s     z,1 and ^z,1 now corresponding to the combined market share
and markup change in the foreign market. In general, due to trade costs, s       z,1 < sz,1 , and thus
                   
we expect  ^z,1 > ^z,1 , explaining why the e ects on consumer surplus in Foreign are typically
both muted and less adverse in most sectors.
    The fall in consumer surplus in Home is partially or fully compensated by the increase in
  15                                     s z,2        z,2               s   s
                                                                       z,1 z,2
      Formally, in this case,  ^z,1 = sz,1 + sz,2 log z,2 and ^z,1 = sz, 1 +sz,2
                                                                                 [ (sz,1 ) +  (sz,2 )], where (sz,1 , sz,2 )
are the pre-merger market shares of the two products. Thus,         ^z,1 and    ^z,1 are the sales weighted averages of
changes in productivity and markups of the two merged products. Note that the direct e ect on consumer surplus,
                                                                                                                  1-z,1
sz,1 [^z,1 - ^z,1 ], is modi ed by the endogenous markup adjustment of all rms, captured by the multiplier 1-          ¯z .




                                                            17
the producer surplus of home rms serving both home and foreign markets:

             dz   sz,1                              sz,1 
                       [z,1 ^z,1 + (1 - z,1 )^
                                             z,1 ] +  [z, 1^           
                                                                            
                                                            z,1 + (1 - z,1 )^z,1 ].
             z Y  µz,1                              µz,1

The presence of this direct producer gain for home rms, absent for foreign rms, explains
the international distributional con ict over domestic mergers between the home and the for-
eign governments. This con ict is particularly pronounced when s       z,1 and ^z,1 are large in
the foreign market. Provided that trade costs are low, this occurs in sectors with pronounced
domestic comparative advantage and granularity, consistent with the quantitative patterns in
Figures 1 and 2.


4.3    Optimal M&A policy
We have seen above that countries may be impacted quite di erently by the mergers of large
  rms. In practice, large mergers of multinational rms may be evaluated by the antitrust
authority of each country in which those rms operate, not only in the country that hosts
the headquarters of these rms. We now examine the incentives and optimal policies of each
country when assessing merger proposals.
    We call a merger policy a simple binary policy choice of whether or not to allow a merger.
We consider a general objective function W   ^ z + W ^ z , indexed by   0, the relative weight
of foreign welfare. Recall that W^ z is the domestic welfare impact of a merger de ned in (16)
and W ^  is the corresponding welfare impact abroad. The case with  = 0 captures the ob-
        z
jective function of the home government,  =  the objective of Foreign, and  = L /L
corresponds to a utilitarian global planner. We de ne a corresponding merger policy func-
tion:
                                 m (z )  1{W   ^ z + W ^  > 0},
                                                          z

i.e. an indicator function de ned over the set of sectors z  [0, 1] with m (z ) = 1 if the merger
of the top two domestic rms in z is welfare-increasing for a given value of .16 We study the
properties of m (z ) for di erent values of , tracing out the international spillover e ects of
domestic antitrust policy, focusing on the baseline case with productivity spillover = 0.35.
  16
     We only focus on a potential merger of two home rms, mostly for technical reasons: it is computation-
ally easier to evaluate a single xed point problem in terms of m (z ) and the world GE vector (w, w , Y, Y  ),
rather than simultaneously solving for a Nash equilibrium in both m0 (z ) at home and m (z ) abroad. However,
such a focus likely leads to little loss of generality in our analysis, as we anticipate the optimal M&A policy
to be approximately a dominant strategy independently of the M&A policy abroad. We leave this conjecture
for future quantitative evaluation. Another interpretation is that we focus on M&A in a large country, which
trades with a continuum of small open economies, where M&A within each individual country is quantitatively
inconsequential.



                                                      18
                         0.9


                         0.8


                         0.7


                         0.6


                         0.5


                         0.4


                         0.3
                               1       1.2         1.4         1.6         1.8          2


                         Figure 3: Optimal M&A policy and trade openness
Note: Share of sectors where a merger at the top leads to positive welfare e ects -- for the domestic government,
                                                                   1
the foreign government, and a utilitarian world planner, that is 0 m (z )dz for   {0, , L /L}.


    Figure 3 plots a rst broad summary of the results. Speci cally, it shows the fraction of
                                      1
sectors where a merger is bene cial, 0 m (z )dz , for Home, Foreign and for a utilitarian global
planner,   {0, , L /L}. These statistics change as a function of trade openness  , ranging
from a closed economy to free trade. Interestingly, in an economy that is su ciently closed
(high  ), the foreign country bene ts most from domestic mergers, as their market power
impact is very limited abroad.17 In contrast, the home government blocks the majority of
mergers when the economy is closed to international trade, as mergers in the closed economy
have a particularly strong market power e ect -- market shares are high due to a lack of foreign
competition. As trade costs decline and Home and Foreign trade more with each other, the
domestic government is more favorable towards the mergers, while they become increasing
less welcome abroad. In particular, a utilitarian global planner would approve fewer mergers
than the domestic government when economies are very open.
    The summary statistics in Figure 3, however, hide dramatic heterogeneity in the subsets
of sectors in which the various planners would see mergers with a favorable eye. This is the
main source of international con icts of interest over merger policies, which we illustrate
in Figure 4. In this gure, we sort sectors into deciles of comparative advantage        z in the
left panel and deciles of granularity   z in the right panel, using the baseline value of trade
costs  = 1.34. We combine together the bottom six deciles as there is little variation across
  17
    Note the di erence with Figure 2, where we focused on the top-20% of sectors in terms of home export share,
while in the current analysis we look at merger policy across all sectors.



                                                         19
            (a) Fraction M&A by z                                     (b) Fraction M&A by z
 1                                                         1



0.8                                                       0.8



0.6                                                       0.6



0.4                                                       0.4



0.2                                                       0.2



 0                                                         0
      1-6       7         8         9        10                 1-6       7         8         9        10



                              Figure 4: Optimal M&A policy across sectors
Note: Figure plots the fraction of sectors in which home mergers are welfare improving at home ( = 0) and
abroad ( = ), by deciles of sectors in terms of home comparative advantage                                
                                                                             z and its granular component z .
The bottom ve deciles are binned together. Baseline parameters = 0.35 and  = 1.34.


these lower deciles. We then plot the fractions of sectors within each bin for which the do-
mestic ( = 0) and foreign ( = ) planners would favor a merger.
    Two main insights emerge from the cross sectional analysis. The right panel indicates
that both Home and Foreign dislike mergers in granular sectors compared to mergers in non-
granular sectors. While they green-light the majority of mergers in sectors without large
granular rms, Home would only allow mergers in 40% and Foreign in 25% of cases in the top
decile of sectors by granularity. The reason is the excessive market power that rms generally
hold in such sectors, which is particularly costly abroad as the loss in consumer surplus there
is not compensated by any direct gains in producer surplus.
    The pattern is somewhat di erent in the left panel of Figure 3. From the perspective of
home welfare, the proportion of favorable mergers to a rst approximation does not depend
on sectoral comparative advantage -- the home planner favors roughly 50­60% of mergers
independently of     z . In contrast, the foreign approval of domestic mergers decreases sharply
with Home's comparative advantage -- while Foreign favors most mergers in low- sectors,
it would want to block every merger in the top decile of home comparative advantage.
    This pattern is not surprising: as we discussed, home mergers in comparative advantage
sectors disproportionately hurt Foreign, due to a transfer of consumer surplus. This, in turn, is
the reason why Home favors many mergers in high comparative advantage sectors. Nonethe-
less, such mergers can also be costly in the domestic economy due to their excessive concen-
tration of market power, and this is the reason why the home planner would not favor all such


                                                     20
mergers. Appendix Figure A1 illustrates these con icting welfare e ects -- sectors with strong
comparative advantage have large consumer surplus losses at Home, which are however o set
by large producer surplus gains.
    Overall, this analysis suggests an important role for international cooperation over M&A
policies in open economies to avoid excessive build-up of market power. Absent cooperation,
each country will pursue excessive mergers, in particular in sectors with strong comparative
advantage, resulting in a Prisoner-dilemma-like equilibrium. Furthermore, the beggar-thy-
neighbor distributional con ict makes some mergers unfavorable for Foreign, even in situa-
tions when a utilitarian global planner may favor them. This suggests that the home decision-
maker is typically too lenient to domestic mergers in comparative advantage sectors, while
the foreign decision-maker would try to always block such mergers, sometimes at a cost to
multilateral e ciency.


5    Granular Tari s
We turn to another aspect of government policies that may a ect and target large rms -- trade
policy. In fact, trade policy is often so narrow that it appears tailor-made to target individual
  rms rather than industries. Such "granular" tactics are particularly widespread in antidump-
ing retaliation, international sanctions and trade wars. Our quanti ed model allows us to
analyze the economic incentives faced by the home government when considering imposing
such granular tari s rather than industry-wide ones, putting aside the legal rami cations of
such a decision.
    Speci cally, we study two alternative tari policies in an open granular economy. We
contrast a uniform tari     ¯z levied on all imports in sector z and a granular tari   ^z,1 levied
exclusively on the largest foreign exporter in the same sector. For concreteness, we compare
a 1% uniform tari with a granular tari         ^z,1 that generates the same tari revenue at the
sectoral level. A government may prefer a granular tari over a uniform one for two reasons.
First, it may be more attractive in terms of domestic political economy, though perhaps more
complex to impose legally. We leave aside these considerations. Second, it may be a more
e ective policy tool at extracting surplus from foreign producers and improving the home
country's terms of trade. As we shall shortly see, this latter consideration is indeed at play in
our granular model with oligopolistic competition.

General setup Consider rm-speci c tari s {z,i } imposed by the home government on
foreign rms i in sector z . In particular, if a foreign rm generates revenues rz,i = sz,i z Y in
the home market, it needs to pay z,i rz,i to the home government, so that its net revenues are


                                               21
(1 - z,i )rz,i . The foreign rm's pro t maximization problem in the home market is then:

                                                      z Y                                     sz,i
  z,i = max          (1 - z,i )pz,i - cz,i p- 
                                            z,i      Kz    1-
                                                                 - wF     = (1 - z,i )z Y             - wF,
            pz,i
                                                     j =1 pz,j
                                                                                              (sz,i )

with the solution for prices and markups as if its costs were increased to cz,i = cz,i /(1 - z,i ).
We denote the resulting market shares by {sz,i } with the residual demand elasticity (s) still
de ned in (6). The foreign share in the home market is still given by z = K            i=1 (1 - z,i )sz,i .
                                                                                         z


However, the home government now collects tari revenues T Rz = z Y K               i=1 (1 - z,i )z,i sz,i ,
                                                                                     z


with the rest, z z Y - T Rz , being the export revenue of foreign rms. We describe the
resulting changes to the general equilibrium conditions in Appendix A.2.
    The resulting change in home welfare from the tari policy {z,i } is described by the gen-
eral expression in (15), which allows us to decompose the overall welfare e ect into tari
revenue, and changes in consumer and producer surplus respectively. We again calculate the
"welfare derivatives" W ^ z , as described in (16), by studying the tari policy in a subset of sectors
with similar characteristics. This is necessary to appropriately capture the general equilibrium
e ects from the sectoral tari s on overall welfare, which are of the same order of magnitude
as the direct sectoral e ect.18

Results Using the general framework above, we now compare two alternative tari policies:
(a) a uniform tari with z,i =    ¯z = 0.01 for all foreign rms i selling in the home market in
sector z ; and (b) a granular tari  ^z,1 levied only on the largest foreign exporter to the home
market in sector z , with the value of the tari given by     ^z,1 sz,1 = ¯z ¯ , that is, the same as
                                                                             z
in case (a). We report here the results when competition takes the Cournot form, with the
results for Bertrand competition being qualitatively similar, albeit quantitatively attenuated
as markups are less variable in that case. Figure 5 compares the domestic welfare e ects of
each policy, contrasting sectors with di erent comparative advantage of the foreign country,
z .19 We nd that imposing a granular tari has clear welfare bene ts from the point of view
of Home, all the more in the sectors in which Foreign has a larger share of the home market.
    To understand the forces behind these results, we decompose these domestic welfare e ects
in Figure 6: namely, we report its three components, following equation (15) -- tari revenues,
consumer surplus, and producer surplus. A clear picture emerges. First, by construction, tari
revenues are equivalent between a granular and a uniform tari in all sectors and increase
  18
      The direct e ect is rst-order within the sector, but comes with a weight z dz in aggregation, while the
indirect general equilibrium e ect (on wages and price levels) is also of the order z dz , via general equilibrium
conditions. We implement the policy in a subset of sectors z  Z with cumulative expenditure weight zZ z dz ,
and scale the resulting welfare e ect by zZ z dz , as in (16).
   19
      Results are very similar when we group sectors by their level of foreign granularity z .


                                                       22
           (a) Change in home welfare                                (b) Di erential welfare e ect




                                Figure 5: Granular tari : welfare e ect
Note: CM stands for constant markup counterfactual and VM is the variable markup baseline. The gures plot
the welfare e ects W^ Z of tari policy by deciles of foreign comparative advantage (foreign share z in the home
market). The left panel plots W^ Z in the case of a uniform tari under CM (pink bars), under VM (pink+red bars),
and a granular tari under VM (pink+red+blue bars). The right panel zooms in on the di erential welfare e ects
of the uniform tari over the counterfactual case with constant markups (red bars), as well as the di erential
welfare e ect of the granular vs the uniform tari (both VM; blue bars).


proportionally with the ex post sectoral import share z . Second, the impact of these tari s
on domestic producer surplus is small, as these e ects are indirect. Therefore, third, the major
driver of the net welfare e ects is the loss in domestic consumer surplus that these policies
induce, o setting a large part of the gains from tari revenues. This is where the di erence
between uniform and granular tari s plays a key role. Home consumers are hurt more by
the uniform tari levied on all foreign exporters than by the granular tari concentrated on a
single largest foreign exporter.
    The reason for this result is that with a granular tari , the pass-through of the import
tari to consumer prices at home is much lower. The tari hits the largest foreign rm, which
typically has a double-digit market share in the home market in high z (or z ) sectors. This
  rm exerts signi cant power in the home market, and absorbs part of the increase in marginal
costs coming from the tari by lowering its markups (see Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings 2019).
Overall, the increase in prices is therefore lower for home consumers than if the tari were
levied uniformly an all foreign rms in the sector. Put di erently, the leading rm prices
strategically to keep its market share high and reduces its markup signi cantly in response
to a loss in relative e ciency. If, instead, all foreign rms are subject to a (smaller) uniform
tari , their relative stance is largely unchanged, so that markup adjustments are smaller. This
makes granular tari an e cient policy tool for the home government as it allows to extract
the same tari revenue at a minimal cost in terms of the loss in consumer surplus due to the


                                                      23
                (a) Uniform Tari , ¯z                                       (b) Granular Tari , ^z,1
  1%                                                          1%




0.5%                                                        0.5%




  0%                                                          0%




-0.5%                                                       -0.5%



        1   2    3    4   5    6   7    8    9   10                 1   2     3    4   5    6   7      8   9   10



                          Figure 6: Welfare e ect of a tari : Decomposition
                                         ^ Z at home into three components according to (15), and the welfare
Note: Decomposition of the welfare e ect W
e ect abroad, from a uniform and a granular tari , by deciles of sectors split by foreign comparative advantage.


lower tari pass-through into prices.20
    Notice that this e ect is not present in Costinot, Rodríguez-Clare, and Werning (2020),
who study a constant markup case with a continuum of heterogeneous rms that all exhibit a
complete pass-through of the tari . We nd that the pass-through e ect, which operates even
in partial equilibrium, is quantitatively large -- the loss in consumer surplus is cut by more
than half in the most import-intensive sectors compared to the constant markup case. Notice
further that this pass-through e ect is present even when we apply a uniform tari to the
whole sector, so long as markups are variable and the foreign share z < 1. This can be seen
in Figure 5 where we compare the welfare impact of a uniform tari against a counterfactual
                                                                            
case with constant markups set at the monopolistically competitive level, -  1
                                                                               . The incomplete
pass-through e ect is maximized by imposing a granular tari , which targets the rm with
the lowest pass-through rate in the industry, thus minimizing the loss of consumer surplus for
a given amount of tari revenues.
    Quantitatively, Figure 5 shows that the home welfare gain from a uniform tari in a vari-
able markup environment is about a third higher than in a constant markup counterfactual.
This gap is roughly constant across all sectors, independently of the foreign share z . In con-
trast, the additional gains from setting a non-uniform granular tari are only present in sectors
  20
     In Appendix A.2, we provide a formal analysis of these e ects, using the welfare approximation introduced
in Section 3. In particular, we show that the main di erence between the tari s is driven by the loss in consumer
                                                  F
surplus, which in general is given by P ^z = 1-  ¯z
                                                    ¯z z , where 1 -  F
                                               1-¯z                  ¯z is the average pass-through of the tari
among the a ected foreign rms. A granular tari minimizes this pass-through, and thus dominates a uniform
tari (or any other tari pro le which yields the same tari revenue).



                                                       24
with substantial foreign comparative advantage. In sectors with large foreign rms, using a
granular tari increases the home welfare gain by another third. In other sectors, even the
largest foreign rm has a small market share in the domestic market, insu cient to result in
a signi cantly lower pass-through of the granular tari .
    This analysis suggests that variable markups and the incomplete pass-through of large
  rms are crucial quantitative components of the optimal tari analysis. Moreover, it shows
that governments likely have strong economic incentives to target only the largest foreign
  rms with tari s as an e ective way of extracting foreign producer surplus with minimal
consequences for domestic consumer surplus.


6    Industrial Policy in a Granular World
To conclude, we brie y consider an extension of the model in which rms can make a one-time
investment in boosting their productivity. We explore under which circumstances the planner
wants to subsidize such investments in comparative advantage sectors and in particular by the
industrial champions -- the largest rms in the economy.

Setup economy Consider an extension of the granular open economy in which a rm in
sector z can invest
                                            z,i
                            vz,i = z Kz  xz,i                                (23)
                                         j =1 z,j

to boost its productivity from z,i to z,i = z,i (1+xz,i )1/ for some ,  > 0 and  >  -1. We
are interested in the home planner's allocation of investment {vz,i } and associated productivity
boosts {xz,i }, and for concreteness limit the planners budget to V , so that:

                                                Kz
                                                      z,i vz,i dz  V.                        (24)
                                  z [0,1]       i=1


In a counterfactual closed economy with constant markups, a planner is simply maximizing
aggregate productivity given by:

                                       z                Kz
                                                               -1
                                                                                 -1
                   = exp                  log                 z,i (1 + xz,i )
                                                                                      dz.    (25)
                             z [0,1]   -1               i=1


In an open economy with variable-markup pricing, the planner chooses {vz,i , xz,i } to maxi-
                           ^ = d log(Y /P ), as de ned in (15), subject to (23) and (24).
mize the change in welfare W
    For concreteness we consider a total budget V = /100 so that a uniform 1% productivity



                                                 25
improvement (xz,i  x    ¯ = /100) is feasible for every rm in every sector.21 We ask the
question under which circumstances the planner would indeed favor such a uniform allocation
of investment and when she would prefer to skew the investment towards certain sectors and
 rms, in particular national champions.

Closed economy Consider rst a closed economy, using our welfare approximation de-
veloped in Section 3. The log productivity improvement is      ^z,i  log(z,i /z,i )  xz,i / .
Using (20) and (21), the reduction in sectoral price levels and the increase in pro ts is given
by:

   ^z = -        1               Kz                                     dz               Kz    sz,i             ^z ),
   P                                   sz,i (1 - z,i )^z,i      and         =                       z,i (^z,i + P         (26)
                1- ¯z            i=1                                    z Y              i=1   µz,i

as the rms increase their markups by µ ^z,i = z,i (        ^z ) according to (19), absent any
                                                    ^z,i + P
exogenous shifts in markups. Therefore, the overall welfare e ect can be evaluated as:22

                 ^ z = dz - P                                                      z,i (z /z )
                                                    Kz
                 W          ^z =                          sz,i ^z,i - cov ^z,i ,       +       z,i ,                      (27)
                       z Y                          i=1                            z,i   1-¯z

where the covariance term is market-share weighted and (z /z )  K                z
                                                                               i=1 sz,i z,i /z,i .
    Equation (27) has a number of implications. First, in a counterfactual economy with con-
stant markups, that is with complete pass-through 1 - z,i  1 and thus with z,i  0, the
distribution of productivity boosts across rms (and sectors) does not matter, and a su cient
statistic is the average productivity growth, K      z
                                                   i=1 sz,i ^z,i . This is a version of Hulten's the-
orem. As a result, the planner should simply maximize aggregate productivity (25) subject
to her budget constraint (24). In this case, it is optimal to have      ^z,i common across all rms
(xz,i = x¯ for all rms) when  =  - 1 in (23), while a smaller (larger)  favors investment into
the largest (smallest) rms. In what follows, we focus on the case of  =  - 1, which estab-
lishes an indi erence benchmark in a counterfactual closed economy with constant markups,
whereby the planner is indi erent on the margin which rms should receive the productivity
boost. Indeed, per unit of investment expenditure, this results in the same aggregate produc-
tivity gains independent of the details of the allocation.
    When markups are variable, both z,i and z,i /z,i are increasing in the rm's market
share sz,i , as larger rms have both a greater strategic complementarity elasticity z,i and a
smaller elasticity of demand z,i . Therefore, the planner can make the covariance term in (27)
negative by allocating  ^z,i towards the smaller rms. When  =  - 1, the increase in the aver-
  21                                          Kz                        Kz       z,i
       Note that in this case,    z [0,1]     i=1             ¯, as
                                                    vz,i dz = x         i=1   Kz     
                                                                                         = 1 and    z [0,1]
                                                                                                              z dz = 1.
                                                                              j =1 z,j
  22
       To derive this result, combine the expressions in (26) and simplify by using the fact that µz,i = z,i /(z,i - 1).

                                                                26
age productivity does not depend on the allocation of investments on the margin, as discussed
above, and thus the preferences of the planner are shaped by the negative of the covariance
term in (27). As a result the planner favors investment to increase productivity of the smallest
  rms. This result is intuitive, as such investment allows the smaller rms to catch up with the
larger rms, thus eroding the monopoly power of the larger rms and bringing down the av-
erage markup in the closed economy. This reduces the deadweight loss and results in greater
welfare gains for the same increase in the average productivity across rms. Another way to
see this from (26) is that smaller rms have a greater pass-through 1 - z,i of their produc-
tivity gains into reduction of consumer prices, while the larger rms retain a larger share z,i
of productivity improvement by increasing their markups, which has a proportionally smaller
(by a factor µz,i > 1) e ect on aggregate welfare.

Open economy Matters are di erent in an open economy as the bene ts of domestic pro-
ductivity gains only partially accrue to domestic consumers, who buy a basket of home and
foreign products, and also partially accrue to foreign consumers by means of their terms of
trade appreciation. This provides an incentive for the home country to subsidize more in-
tensively its comparative advantage sectors, which maximize the bene ts from productivity
improvements. In contrast, in comparative disadvantage sectors, the home country has an
incentive to "free ride" on the foreign high productivity level, which translates into favorable
terms of trade for the home country.23
    Furthermore, the same force that made it disadvantageous to subsidize large rms in a
closed economy, may render it desirable in an open economy. Speci cally, the low pass-
through 1 - z,i of productivity improvements into consumer prices at home translates into
greater pro tability of home rms abroad. In other words, subsidizing productivity improve-
ments for large exporters has disadvantages in the home market, yet allows to capture a greater
share of enhanced competitiveness in the foreign market in the form of greater producer sur-
plus. Indeed, the direct e ect of productivity improvement on the producer surplus from ex-
                                     s
ports is given by K     z
                      i=1 (1 - 
                               z,i ) µ
                                      z,i
                                          z,i
                                          
                                              ^z,i , and it is increasing in both the comparative ad-
                                              
                                              z,i
                                        Kz
vantage of a sector  =     z
                                 -         
                                        i=1 (1
                                                                                    
                                     z,i )sz,i and in the average markup elasticity z,i of the
subsidized rms, which is increasing in rm size.
  23
       Formally, the increase in consumer surplus is given by:
                               Kz                                           H   Kz
              ^z =    1                                                  1-¯z   i=1 z,i sz,i (1 - z,i )^z,i
             -P                     z,i sz,i (1 - z,i )^z,i = (1 - z )            Kz
                                                                                                            ,
                     1- ¯z   i=1
                                                                         1-¯z     i=1 z,i sz,i (1 - z,i )

                       K                                          H       1      K
where 1 - z = i=1        z
                            z,i sz,i is the home share and 1 -  ¯z  = 1-   z      i=1 z,i sz,i (1 - z,i ) is the average
                                                                                    z


pass-through rate among domestic rms. If the home government subsidizes proportionately every home rm in
                                                                H
sector z , so that ^z,i =                      ^z = (1 - z ) 1-
                           ^z for all i, then -P
                                                               ¯z
                                                                   ^z , which is increasing in the home share 1 - z .
                                                             1-¯z 



                                                            27
    To summarize, the planner favors productivity gains by smaller rms in a closed economy,
as it helps to bring down the average markup distortion. That is, in a closed economy, the
planner is likely to adopt policies opposing the creation of "national champions" and granular
 rms. In an open economy, however, there exists a rationale to subsidize productivity gains in
comparative advantage sectors and, furthermore, by the largest rms in such sectors, thus cre-
ating national champions in sectors of comparative advantage. The gains in producer surplus
abroad may become the goal of the policy, in which case large rms with a low pass-through of
productivity gains into foreign consumer prices may become the target of industrial policies.
We leave the comprehensive quantitative evaluation of this hypothesis to future research.


7    Conclusion
Granular rms play a pivotal role in international trade. We analyze a series of policies aimed
speci cally at large individual rms in an open economy context, relying on the theoretical
and quantitative framework developed in Gaubert and Itskhoki (2020). We study merger poli-
cies as well as `granular' trade policy. In both cases, we nd that the granular structure of
the world economy o ers powerful incentives for governments to adopt policies targeted at
individual rms, and that they tend to create negative international spillovers.
     The key force underlying these results is that these large individual rms tend to enjoy
substantial market power. In this context, lenient merger policy towards local rms allows
national governments to help domestic rms build producer surplus at the expense of foreign
consumers, a form of `beggar-thy-neighbor' policy. Turning to trade policy, granular tari s
targeting large foreign exporters allow to leverage the fact that these rms have high markups,
hence absorb a large fraction of import tari s rather than passing them on to home consumers.
As a result, granular trade policy can achieve the same tari revenues at lower cost in terms
of consumer surplus, compared to imposing a tari on all rms in a sector.
     Negative spillovers created by such unilateral policies could be addressed with interna-
tional cooperation mechanisms. In particular, the analysis puts forth a clear rationale for in-
ternational cooperation on merger and antitrust policy. Our work has analyzed the incentives
faced by governments when deciding on unilateral antitrust and trade policies, assuming that
its trade partners do not retaliate. This leaves a set of interesting questions for future research.
Next on the agenda should be the analysis of incentives to retaliate by the foreign country, and
the Nash equilibrium that ensues. Another one is to distinguish between two sources of large
  rms' market power, which may have very di erent implications for these open-economy
policies: market power on the output market and market power on the input markets.



                                                28
A           Appendix
A.1         Additional Figures

        Figure A1: Welfare e ects of a merger: Decomposition into producer and consumer surplus

                          (a) By Decile of z                                                       (b) By Decile of z
 2%                                                                            2%




 1%                                                                            1%




 0%                                                                            0%




-1%                                                                            -1%




-2%                                                                            -2%
        1      2      3      4     5       6     7       8   9    10                 1    2    3      4    5   6    7      8     9   10


Note: Decomposition of home welfare e ects from the merger policy according to (15). See Figures 1 and 4.




A.2         Granular Tari
Consider rm-speci c tari pro le {z,i } imposed by the home government on foreign rms i
in sector z . Then the foreign rm's pro t maximization results in the same prices and markups
as if the rm has its costs increased to cz,i = cz,i /(1 - z,i ), or equivalently productivity draw
reduced to z,i = z,i (1 - z,i ). We denote the resulting market shares {sz,i }, and the resulting
                                                                               s
pro ts for foreign rms are z,i = (1 - z,i )z Y (sz,i ) - wF , where (s) is as de ned in (6).24
                                                         z,i
    The expenditure on foreign goods in the home market is still given by sz,i z Y , and the
foreign share is still z = K    i=1 (1 - z,i )sz,i . However now, the home government collects
                                   z


T Rz =  z Y K    i=1 (1 - z,i )z,i sz,i , while the rest (z z Y - T Rz ) is the revenue of foreign
                   z


                                                                                     Kz                        sz,i
 rms, which are split between production labor z Y                                   i=1 (1 - z,i )(1 - z,i ) µ(sz,i ) ,       xed costs
            Kz                                           Kz
wF          i=1 (1   - z,i ), and pro ts                 i=1 (1   -   z,i )z,i , where µ(s) = (s()s- )
                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                         .
  24
       Note that a non-uniform tax creates a computational challenge for the entry game, as the e ective condition
                                 sz,i           wF
for entry becomes z Y            (sz,i )       1-z,i ,   and ranking rms on cz,i (and hence sz,i does not guarantee monotonic-
ity of z,i . We assume, however, that for a small enough z,i (as is the case in our simulation), the approximation
F/(1 - z,i )  F is su ciently accurate in the entry game. Indeed, recall that entry is a discrete zero-one
decision, in which most entering rms are inframarginal, with z,i         0 due to the Zipf's law.




                                                                          29
    Therefore, there are changes to the three general equilibrium conditions (8)­(10). In par-
ticular, (8) becomes:
                                                                 1       Kz
      Y = wL +  + T R,              where       TR = Y               z         (1 - z,i )z,i sz,i dz,
                                                             0           i=1


and where the pro ts of home rms  are still expressed as in (9). Foreign aggregate income
is still Y  = w L +  , where now aggregate foreign pro ts re ect import tari s imposed
by the home government:

  
            1    Kz                           sz,i                        
                                                                         Kz              s z,i
 =                   (1 - z,i ) (1 - z,i )z Y         - wF           +         z,i   z Y  
                                                                                            
                                                                                                 - w F      dz.
        0        i=1                          (sz,i )                    i=1             (sz,i )

Finally, the current account balance becomes:

                             Y - wF KF - T R = Y   - w F  KH
                                                           
                                                             ,

                1     Kz                               Kz1                                  
where  = 0 z          i=1 (1 - z,i )sz,i dz , KF = 0   i=1 (1 - z,i ) dz and similarly for 
     
and KH , as now the foreign income from exporting is reduced by T R.

Welfare approximation         We now adapt the welfare approximation introduced in (20)­(21)
in Section 3 to the case of the import tari . In this case, W     ^ z has an additional component,
namely, government tari revenue d       T Rz
                                         zY
                                             =  ¯z z (equivalently under the granular tari        ^z,1 ),
levied on foreign exporters who in turn partially pass it through to home consumers. From
the point of view of home consumers, a tari is equivalent to an adverse productivity shock
to foreign products,    ^z,i = -z,i , and there is no direct e ect on Home's producer surplus
(only a second-round e ect on their markups). As a result, using (20), the decline in consumer
                                F
surplus is given by P^z = 1-   ¯z
                                  ¯  , where 1 - 
                                                    F
                                                   ¯z is the average pass-through rate of the tari
                             1-¯z z z
                                               F                1     Kz
among the a ected foreign rms. Thus,         ¯ z is equal to     z    i=1 (1 - z,i )sz,i z,i under the
                      F
uniform tari and z,     1 under the granular tari . This erosion of consumer surplus is partially
o set by an increase in producer surplus, as home rms increase their markups and prices by
z,i P^z according to (19).
    Therefore, the net e ect of a tari on home welfare is given by:

                                 H            F                  H     F
       ^z =                    ¯z  ^z =      ¯z
                                                - ¯z           ¯z
                                                                   1- ¯z
       W    ¯z z - 1 - (1 - z ) H  P    ¯z z         + (1 - z ) H        ,
                               µ
                               ¯z             1- ¯z            ¯z 1 - 
                                                               µ      ¯z

       H
where ¯z     ¯H
         and µ z are the average strategic complementarity elasticity and the average markup
                                       F
among domestic rms. We see that      ¯z  >   ¯ z is su cient (but not necessary) for a positive


                                                   30
welfare e ect of an import tari on home welfare.25 This condition is equivalent to the pass-
through rate being lower among foreign exporters relative to an average rm serving the home
              F
market, 1 -  ¯z < 1-    ¯ z . We generally expect this condition to hold due to the Melitz selection
force of larger rms into the foreign market and pass-through being lower among the rms
                                                                         F
with greater market shares. Adopting a granular tari maximizes         ¯z  and minimizes the tari
                    F
pass-through 1 -  ¯ z , thus delivering larger welfare gains to Home, especially in sectors where
the largest foreign rm commands a substantial market share in the home market.
    This discussion requires two remarks. First, it focuses exclusively on partial equilibrium
e ects, thus omitting the standard general equilibrium terms-of-trade e ect, which is usually
the focus of the optimal tari argument. The welfare e ect of a tari in our partial equilibrium
approximation would be altogether absent if the model were to feature constant markups and
complete pass-through, z,i = 0 for every rm. Our numerical analysis above combines both
partial and general equilibrium forces, thus delivering a complete quantitative evaluation of
the welfare consequences of di erent tari s. Second, we note that the welfare consequences
of a tari are always negative if the impact on foreign countries, in particular on foreign
producers, is taken into account. Indeed, the loss in foreign producer surplus is greater than
the welfare bene t at home due to the increased Harberger's triangle and deadweight loss,
independently of the type of tari adopted.26


A.3        Model Quanti cation
The model is estimated to match salient features of French rm-level data, as discussed in
detail in Gaubert and Itskhoki (2020). Here we brie y summarize the main steps.
    To estimate the model, we rely on French rm-level balance sheet data, which in particular
reports sales at home and abroad, as well as the rm industry. This data is merged with
international trade data from Comtrade, to get the aggregate imports and exports of France in
each industry.
    The estimation proceeds in two steps. In the rst step, we calibrate Cobb-Douglas shares {z }
to equal the sectoral expenditure shares in the French data. We also calibrate w/w = 1.13,
which corresponds to the ratio of wages in France to the average wage of its trading partners
weighted by trade values. Lastly, in our estimation, we nd that the elasticity of substitution 
and the productivity parameter  are only weakly separately identi ed. Therefore, we choose
  25
     For example, when  H
                       ¯z =  ¯zF
                                 =  ¯ z > 0 (e.g., if z,i > 0 and constant across all rms), W^ z > 0 provided that
z  (0, 1). Indeed, tax pass-through is incomplete i the tax is levied on some but not all rms in the industry
                                                                F            H
and rms feature incomplete cost pass-through. In contrast, if  ¯z  = 0 and  ¯z  > 0, the partial equilibrium e ect
of a tari on home welfare is negative, as consumers bear out the full cost of the tari on foreign rms and in
addition home rms raise their prices in response to increased prices of foreign competitors.
                                                                          F           F
  26                                                            1       ¯z
                                                                                   1-¯z
       The loss in foreign producer surplus is given by ¯z z   ¯F
                                                                    +   ¯F
                                                                        µ
                                                                              1-   1-¯z   z .
                                                                z        z




                                                         31
                                Table A1: Moments used in SMM estimation

              Moments                                                     Data        Model       Loss (%)
         1.   Log number of rms,          mean               ~z           5.631        5.429        1.9
                                                         log M
         2.                             -- st. dev.                       1.451        1.230        3.9
         3.   Top- rm sales share,        mean                            0.197        0.205        3.0
                                                           s
                                                           ~z,1
         4.                             -- st. dev.                       0.178        0.148        4.5
         5.   Top-3 sales share,          mean            3               0.356        0.343        2.0
         6.                             -- st. dev.       j =1 s
                                                               ~z,j
                                                                          0.241        0.176       12.2
         7.   Imports/dom. sales,         mean             ~z             0.365        0.354        1.5
                                                           
         8.                             -- st. dev.                       0.204        0.266       15.2
        9.    Exports/dom. sales,      mean                ~              0.328        0.345        3.9
                                                            z
        10.                         -- st. dev.                           0.286        0.346        7.2
              Fraction of sectors with                  ~z > D
                                                             ~z
        11.   exports>dom. sales                      P X                 0.185        0.095       39.7

        Regression coe cients:
        12.   export share on top- rm share                   ^
                                                              b           0.215        0.240        2.2
                                                               1
                                                                         (0.156)      (0.104)
        13.   export share on top-3 share                     ^
                                                              b           0.254        0.222        2.6
                                                               3
                                                                         (0.108)      (0.090)
        14.   import share on top- rm share                   ^
                                                              b1       -0.016        -0.011         0.1
                                                                         (0.097)      (0.079)
        15.   import share on top-3 share                     ^
                                                              b3          0.002        0.008        0.1
                                                                         (0.074)      (0.069)
Note: Last column reports the contribution of the moment to the SMM loss function.
                                                 ~         ~                 3
 Moments 12­15 are regression coe cients of        z and z on s   ~z,1 and j =1 s ~z,j (pairwise), controlling in all
                                                                            ~z ; OLS standard errors in brackets.
cases for the size of the sector with the log domestic sectoral expenditure Y


to x  at a conventional value in the trade literature ( = 5; see Broda and Weinstein 2006),
and estimate the constrained model with ve parameters  = (, , F, µT , T ).
    In the second step, we use simulated method of moments (SMM) to estimate the remaining
parameters. We search for parameter values that minimize the distance between data moments
and their model counterpart. We are particularly interested in the following salient feature of
the data: (a) heterogeneity across sectors in top rm concentration, (b) heterogeneity across
sectors in export stance and, importantly, (c) the extent to which the two are correlated, cap-
turing granular forces at play in shaping sectoral outcomes.
    To that end, we choose to target three types of moments, summarized in Table A1. The
 rst set of moments is informative about the prevalence of large rms in domestic sectoral
sales (a). Namely, we target the average and standard deviation across sectors of two mea-
sures of within-industry concentration (the relative sales shares of the largest and top-3 largest
French rms within-industry relative to other French rms). We also target the average (log)
number of French rms operating within sectors, as well as its standard deviation. This en-


                                                         32
sures that the model captures simultaneously the large number of rms operating in French
sectors with the high concentration of sales. These moments particularly help inform the
estimation of the xed costs F , as well as the productivity dispersion parameter .
    The second set of moments are informative about the intensity of sectoral exports (b).
Speci cally, we match the average and standard deviation of foreign shares in the French
market   ~ z , and the French export intensity  ~  . We also target the fraction of French sectors
                                                  z
in which export sales exceed the overall domestic sales of French rms. These trade moments
help inform the estimation of the size of the trade cost  and the average productivity advan-
tage of France µT .
    Finally, the third set of moments is informative about the joint distribution of rm concen-
tration and sectoral exports (c). We target four moments describing the correlation between
French import and export shares and the sectoral sales concentration at home. Speci cally,
we target the regression coe cients of     ~ z and  ~z separately on s~z,1 and 3  j =1 s
                                                                                       ~z,j , control-
ling in all four regressions for the size of the sector (log total domestic expenditure, log Y    ~z ).
These moments are instrumental for identifying the relative importance of fundamental and
granular forces in shaping trade patterns.
    The parameter values resulting from this SMM estimation are reported in Table 1. Table A1
reports the model-based values of the 15 moments used in the estimation, and compares them
with their empirical counterparts. The table also reports the percentage contribution of each
moment to the SMM loss function. Overall, the model provides a good t to the data for the
15 moments targeted in the estimation.




                                                  33
References
A               , D., V. M. C                    , A. O            ,        A. T      S      (2012): "The Network Origins
    of Aggregate Fluctuations," Econometrica, 80(5), 1977­2016.
A       , M., O. I               ,          J. K             (2019): "International Shocks, Variable Markups and Domestic
    Prices," Review of Economic Studies, 86(6), 2356­402.
A               , J. E.,         E.           W               (2004): "Trade Costs," Journal of Economic Literature, 42(3),
    691­751.
A          , A.,            A. B                   (2008): "Trade Costs, Pricing-to-Market, and International Relative
    Prices," American Economic Review, 98(5), 1998­2031.
B          , K.,           S. H. L        (2020): "Trade policy under monopolistic competition with rm selection,"
    Journal of International Economics, 127, 103379.
B          , K.,            R. W. S                (2004): The Economics of the World Trading System. The MIT Press,
    Cambridge MA.
B        , P. P.,           L. C             (1994): "Merger policy in open economies," European Economic Review,
    38(5), 1041­1055.
B           , B. A.,             T. J. P            (2008): "Antidumping," in Handbook of International Trade, ed. by
    E. Choi, and J. Harrigan, chap. 9, pp. 251­284. Wiley-Blackwell.
B          , J. A. (1995): "Chapter 27 Strategic trade policy," vol. 3 of Handbook of International Economics,
    pp. 1395 ­ 1455. Elsevier.
B          , J. A.,          B. J. S                (1984): "Trade warfare: Tari s and cartels," Journal of International
    Economics, 16(3­4), 227­242.
B               , H., V. N            ,       N. S             (2019): "Merger Policy in a Quantitative Model of Interna-
    tional Trade," The Economic Journal, 130(626), 393­421.
B       , C.,             D. W                (2006): "Globalization and the Gains from Variety," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 121(2), 541­85.
C               , V. M.,         X. G               (2013): "The Great Diversi cation and Its Undoing," American Eco-
    nomic Review, 103(5), 1697­1727.
C               , V. M.,             B. G           (2019): "Large Firm Dynamics and the Business Cycle," American
    Economic Review, 109(4), 1375­1425.
C         , T. (2008): "Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International Trade,"
    American Economic Review, 98(4), 1707­1721.
C           , A., A. R                       C          ,      I. W          (2020): "Micro to Macro: Optimal Trade Policy
    With Firm Heterogeneity," Econometrica, 88(6), 2739­2776.
D S               , M.,          M. R               (2010): "Competition Policy as Strategic Trade with Di erentiated
    Products," Review of International Economics, 18(4), 758­771.
D            , S.,          A. R                    C         (2013): "The simple analytics of the Melitz model in a small
    economy," Journal of International Economics, 90(2), 266 ­ 272.
    G             , J.,      A. A. L                        (2012): "Country Size, International Trade, and Aggregate Fluc-

                                                                       34
    tuations in Granular Economies," Journal of Political Economy, 120(6), 1083­1132.
    G               , J., A. A. L                     ,      I. M        (2014): "Firms, Destinations, and Aggregate Fluctu-
    ations," Econometrica, 82(4), 1303­1340.
D       , A. (1984): "International Trade Policy for Oligopolistic Industries," Economic Journal, 94(376a),
    1­16.
D                  , R., S. F                 ,       P. A. S             (1977): "Comparative Advantage, Trade, and Pay-
    ments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods," American Economic Review, 67(5), 823­839.
E        , J.,             G. M. G                    (1986): "Optimal Trade and Industrial Policy Under Oligopoly," The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2), 383­406.
E        , J., S. K                  ,        S. S         (2012): "International Trade: Linking Micro and Macro," NBER
    Working Papers No. 17864.
F                   , G., B. J            ,        M. L         (2013): "Optimal tari s, retaliation, and the welfare loss from
    tari wars in the Melitz model," Journal of International Economics, 89(1), 13 ­ 25.
G         , X. (2009): "Power Laws in Economics and Finance," Annual Review of Economics, 1(1), 255­294.
            (2011): "The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations," Econometrica, 79(3), 733­772.
G            , C.,            O. I                 (2020): "Granular Comparative Advantage," Journal of Political Economy,
    forthcoming, http://www.princeton.edu/~itskhoki/papers/GranularCA.pdf.
G         , B. (2017): "IO in I­O: Size, industrial organization, and the input-output network make a rm
    structurally important," Manuscript, Department of Economics, Bocconi University.
H               , J. I.,           A. J. V                (2016): "Optimal trade policy with monopolistic competition and
    heterogeneous rms," Journal of International Economics, 102, 85 ­ 95.
H       , K.,              J. R          (1997): "International Mergers and Welfare under Decentralized Competition
    Policy," Canadian Journal of Economics, 30(4), 1104­23.
H            , E.,                P. K               (1989): Trade Policy and Market Structure. The MIT Press, Cambridge
    MA.
H       , H.,              J. L                   (2001): "Merger Policies and Trade Liberalisation," The Economic Journal,
    111(April), 244­276.
M         , M. J. (2003): "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
    Productivity," Econometrica, 71(6), 1695­1725.
R                   , M. (1999): "Trade and Competition Policies: Concordia discors?," Oxford Economic Papers,
    51(4), 649­664.




                                                                         35
