                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            CEO STRESS, AGING, AND DEATH

                                      Mark Borgschulte
                                       Marius Guenzel
                                          Canyao Liu
                                      Ulrike Malmendier

                                      Working Paper 28550
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28550


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




We thank Martijn Cremers, Allen Ferrell, Kevin J. Murphy, and Emmanuel Saez for sharing their
data. We thank Grigory Antipov, Moez Baccouche, Sid-Ahmed Berrani, and Jean-Luc Dugelay
for sharing their age estimation software. We also thank Tania Babina, Xavier Gabaix, Kevin J.
Murphy, Christopher Parsons, as well as seminar and conference participants at the 2018 briq
Workshop on Skills, Preferences, and Educational Inequality, University of Bonn; the 2018
Berkeley-Stanford Joint Behavioral Economics Mini-Conference; the 2019 NBER Organizational
Economics Fall Conference; the 2019 Finance, Organizations and Markets (FOM) Conference;
the 2020 American Finance Association Annual Meeting; Berkeley Haas; Yale SOM; the
University of Illinois at Chicago; the University of Minnesota; and¸the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Mark Borgschulte, Marius Guenzel, Canyao Liu, and Ulrike Malmendier. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
CEO Stress, Aging, and Death
Mark Borgschulte, Marius Guenzel, Canyao Liu, and Ulrike Malmendier
NBER Working Paper No. 28550
March 2021
JEL No. G01,G3,I10,J01

                                          ABSTRACT

We estimate the long-term effects of experiencing high levels of job demands on the mortality
and aging of CEOs. The estimation exploits variation in takeover protection and industry crises.
First, using hand-collected data on the dates of birth and death for 1,605 CEOs of large, publicly-
listed U.S. firms, we estimate the resulting changes in mortality. The hazard estimates indicate
that CEOs' lifespan increases by two years when insulated from market discipline via anti-
takeover laws, and decreases by 1.5 years in response to an industry-wide downturn. Second, we
apply neural-network based machine-learning techniques to assess visible signs of aging in
pictures of CEOs. We estimate that exposure to a distress shock during the Great Recession
increases CEOs' apparent age by one year over the next decade. Our findings imply significant
health costs of managerial stress, also relative to known health risks.

Mark Borgschulte                                 Canyao Liu
UIUC Economics                                   Yale School of Management
214 David Kinley Hall                            165 Whitney Avenue
1407 W Gregory Dr                                New Haven, CT 06511
Urbana, IL 61801                                 canyao.liu@yale.edu
markborg@illinois.edu
                                                 Ulrike Malmendier
Marius Guenzel                                   Department of Economics
The Wharton School                               549 Evans Hall # 3880 University
 University of Pennsylvania                      of California, Berkeley Berkeley,
Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall                     CA 94720-3880
3620 Locust Walk                                 and NBER
Philadelphia, PA 19104                           ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu
mguenzel@wharton.upenn.edu
                                         1.   INTRODUCTION

Job demands and work-related stress are increasingly recognized to be key determinants of
population health and well-being.1 As Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2018) document, the
amount of stress experienced at work has steadily grown since at least the 1950s, even as
shifts in the composition of occupations have reduced job-related physical pain and tiredness
for the average worker. Health researchers argue that stress, and the damage it causes, is the
mechanism underlying many health disparities (Cutler et al. 2006, Pickett and Wilkinson
2015, Puterman et al. 2016, Snyder-Mackler et al. 2020).
    Yet, there is little quasi-experimental evidence that links job demands and stressors at
work directly to health outcomes. While stress arising from social hierarchies, especially
in the workplace, has been proposed as an explanation for the strong relationship between
socioeconomic status and life expectancy, causal evidence on, for example, the effect of
promotions is limited and reaches mixed conclusions (Boyce and Oswald 2012, Anderson
and Marmot 2012, Johnston and Lee 2013).
    A key reason for the lack of causal evidence is that it is challenging to disentangle the
health effects of job stressors from those of income losses and financial hardship (Smith
1999). In this paper, we overcome these identification hurdles by focusing on CEOs of large
publicly traded companies. CEOs in this sample are wealthy and unlikely to be affected by
financial hardships even if they lost their job. Thus, the setting of top corporate jobs allows
us to isolate direct effects on health from indirect effects due to financial constraints.
    The CEO position is a suitable candidate to analyze work-related stress as CEOs work
long hours, make high-stakes decisions such as layoffs or plant closures, and face uncertainty
in times of crisis (Bandiera et al. 2020, Porter and Nohria 2018). They are closely moni-
tored and criticized when their firm is underperforming, and media frequently reports on
"overworked [and] overstressed" CEOs.2 Needless to say, lower-ranked and non-corporate
position might entail significantly higher levels of stress. (We can think of "life-or-death"
jobs, such as emergency room doctors and airline pilots, but also of minimum-wage and
temporary jobs with rigid schedules, such as delivery drivers.) Our analysis does not speak

   1  See, e. g., Marmot (2005) and Ganster and Rosen (2013). A vast literature in psychology, medicine, and
biology associates chronic stress with changes in hormone levels, brain function, cardiovascular health, DNA,
and deleterious health outcomes (McEwen 1998, Epel et al. 2004, Sapolsky 2005).
    2 See CNN's Route to the Top segment (cnn.com/2010/business/03/12/ceo.health.warning/index).

Cf. also Harvard Business Review on "How Top CEOs Cope with Constant Stress" (hbr.org/2011/04/how-
top-ceos-cope-with-constan) and expert psychologists offering "Strategies for CEOs to reduce stress"
(vistage.com/research-center/personal-development/20200402-ceo-stress).

                                                     1
to the question of which type of occupations come with the highest personal cost. Instead,
it exploits plausibly exogenous variation in job demands within the CEO group to help
establish and quantify the influence of job demands on health outcomes.
    That said, the CEO context is of interest in its own right for at least two reasons.
First, CEOs bear the ultimate responsibility for the success of the firm and satisfaction of
employees. Given their overarching importance within their firms, it matters how incentives
and performance affect CEOs personally. Second, the health implications of CEOs' job
demands affect their ability to stay on the job and, if anticipated, their willingness to
select into the CEO job. Our analysis might thus speak the prevalence of certain CEO
characteristics and possible feedback effects: Are aspiring CEOs (over-)confident about their
health? Are women vastly underrepresented in the C-suite not only because of discrimination
but also because they (correctly) anticipate the health costs of assuming such positions?
    We assemble new measures of health outcomes to investigate the link between CEO
stress and health. By stress, we do not mean a biomedical analysis in the sense of measuring
adrenaline or cortisol levels.3 Instead, building on the popular notion of stress, we exploit
periods of industry-wide distress and variation in the intensity of CEO monitoring to capture
variation in work-related stress. We estimate the effect on CEOs' life expectancy and
aging patterns. Our analysis uses new data on the lifespan of CEOs and a new data set of
photographs of CEOs' faces, combined with recent visual machine learning (ML) techniques
to estimate the effects on visible signs of aging. The ML techniques are a promising avenue
for the assessment of work-induced strains in broader samples and, to the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to introduce them into the economic literature. Our application
illustrates their potential for the study of health and aging to complement standard measures
based on mortality, hospital admissions, or survey responses.
    Our analysis has three main parts. In the first part, we relate variation in the intensity of
CEO monitoring due to corporate-governance legislation to CEO mortality. In the second
part, we exploit variation in job demands due to industry-level distress shocks, and also study
the effect on CEO mortality. In the third part, we continue to exploit industry-level distress
shocks, here from the Great Recession, and relate them to visible signs of accelerated aging,
identified by neural-network based ML estimations.
    In the first part of the analysis, the source of identifying variation is the staggered passage

   3 Stress arises from experiencing demands without sufficient resources to cope (Lazarus and Folkman
1984). Biomedically, changes in hormones and other bodily processes due to stress can cause long-term
damage and accelerate aging (Brondolo et al. 2017, Franceschi et al. 2018, Kennedy et al. 2014).

                                                  2
of anti-takeover laws across U.S. states in the mid-1980s. The laws shielded CEOs from
market discipline by making hostile takeovers more difficult. Prior research has documented
that they reduced CEOs' job demands and allowed them to "enjoy the quiet life" (Bertrand
and Mullainathan 2003). For example, CEOs became less tough in wage negotiations, and
their rate of plant closures as well as plant creations decreased. The prevailing view in law
and economics at the time of the passage of the laws was that the "continuous threat of
takeover" is an important means to counteract lagging managerial performance (Easterbrook
and Fischel 1981).4 While some later studies question whether the passage of anti-takeover
laws in fact reduced hostile takeover activity (e.g. Cain et al. 2017), it arguably constituted a
significant shift in managers' perception of their job environment.
    For this analysis, we extend the CEO data from Gibbons and Murphy (1992) and merge
it with hand-collected data on the exact dates of birth and death of more than 1,600 CEOs of
large U.S. firms. We restrict all analyses to CEOs appointed before the enactment of the anti-
takeover laws to address the concern that their passage altered the selection of CEOs. Using
a hazard regression model and controlling for CEO age, time trends, industry affiliation, and
firm location, we find that anti-takeover laws significantly increase the life expectancy of
incumbent CEOs. One additional year under lenient governance lowers mortality rates by
four to five percent for an average CEO in the sample. Non-linear specifications indicate life
expectancy gains as large as nine percent per year in the initial years of lenient governance,
with incremental effects falling to zero within five years of initial exposure.
    These results are robust to an array of alternative specifications, including models
with CEO birth-cohort and appointment-year fixed effects, and alternative subsampling
and classifications of anti-takeover laws that account for other firm or state anti-takeover
provisions, exclude lobbying and opt-out firms, or cut data differently based on firms'
industry affiliation or state of incorporation (cf. Cain et al. 2017; Karpoff and Wittry 2018).
    The estimated effect sizes are large. For a typical CEO, the effect of the anti-takeover
laws is equivalent to making the CEO two years younger. The effect size is even larger if
we use life tables instead of the estimated CEO age effects for the comparison of takeover
protection and increasing age in terms of mortality hazard. We can also compare the
estimated mortality effects to known health threats. For example, smoking until age 30 is
associated with a reduction in longevity by roughly one year, and lifelong smoking with a
   4  Other experts at the time made similar arguments. Scharfstein (1988) develops a formal model in which
the threat of a takeover disciplines management, and then-U.S. Supreme Court Justice Byron White's opinion
in Edgar vs. MITE emphasizes "[t]he incentive the tender offer mechanism provides incumbent management
to perform well."

                                                    3
reduction by ten years and more (General 2014, Jha et al. 2013).
    We find no evidence of a compensating differential in the form of lower pay for CEOs
who are protected from hostile takeovers.5 This may indicate that not all parties fully
account for the health implications of job demands, though we note that prior literature has
generally struggled to find evidence of compensating differentials outside of select settings
and carefully designed experiments (e. g., Mas and Pallais 2017; Lavetti 2020).
    Consistent with anti-takeover laws changing CEOs' perceptions of job demands, we
find that protected CEOs remain on the job for longer. However, the increase in longevity
estimated before is unlikely to arise from prolonged tenure because our nonlinear estimates
imply that prolonged exposure (resulting from prolonged tenure) does not lead to incremental
survival gains. We also note that our estimations that use an indicator for anti-takeover
law exposure imply similar effect sizes as those which allow for an endogenous length of
exposure. Nevertheless, we verify that our estimates are robust to using CEOs' predicted
rather than actual anti-takever law exposure, where we predict exposure using only variables
realized before the passage of the laws, such as CEO age and pre-law tenure, thereby purging
the prediction of any endogeneity due to the laws themselves.
    In the second part of the paper, we consider industry distress shocks. Typically defined
based on a 30% median firm stock-price decline over a two-year horizon, industry shocks
have been used to study effects on, e. g., market concentration, creditor recoveries, and
employee exit (Opler and Titman 1994, Acharya et al. 2007, Babina 2020). In our analyses,
they constitute a separate and oppositely-signed change in job demands compared to anti-
takeover law passage. About 40% of CEOs in our sample experience at least one such
industry-wide downturn during their tenure. We find that distress exposure significantly
increases a CEO's mortality risk. The estimated mortality effect is equivalent to increasing
age by 1.5 years, and comparable to serving three fewer years under lenient monitoring.
    In the final part of the paper, we document more immediate health implications of
industry crises in the form of visible signs of aging in the faces of CEOs. We utilize
machine-learning algorithms designed to estimate a person's apparent age, i. e., how old
a person looks rather than a person's biological age, from Antipov et al. (2016). The
software, trained on more than 250,000 pictures, is the winner of the 2016 ChaLearn
Looking At People competition in the apparent-age estimation track, roughly comparable to
the certification effect of a first-tier publication in other academic fields.

   5 The analysis of pay builds on Bertrand and Mullainathan (1998) and predictions in Edmans and Gabaix's
(2011) CEO market model.

                                                    4
    We collect a sample of 3,086 pictures of the 2006 Fortune 500 CEOs from different
points during their tenure to estimate differential apparent aging in response to industry-
level exposure to the financial crisis. Using a difference-in-differences design, we estimate
that CEOs look about one year older in post-crisis years if their industry experienced a
severe decline in 2007-2008 relative to CEOs in other industries. The estimated difference
between distressed and non-distressed CEOs increases over time and amounts to 1.178
years for pictures taken five years and more after the onset of the crisis. We include a
detailed description of the procedure and examine issues that have been shown to impact
the use of visual machine learning in other settings (Wang and Kosinski 2018, Dotsch et al.
2016, Ag¨ uera y Arcas et al. 2018). To the best of our knowledge, this represents the first
application of visual machine learning to a quasi-experimental research design.
    Our paper adds to several strands of literature. A recent literature sheds light on CEOs'
demanding job and time requirements. Bandiera et al. (2020) obtain weekly diaries of 1,114
CEOs of manufacturing firms and document long hours that often include six- and seven-day
workweeks. Porter and Nohria (2018) record an even more intense schedule for 27 CEOs of
multi-billion dollar firms. Bandiera et al. (2018) document that professional CEOs' job is
especially taxing as they work longer hours and consume less leisure than family CEOs.
    Few papers explicitly study health outcomes among CEOs. Bennedsen et al. (2020)
study the negative effect of CEO hospitalizations on firm performance. Keloharju et al.
(2020) find that corporate boards in Scandinavia factor CEO health into CEO appointment
and retention decisions. None of these papers, however, examines the effect of CEO job
demands on CEOs' health trajectories. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
explore quasi-random variations to establish significant costs for CEOs, both in terms of the
mortality and in terms of visible aging. The only prior work on executives' health outcomes
is Yen and Benham (1986), who calculate the age-adjusted mortality rates of 125 executives
in the banking industry and compare them with those in other industries. Our significantly
larger sample and quasi-experimental design allows to control for industry-specific selection
into job environments, and to implement a rigorous survival analysis.
    Second, our paper contributes novel evidence to the literature on the health effects
of stress, socioeconomic status, and financial insecurity. In health and labor economics,
stress has been proposed as an explanation for the association between job loss and higher
mortality (Sullivan and Von Wachter 2009); the health benefits of the EITC (Evans and
Garthwaite 2014), unemployment insurance (Kuka 2020), and access to health care (Koijen
and Van Nieuwerburgh 2020); and early-life health disparities (Camacho 2008, Black et al.

                                             5
2016). Stress is also implicated in the intergenerational persistence of poverty (Aizer et al.
2016, Persson and Rossin-Slater 2018, East et al. 2017). To the best of our knowledge, the
only paper that relates quasi-random increases in job demands directly to health outcomes is
Hummels et al. (2016), who document the negative impact of trade shocks on workers' stress,
injury, and illness. Turning from the general or poorer populations to wealthier populations,
income appears to play a small role in health disparities among the already-wealthy, while
social factors, such as the prestige associated with a Nobel prize or a political election may
be protective (Rablen and Oswald 2008; Cesarini et al. 2016; Borgschulte and Vogler 2019).
    Third, we add to the corporate-governance literature on the impact of anti-takeover
laws on firm productivity starting from Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003). Giroud and
Mueller (2010) show that the effect of business combination (BC) laws on performance
is concentrated in non-competitive industries. After the adoption of BC laws, managers
undertake value-destroying actions that reduce their firms' risk of distress (Gormley and
Matsa 2016), patent count and quality decrease (Atanassov 2013), and managers reduce
their stock ownership (Cheng et al. 2004). The mechanisms suggested in these papers work
through incentives; we are the first to quantify their long-term health consequences.
    Finally, we contribute to the literature on industry shocks and financial distress. Prior
work has documented their economic and financial consequences for firm performance
(Opler and Titman 1994), creditors (Acharya et al. 2007), brain drain and entrepreneurship
(Babina 2020), and CEO pay and turnover (Bertrand and Mullainathan 2001, Garvey and
Milbourn 2006, Jenter and Lewellen 2015). Related to our setting, Engelberg and Parsons
(2016) document a link between stock-market crashes and hospital admissions, especially
for anxiety and panic disorders. Our paper offers complementary evidence that distress
experiences impose long-term health costs, even for successful and wealthy individuals.
    In the remainder of the paper, Section 2 describes the data and discusses the identifying
variation. We present the results pertaining to life expectancy and exposure to anti-takeover
laws in Section 3, and exposure to industry-wide distress shocks in Section 4. Section 5
presents the results on apparent aging and distress shocks. Section 6 concludes.

              2.   CEO DATASETS AND VARIATION IN CEO JOB DEMANDS

                         2.1. CEO Data for Longevity Analyses
The initial dataset consists of the universe of CEOs included in the Forbes Executive
Compensation Surveys from 1975 to 1991, which extends the data in Gibbons and Murphy


                                              6
(1992).6 These surveys are derived from corporate proxy statements and include the
executives serving in the largest U.S. firms. We choose 1975 as the start year given the
timing of anti-takeover laws (see Section 2.3), in line with prior studies,7 but will consider a
more recent sample for the visible aging analysis later. We include all firms with a PERMNO
identifier in CRSP. The initial sample comprises 2,720 CEOs employed by 1,501 firms.
    We manually search for (i) the exact dates of CEOs' birth, (ii) whether a CEO has died,
and (iii) the date of death if the CEO has passed away. All CEOs who did not pass away by
the cutoff date of October 1st, 2017 are treated as censored. Our main source of birth and
death information is Ancestry.com, which links historical birth and death records from the
U.S. Census, the Social Security Death Index, birth certificates, and other historical sources.
To ensure that we have identified the correct person, we validate Ancestry's information with
online and newspapers searches, e. g., on birth place, elementary school, or city of residence.
Identifying a person as alive turns out to be more difficult as there is little coverage of retired
CEOs. We classify a CEO as alive whenever recent sources confirm their alive status, such
as newspaper articles or websites that list the CEO as a board member, sponsor, donor,
or chairman or chairwoman of an organization or event.8 We obtain the birth and death
information for 2,361 CEOs from 1,352 firms in the post-1975 sample, implying a finding
rate of 87%. We test and confirm that the availability of birth and death information is not
correlated with incorporation in a state that passed a BC law.9
    To measure CEOs' exposure to anti-takeover laws, we identify the historical states of
incorporation during CEOs' tenure. Since CRSP/Compustat backfills the current state of
incorporation, we access its historical Comphist and Compustat Snapshot data as well as
incorporation data recorded at issuances and merger events in the SDC database. In case
of discrepancies, we use firms' 10-Ks and other SEC filings, legal documents, and news
articles to identify the correct historical state of incorporation. Overall, we correct the state
of incorporation in 169 cases (6.7%) of the initial sample with state-of-incorporation infor-
mation (2,514 CEOs). Out of the sample of 2,361 CEOs with birth and death information,
   6  We are very grateful to Kevin J. Murphy for providing the data.
   7  Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003), Giroud and Mueller (2010), Gormley and Matsa (2016) all start their
sample in the mid-1970s. Our results are robust to varying the start year, cf. Section 3.5 and Appendix B.
    8 We use sources dated 01/2010 or later to infer alive status since recent coverage of a retired CEO makes

it very likely that news outlets would also have reported their passing (by October 1st, 2017), had it occurred.
Our results are robust to ending our sample in 2010 (Section 3.5 and Appendix B) and to restricting the sample
period for CEOs classified as alive as of 10/2017 to end in 01/2010.
    9 We estimate I (Found ) =  +  × I (BC State )+  +  +  , where  represents state-of-headquarters
                            i     0    1             i     j    k    i         j
fixed effects and k FF49-industry fixed effects on the sample with available state-of-incorporation information
(2,514 out of the initial sample of 2,720 CEOs). We obtain 1 = 0.0142 ( p = 0.627).

                                                       7
we are able to identify the historical state of incorporation for 2,209 CEOs.
    We collect tenure information for all sample CEOs to fill the gaps and correct mis-
recorded data in the Forbes Executive Compensation Surveys. We use Execucomp, online
searches, and especially the New York Times Business People section, which frequently
reports on executive changes in our sample firms. When the exact month of a CEO transition
is missing, we use the "mid-year convention" motivated by the relatively uniform distribu-
tion of CEO starting months in Execucomp (Eisfeldt and Kuhnen 2013). We further restrict
the sample to CEOs whose firm was included in CRSP during the time of their tenure (1,900
CEOs).10 Finally, we address selection concerns revolving around CEO "types" responding
to the more lenient BC law governance. For example, it would confound the analysis if less
resilient managers, i. e., those more prone to health ailments, became more likely to seek
the CEO position. To alleviate such concerns, we focus on CEOs appointed prior to the
enactment of the business combination laws as our main sample (1,605 CEOs). That said,
our results are robust to being estimated on the enlarged sample of 1,900 CEOs.

                         2.2. CEO Data for Apparent Aging Analysis
To study visible signs of aging in CEOs' faces, we collect pictures of CEOs of the 1,000
firms included in the 2006 Fortune 500 list. This analysis uses a more recent sample since
picture availability and quality have substantially improved over time. We focus on the 2006
CEO cohort to exploit differential exposure to industry shocks during the Great Recession.
    We search for five pictures from the beginning of a CEO's tenure and two additional
pictures every four years after that. The main challenge is finding dated pictures in order
to compare CEOs' apparent age to their true age. In addition, we aim for pictures that are
taken in daily life, such as at social events or conferences, rather than posed pictures. The
most useful source given these criteria is gettyimages.com, followed by Google Images. We
are able to find at least two pictures from different points in time during or after their tenure
for 463 CEOs, of whom 452 are male and 447 are White,11 for a total of 3,086 pictures.

                          2.3. Variation in CEO Job Demands
We exploit two sources of variation in CEO job demands, the passage of state-level anti-
takeover laws and industry-wide distress shocks.

  10  Relative to the previously mentioned restriction to firms with a PERMNO in CRSP, we drop CEOs who
served, for instance, before their firm went public.
   11 Among the sixteen non-White CEOs, seven are African-American, two are Hispanic or Latinx, and seven

are Asian (including Indian). We collect this information through Google searches and Wikipedia.

                                                   8
     Anti-takeover Laws. Anti-takeover statutes increase the hurdles for hostile takeovers.
After the first-generation anti-takeover laws were struck down by courts in the 1970s and
early 1980s, states started passing second-generation laws in the mid-1980s (cf. Cheng et al.
2004, Cain et al. 2017). The statutes included Business Combination (BC) laws, Control
Share Acquisition, Fair Price, and Directors' Duties laws, and Poison Pills. We follow prior
literature and first focus on BC laws as the most potent type of statutes, but will return to the
other types of laws later (in Section 3.5). BC laws significantly reduced the threat of hostile
takeovers by imposing a moratorium on large shareholder conducting certain transactions
with the firm, usually for a period of three to five years.




F IGURE 1.--Introduction of Business Combination laws over time. Notes: This figure visualizes the
distribution of business combination law enactments over time. In total, thirty-three states passed a
BC law between 1985 and 1997. The map omits the states of Alaska and Hawaii, which never passed
a BC law.

    Figure 1 visualizes the staggered introduction of BC laws across states.12 The map
illustrates the variation across both time and states as a source of identification: 33 states
passed a BC law between 1985 and 1997, with most laws being passed in 1987-1989. An
advantage of using anti-takeover laws as identifying variation is that these laws applied
based on the state of incorporation, not the state of firms' headquarters or operation. The
frequent discrepancies between firms' location and state of incorporation enables us to
assess the impact of the laws while controlling for shocks to the local economy.
       Industry-Wide Distress Shocks. Distress shocks induce a shift in job demands in the
  12 Appendix-Figure B.1 contains a similar map based on the earliest enactment of any of the five types of
second-generation anti-takeover laws listed above.

                                                    9
opposite direction than anti-takeover laws, and are of a less permanent nature. Thus, they
constitute a useful alternative approach to analyzing the health consequences of a CEO's
job demands. In the spirit of Opler and Titman (1994), Babina (2020), and Acharya et al.
(2007), we define an industry as distressed in year t if the median firm's two-year stock return
(forward-looking) is less than -30%. As in Babina (2020), we generate the annual industries-
in-distress panel (i) restricting to single-segment CRSP/Compustat firms, i. e., dropping
firms with multiple reported segments in the Compustat Business Segment Database, (ii)
dropping firms if the reported single segment sales differ from those in Compustat by more
than 5%, (iii) restricting to firms with sales of at least $20 million, and (iv) excluding
industry-years with fewer than four firms.13 Following prior work, we use 3-digit SIC
classes to measure industry affiliation and, as with state of incorporation, rely on historical
SIC codes for the firms in our sample.

                                   2.4. Summary Statistics
Table I presents the summary statistics of our main sample for the longevity analyses,
consisting of 1,605 CEOs. (All variables are defined in Appendix A.) The median CEO
in our sample was born in 1925, became CEO at age 52, and served as CEO for nine
years. There is relatively large heterogeneity in tenure, with an interdecile range of 17 years.
Non-integer values result from CEOs not starting or ending their tenure or stepping down at
the end of the year. 71% of our CEOs have passed away by the censoring date (October 1st,
2017). The median CEO died at age 83, and passed away in 2006. Conditional on being
shielded by a BC law, the median CEO serves 4.4 years under the BC law regime. BC law
experience is calculated at (up to) daily precision levels and, similar to tenure, can take
non-integer values. For example, Delaware's BC law was adopted on 2/2/1988. A CEO's
BC exposure in 1988 would then be calculated as BCi,1988 = 365-doy(2/2/1988)
                                                                        365       = 0.92. 40%
of CEOs experience industry-wide distress during their tenure.
    We provide additional summary statistics in Appendix-Table B.1. Panel A splits the
sample into CEOs with no BC exposure (N = 980), with positive but below-median exposure
(N = 320), and with higher exposure (N = 305). Some of the observed differences across
sub-groups are suggestive of the effects we have in mind. For example, 82% of CEOs
without BC exposure have passed away, but only 68% (38%) of CEOs with below-median
(higher) exposure. However, it is also the case that fewer CEOs from the beginning of

  13 Sections 4 and 5 also discuss more restrictive distress definitions, exploring specific recession periods or
using industry returns in conjunction with sales growth.

                                                      10
our sample--who are more likely to have passed away, including at higher ages--became
protected by the laws during their tenure, as BC laws were only introduced starting in
1985. In Section 3.2, we will discuss cohort-specific splits that directly account for such
differences. Panel B provides information on the most common Fama and French (1997)
49 industries and most common states of incorporation. CEOs are frequently employed by
firms in the banking, utilities, and retail industry. Across BC exposure sub-groups, there are
only few differences in industry frequencies. We note that we include industry fixed effects
in all analyses. Consistent with prior literature, the most common state of incorporation is
Delaware in all CEO sub-groups. Other common states include New York and Ohio.

                3. CORPORATE MONITORING AND LIFE EXPECTANCY
                                 3.1. Empirical Strategy
Our main analysis uses the Cox (1972) proportional hazards model to estimate the effect of
variation in job demands on longevity. CEOs enter the analysis ("become at risk") in the
year they are appointed, and they exit at death (or the censoring date). We capture variation
in CEOs' exposure to more lenient governance through the passage of BC laws in two ways.
First, we use an indicator of exposure to the BC law treatment and estimate
                      (t |BCi,t , Xi,t ) = 0 (t ) exp( I (BCi,t ) +  Xi,t ),                (1)
where Xi,t is a vector of control variables. In our main specifications, it includes time trends
(or fixed effects), CEO age, firm location and industry effects. We later present robustness
specifications with birth-cohort or appointment-year fixed effects, to account for the fact the
BC laws disproportionally affected more recent CEO cohorts. I (BCi,t ) is an indicator equal
to 1 if CEO i has been exposed to a BC law by year t . The proportional hazard framework
assumes that mortality risk shifts permanently at the passage of a BC law for an exposed
CEO. Below, we investigate departures from the proportional hazard assumption by allowing
for a non-linear effect. Note that, when a CEO steps down, the value of the BC law indicator
remains constant from then on at its value at departure.
    Second, to capture intensity of exposure, we replace the indicator I (BCi,t ) with a measure
BCi,t that counts the exposure length in years until year t :
                       (t |BCi,t , Xi,t ) = 0 (t ) exp( BCi,t +  Xi,t ).                    (2)
    We also implement two refined measures of exposure length. First, we refine the linear
dose-response function represented by BCi,t and separate the effects of initial and later years
of exposure to lenient governance on survival rates. This refinement accounts, for example,


                                               11
for CEOs adapting to the new business environment and exhausting their opportunities to
adjust their activities. The second refinement addresses the concerns that a CEO's remaining
tenure after BC law passage might (a) reflect unobserved CEO characteristics and (b) be
affected by the introduction of the laws. Directly controlling for realized tenure would
introduce endogeneity, and the estimates would suffer from the "bad control" problem
(Angrist and Pischke 2008).14 Instead, we estimate a hazard model using a CEO's predicted,
rather than true, length of exposure, where the prediction model only uses information from
prior to the BC law passage. Additionally, we test the robustness of our results to estimating
simple linear probability models instead of the hazard model.

              3.2. Within-Cohort Comparisons of Means and Graphical Evidence
Before presenting the main results, we provide simple within-cohort comparisons of means
as well as graphical evidence on the mortality effects of variation in governance regimes.
    Table II presents the proportions of deaths as well as the average age at death, conditional
on having passed away, in a two-way split by CEOs' birth cohort and BC law exposure.15
The table reveals that, for all but the tail cohorts, CEOs with BC law exposure have lower
mortality than those with no exposure. Furthermore, across all cohorts, the average age
at death is higher for CEOs with BC law exposure. The average age difference, weighted
by the total number of deaths in each cohort, is 3.76 years. Hence, the raw means reveal a
sizeable and systematic difference between CEOs with and without anti-takeover protection.
    Figure 2 plots the Kaplan-Meier survival graphs, also split by cohorts and by exposure.
The non-parametric estimator discretizes time into intervals t1 , ..., tJ , and is defined as
         f
KMj   = r jj , where f j is the number of spells ending at time t j and r j is the number of spells
that are at risk at the beginning of time t j . In the plots, the vertical axes show the survival
rate, and the horizontal axes the time elapsed (in years) since becoming CEO.
    Panel (a) compares the survival of CEOs who became CEO in the 1970s and were never
shielded by a BC law, those who became CEO in the 1980s and were never shielded by a
BC law, and those who became CEO in the 1980s and were eventually insulated by BC law
protection during their tenure.16 Two results emerge. First, the survival patterns of the 1970s

  14  While the estimates remain similar with the tenure control, including the effect being concentrated in the
early years of treatment, it is unclear how to sign the resulting bias. We thus follow the general recommendation
to exclude the "bad controls" from the estimation.
   15 We thank our discussant, Kevin J. Murphy, for suggesting this table.
   16 For the 1970s cohorts, maximal elapsed time since our sample start is t = 47.75 (time elapsed between

1/1/1970 and the censoring date, 10/1/2017). Similarly, for the 1980s cohorts, maximal elapsed time is
t = 37.75. We restrict the graph to periods when at least 30 CEOs in either cohort group are uncensored,

                                                      12
                                          (a) By cohort




                   (b) By state                            (c) By years under BC law




F IGURE 2.--Kaplan-Meier survival estimates. Notes: This figure shows Kaplan-Meier survival plots.
The vertical axis shows the fraction of CEOs who are still alive. The horizontal axis reflects time
elapsed (in years) since a person became CEO. Panel (a) compares the survival of CEOs starting
in the 1970s who never served under a BC law (light blue) to those who became CEO in the 1980s
and never served under a BC law (dark blue) and those who became CEO in the 1980s and were
eventually exposed to a BC law (orange). Panel (b) splits the CEOs from Panel (a) based on whether
their state never passed a BC law (light blue), passed a BC law after the CEO stepped down (dark
blue), or passed a BC while in office. Panel (c) zooms in on CEOs with BC exposure, and plots
survival separately for CEOs with positive but at most two years of BC exposure (orange), with two
to median exposure (red), and with above-median exposure (brown). Survival estimates in Panel (b)
are adjusted to the 12 years median tenure of CEOs with BC exposure.


and 1980s cohorts without BC exposure are remarkably similar, allaying concerns that our
results pick up general changes in survival patterns between the 1970s and 1980s. Second,
consistent with our hypothesis, the survival line for the 1980s cohorts with BC exposure is
visibly right-shifted compared to the No-BC-cohorts. For example, 20 years after a CEO's
appointment, about 25 percent of CEOs in the 1980s cohorts without BC exposure have



                                               13
died, whereas it takes closer to 30 years for CEOs in the 1980s cohorts with BC exposure.
     One possibility is that the patterns in Panel (a) might pick up systematic differences
between BC and non-BC states--despite the fact that these laws apply based on state of
incorporation as opposed to firms' location. To examine this graphically, Panel (b) reshuffles
CEOs in Panel (a)'s No-BC-cohorts, grouping them instead by whether their state eventually
enacted a BC law after the CEO stepped down (dark blue) or not (light blue). The survival
lines for these groups are virtually identical, and only CEOs in BC states with BC exposure
(orange) show a more beneficial survival curve. Thus, there is no evidence of BC states
being inherently different prior to BC enactment. We also note that all our results will
include location fixed effects and are robust to using state of incorporation fixed effects.
     Panel (c) zooms in on the CEO group with BC exposure and explores potential non-
linearities in the insulating effect of more lenient governance on lifespan. Specifically, we
plot survival rates separately for three sub-groups, formed as (i) at most two years of BC
exposure, (ii) more than two years of but at most the median BC exposure (4.4 years), and
(iii) more than median BC exposure. We adjust the estimated survival functions to a tenure
of 12 years, which is the median tenure of CEOs with BC exposure to ensure that we do
not conflate the independent effect of tenure with the direct effects of corporate governance.
Comparing CEOs with low BC exposure up to 2 years to those with more exposure, we
observe higher (right-shifted) survival rates for the latter groups. However, there is no
further rightward shift comparing CEOs with medium and high BC exposure. This suggests
that the health benefits from insulation against takeover threats increase initially, but the
incremental effects might taper off eventually.
     The comparisons of means and survival plots offer first evidence that serving under more
stringent corporate governance is associated with adverse consequences in terms of life
expectancy. Our hazard model based analysis below formalizes the observed patterns.

                     3.3. Main Results on Business Combination Laws
Table III shows the hazard model results on the relationship between BC laws and CEOs'
mortality rates, based on our main estimating equations (1) and (2). In Columns (1) through
(3), we summarize the total effect of the BC laws with the indicator I (BCi,t ) for CEO i having
been exposed to a BC law by time t . These estimates are akin to the group-level divergence
in survival reported in Figure 2(a). In Columns (4) through (6), we estimate a linear (in
hazards) effect in years of exposure to more lenient corporate governance. All regressions

explaining the slightly differential ends of the survival lines (after 36 and 45 years, respectively).

                                                       14
control for a CEO's age and include firm location fixed effects. Following Gormley and
Matsa (2016), we assign location fixed effects based on headquarters as most firms' main
operations are in the state of its headquarters. These fixed effects thus absorb state-level
characteristics, such as general business conditions, pollution, and eating habits, to the extent
that these are time-invariant. In robustness checks, we verify that our main results remain
unaffected when we instead include state of incorporation fixed effects (cf. Section 3.5). In
the specifications of columns (1) and (4), we include linear controls for time trends and CEO
age; in columns (2) and (5), we add industry fixed effects, using the Fama and French (1997)
classification of firms into 49 industries; and in columns (3) and (6), we include year fixed
effects instead of the linear time controls. To address any concerns regarding the use of fixed
effects in non-linear models, we also estimate the model with only linear age and linear year
as controls, with very similar results.17 All coefficients are shown as hazard ratios so that a
coefficient smaller than one indicates that the risk of failure (death) decreases with positive
values of that variable. We cluster standard errors at the state-of-incorporation level, given
that the BC laws applied based on the state of incorporation (Abadie, Athey, Imbens, and
Wooldridge 2017). As pointed out in Section 2.1, we restrict the sample to CEOs who were
appointed prior to the enactment of a BC law to alleviate selection concerns.
    In the specification of columns (1) and (4), the estimated hazard ratio on the BC indicator
is 0.764, and the ratio on the BC law exposure is 0.955, both significant at 1%. The indicator
captures the total effect of BC exposure, while the cumulative exposure measure is the
effect of an additional year of exposure: a one-year increase in exposure to more lenient
governance is estimated to reduce a CEO's mortality risk by 4.5%. For a CEO with a typical
BC law exposure, both measures imply very similar effects on longevity.18
    The results do not change when we make comparisons within industry or include a more
flexible control for time. The inclusion of industry fixed effects in columns (2) and (5)
addresses the possibility that certain industries are differentially incorporated in BC-law
states. The resulting estimates of the hazard ratio on BC law exposure are almost unchanged,
0.769 and 0.958, both significant at 1%. Similarly, year fixed effects in column (3) and (6),
instead of the linear time control, have virtually no effect on the estimates.
    Turning to the interpretation of the control variables, the linear time control is close
to one and insignificant, suggesting no general time trends in the survival of CEOs over
  17 Estimates are 0.776 for I (BC) and 0.955 for BC, which are very close to the estimates in the Table III.
  18 The cumulative measure estimates a 17-18% shift in the mortality hazard associated with the median
BC exposure of 4.4 years (exp(4.4 × ln(0.955)) = 0.817), very close to the 22-24% shift estimated in the BC
indicator measure.

                                                    15
the sample period. The effect of Age is significantly positive, reflecting that older people
have a higher estimated risk of dying.19 One potential concern is that the treatment group
is younger on average and is more likely to still be alive, and that the model may have
difficulty separating the effect of age from treatment in older age ranges. To address this,
we test and confirm the robustness of our results to including birth-year fixed effects, CEO
appointment-year fixed effects, and age-cohort interactions (see Section 3.5 for details) and,
alternatively, higher-order age terms. Across these robustness tests, the estimated hazard
coefficients remain significant and are remarkable stable in magnitude.
    Economic Significance. One way to evaluate the magnitude of the estimated effect on
longevity is relative to other predictors of CEO life expectancy in our hazard model, in
particular CEO age. This "in-sample" approach has the advantage that it is directly based on
data from the sample CEOs. The estimated effect of age on death hazard from column (3) is
1.124, i. e., a 12.4% increase per year of age. This means that the life-extending effects of
BC law protection corresponds to the effect of a two-year shift in CEO age.20
    Alternatively, we can compare our estimated hazard with mortality statistics of the
general U.S. population, acknowledging that statistics derived for high SES groups would
be ideal. For example, at age 57 (the median CEO age in our sample), the one-year mortality
rate of a male American born in 1925 (the median birth year in our sample) is 1.366%
(Human Mortality Database 2019). The median exposure to lenient governance of 4.4 years
pushes this rate down to 1.119%, which is roughly the mortality rate of a male born in 1925
at age 54, i. e., when three years younger. The implied three- year gain in remaining life
expectancy is in fact close to the difference in age at death using the simple within-cohort
comparison of treated and non-treated CEOs in Table II for the 1921-1925 cohort.
    Yet another benchmark for comparison are other known health threats. For example,
smoking until age 30 is associated with a reduction in longevity by roughly one year (Jha
et al. 2013). The gain in life expectancy from BC law exposure is thus twice as large as the
gain from not smoking in the first three decades of one's life.
    In sum, these results lend strong support to the hypothesis that changes in job demands
arising from more lenient corporate governance have significant effects on a CEO's health.



  19  We note that the Gompertz (1825) "law of mortality," i. e., the empirical regularity that the risk of dying
follows a geometric increase after middle age, motivates a linear age term (Olshansky and Carnes 1997).
   20 Using equation (1) from the Cox (1972) estimation to calculate how much older a CEO needs to be to
                                                      1
offset the estimated BC effect of 0.777, we solve ( 1.124 )x = 0.777 and obtain x = 2.16.

                                                      16
                                   3.4. Alternative Specifications
Nonlinear Effects. The survival plots in Figure 2(b) suggested that the incremental effects of
a more lenient governance regime on survival rates diminish over time. The first few years
of BC law exposure appear to have the largest effect, possibly because CEOs adapt to the
new business environment and exhaust their opportunities to adjust their activities.
    To examine this possibility empirically, we estimate a modified version of (2) where
we split the cumulative BC exposure variable into below- and above-median exposure,
   (min - p50)       ( p51- max)
BCi,t          and BCi,t         , with above-median exposure variable picking up incremental
exposure, in addition to initial exposure.21
    Columns (1) to (3) in Table IV present the results, with controls and fixed effects as before.
Across columns, the hazard ratio on below-median BC exposure is strongly significant (at
1%) and ranges from 0.908 to 0.916. These estimates imply that initial insulation from
market discipline yields substantial reductions in mortality risk, corresponding to a 9%
higher survival rate. By contrast, the coefficient on above-median BC exposure is close to
one and insignificant. Thus, in line with the survival plots, the estimated survival gains are
concentrated in the first few years of exposure to reduced monitoring.
    Predicted Length of Exposure. Our second alternative specification uses CEOs' predicted
rather than true BC-law exposure. This estimation purges the per-year estimates of possible
endogeneity in the length of exposure. We note that this concern does not apply to the
indicator strategy, and thus the endogeneity concern does not threaten our main findings in
Table III, but merely the magnitude of the per-year estimates. We proceed in three steps.
First, we estimate a prediction model for CEO tenure; we then construct predicted BC
exposure; and finally we re-estimate the hazard regressions using predicted BC exposure as
the independent variable.
    We first predict for every CEO-year, including years after the passage of a BC law:
                                            RemainTenurei,t = Xi,t A + ei,t .                                                  (3)
The control variables are an age cubic, tenure cubic, the CEO's cumulative exposure to
the BC law until year t , BCi,t , and fixed effects for industry, year, headquarters state, birth
year, and tenure start-year. Denoting as t  the year when the BC law is passed, we use the
predicted remaining tenure at t  from equation (3) to construct CEOs' predicted exposure to


  21                                                                                        (min - p50)
       For example, for a CEO with a current BC exposure of four years, BCi,t                             would take the value 4,
        ( p51- max)                                                         (min - p50)                               ( p51- max)
and   BCi,t           the value 0. In the following      year (t + 1), BCi,t +1         would be   set to 4.4, and BCi,t +1         to
                         (min - p50)                             ( p51- max)
0.6. In year t + 2,    BCi,t +2        remains at 4.4,   and BCi,t +2        increases to 1.6.

                                                                 17
BC laws,                 
                      BCi = I (BCLawPasseds(i),t ) × RemainTenurei,t  ,                       (4)
where I (BCLawPasseds(i),t ) = 1 for CEO i in state s(i) at t  t  . RemainTenurei,t  is
backward-looking, i. e., constructed using information from years up to t  .
    Using this variable, we construct a CEO's predicted cumulative BC exposure until year t ,
BCi,t as (i) BCi,t = 0 t in the control group; (ii) BCi,t = 0 t < t  if not yet treated; and (iii)
                        
BCi,t = min{k + 1, BCi } for each year t following t  , with t = t  + k. Note that k is allowed
to be fractional if the BC law goes into effect in the middle of the year.
    We then use the predicted cumulative exposure in the following hazard estimations:
                         (t |BCi,t , Xi,t ) = 0 (t ) exp{ BCi,t +  Xi,t }                     (5)
    Columns (4) to (6) in Table IV present the results, with controls and fixed effects as in
Table III. Since this approach involves a generated regressor, we use the block bootstrap
method (a block is a state of incorporation cluster) with 500 iterations for the standard errors.
    The results corroborate our baseline findings. Predicted BC exposure is estimated to
significantly affect CEOs' mortality rates. The estimated hazard ratios range from 0.943 to
0.952 and are very similar to those in Table III. While the bootstrapped standard errors are
larger than those in Table III, the coefficient of interest remains significant in all columns,
either at 1% or 5%. A regression of true BC exposure on predicted exposure yields a
coefficient of 1.21, which indicates that the prediction well approximates the true exposure.
The estimated effects remain sizable if we divide them by 1.21. For instance, using the
coefficient in column (3) of Table IV, exp(ln(0.952)/1.21) = 0.960. Point estimates from
a non-linear predicted-exposure model are also similar in magnitude to those reported in
Columns (1) to (3) of Table IV, though less precisely estimated.

                                   3.5. Robustness Tests
Our results are robust to a series of additional tests. For brevity, we only provide a brief
overview of these tests here and present a detailed discussion in Appendix B.
    CEO Cohorts. We estimate various alternative specifications involving cohort effects.
These specifications address concerns arising from more recent CEOs being shielded more
often by BC laws. Our results are virtually unchanged when we include birth-year fixed
effects (Panel A of Appendix-Table B.2). Relatedly, the results are very similar when we
keep the year fixed effect setup but allow the effect of age on mortality to vary across
birth cohorts (Panel B of Appendix-Table B.2). Additionally, our results are unchanged
when adding appointment-year fixed effects to the model (Panel C of Appendix-Table B.2),


                                               18
and when dropping CEOs who stepped down significantly before the passage the BC laws
(Appendix-Figure B.2).
    Other Specifications and Sample Choices. Our results are robust to including additional
CEO and firm controls, in particular CEO pay and firm size measures (Panel A of Appendix-
Table B.3), and to specifications with state of incorporation fixed effects (Panel B of
Appendix-Table B.3). They are also robust to different censoring date choices (Appendix-
Figure B.3).
    Other Anti-Takeover Laws. The results are also robust to using the first-time enactment
of any of the five second-generation anti-takeover laws as identifying variation (Appendix-
Table B.4). This test highlights that our results should be interpreted more broadly, applying
to different corporate governance mechanisms rather than narrowly to BC laws.
    Karpoff­Wittry and Related Tests. All results are robust to extensive robustness checks
proposed in Karpoff and Wittry (2018) to account for firms lobbying for the passage of BC
laws or opting-out, as well as confounding effects of firm-level defenses and first-generation
anti-takeover laws (Appendix-Tables B.5 and B.6). Additionally, the results are robust to
data cuts based on state of incorporation and industry affiliation (Appendix-Table B.7).
    Linear Probability Model. To address any concerns regarding the usage of the hazard
model, we estimate a linear probability model (LPM) at the CEO level. The dependent
variable is an indicator variable for whether a CEO has passed away by October 1st, 2017,
and the main independent variable of interest is an indicator for BC exposure during a CEO's
tenure (Appendix-Table B.8). Even though the LPM discards all time-series variation, as
it does not take into account how soon CEOs pass away after being appointed, the results
support the hazard analysis. The estimated coefficient on the BC exposure indicator is
negative and significant at conventional levels, indicating that BC-protected CEOs are less
likely to die before the censoring date. In terms of magnitudes, the effect of being protected
by BC laws on survival likelihood corresponds to that of a two and a half year increase in
CEO age at appointment in the LPM, similar to the hazard model.

                3.6. Intermediate Outcomes: Tenure, Retirement, and Pay
In addition to health benefits, we observe several other sources of private benefits, namely
pay and tenure as CEO. These outcomes are of interest themselves and may also provide
insights regarding why CEOs live longer when facing a less stressful work environment.
    We begin with an analysis of CEO tenure. Theory does not provide a strong prediction
as to how tenure should respond to the anti-takeover laws. On the one hand, CEOs may


                                             19
become entrenched and stay on the job longer. On the other hand, CEOs who reduce effort
on the job might be fired more frequently. We estimate again the hazard model from the
survival analysis. The results in columns (1)-(2) of Panel A in Table V indicate that BC law
treatment, I (BC), decreases the separation hazard by 20-21 percent, but the effect halves in
magnitude and becomes statistically insignificant after controlling for year effects (column
3), with standard errors nearly doubling. In the specifications using the length of exposure
variable BC (in columns 4 to 6), the estimated separation hazard falls by 4 to 9 percent.
     Further analyses of CEOs' age at the end of their tenure suggest that increases in tenure--
if there are any--would be driven by fewer CEOs stepping down in their 50s and early 60s.
Appendix-Figure B.4 plots the retirement hazard separately for CEOs with and without BC
law exposure.22 Exposure appears to lower the hazard before and increase it above age 65,
including a long tail of tenures into the 80s and 90s. While the raw data is not as stark as
for our longevity results, nor are the hazard estimates as robust, it is noteworthy for another
reason: It helps rule out that the end of mandatory retirement through the amendment of the
Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) in 1986 confounds our longevity findings.
Although there is a large spike in retirements at ages 64 and 65, there is no association
between retirement at these ages and exposure to the business combination laws.
     Longer tenure (or delayed retirement) as a result of anti-takeover insulation--if there is
any such effect-- is also unlikely to be the channel for the estimated increase in longevity. To
begin with, prior research has found small or even beneficial effects of retirement on health
in the general population (Hernaes et al. 2013, Insler 2014, Fitzpatrick and Moore 2018). In
our population, a life expectancy advantage arising directly from tenure would run counter
to the notion that the CEO job is demanding as the evidence in Bandiera et al. (2020) and
Porter and Nohria (2018) on the intensity of CEO schedules and the constraints imposed by
the CEO position imply. Moreover, the results in Section 3.4 on nonlinearities point to initial
exposure effects, with prolonged exposure (from prolonged tenure) having no incremental
impact on life expectancy. Consistent with these arguments, we find quantitatively very
similar longevity effects of BC exposure when we focus on CEOs who leave office at or
shortly before age 65.23
     We next turn to CEO pay. Here, too, the theoretical prediction is unclear, as also noted by
Bertrand and Mullainathan (1998). On the one hand, a model of compensating differentials
  22  CEOs may continue to work after they separate, however, we find few (34 in total) cases in which a CEO
steps down and then becomes CEO at another firm in our sample.
   23 The finding in Appendix-Figure B.4 that a disproportional fraction of CEOs in our sample steps down

near this retirement age is consistent with the evidence in Jenter and Lewellen (2015).

                                                    20
would predict a decrease in pay as CEOs' working conditions improve and imposed health
costs are reduced. In line with such a channel, Edmans and Gabaix (2011) present a
theoretical model of the CEO market in which lower effort--which is isomorphic to lower
job demands--is compensated by lower pay. On the other hand, a model of skimming would
predict that CEOs use the increase in autonomy to extract additional private benefits in the
form of higher compensation. It is thus an empirical question as to which effect dominates
in our specific context.
    Before estimating the empirical relation, it is useful to first calibrate what effect size
we would expect if compensation for health ramifications were the primary channel empiri-
cally.24 In their meta-analysis of the literature on the value of a statistical life (VSL), Viscusi
and Aldy (2003) report an estimate around $6.7 million (in 2000 dollars) for a person with
income of around $26,000, and an income elasticity for the VSL of around 0.5. Applied
to our CEO sample, this translates into a VSL of around $47.3 million.25 Given a baseline
mortality rate of 1.366% for 60-year-olds born in 1925 (Human Mortality Database 2019), a
reduction in mortality risk of 4.1% per year of BC exposure (column 6 in Table III) implies
a CEO pay change between -2% and -9%, depending on whether the wage adjustment
reflects the entire BC-induced mortality risk shift over the expected remaining lifespan or
solely the shift over the remaining years while serving as CEO.26
    With these calibrated effects in mind, Panel B of Table V presents the results on the rela-
tion between CEO pay and BC law exposure. In column (1), we estimate linear regressions
of CEO pay on the BC indicator and the same controls and fixed effects as in the hazard
analyses. This specification excludes any post-treatment outcomes from the right-hand side
and parallels the survival analysis. In column (2), we add the control variables used in
Bertrand and Mullainathan (1998): tenure, firm assets, and employees. We note that these
controls may themselves be affected by the reform and therefore absorb the effect of the
anti-takeover laws. Finally, in column (3), we add firm fixed effects (in place of industry
fixed effects), as in the baseline specification of Bertrand and Mullainathan (1998):
                        ln(Payi, j,t ) = t +  j +  I (BCi,t ) +  Xi, j,t + ei, j,t .

  24  We thank Xavier Gabaix for suggesting this calibration exercise.
  25  Given an average CEO pay of $1.3 million (in 2000 dollars) in our sample, we can calculate the implied
VSL for the average CEO as V SLCEO = exp(0.5 × (ln($1.3m) - ln($26k)) + ln($6.7m)) = $47.3m.
   26 The calculations are based on an average length of BC exposure of 5.68 years (Table I), an average time

of 24.77 years between onset of BC exposure and death, and an average annual CEO pay of $1.3 million
in 2000 dollars). For example, if we assume that the wage adjustment reflects the mortality risk shift over
the expected remaining lifespan, we can calculate the pay change as (-24.77/5.68) × (4.1% × 1.366% ×
$47.3mn)/$1.3mn = -9%.

                                                     21
where i represents a CEO, j represents a firm, and t represents a calendar year.
    We estimate a positive, albeit mostly insignificant treatment effect. The estimates
indicate a pay increase around 4.1-8.7%. Only the estimate in column (2) is marginally
significant. In comparing the results to the earlier work, which estimated a (more significant)
5.4 percent pay increase, it is important to note that our analysis is conducted on a CEO-level
sample, and restricts the sample to incumbent, pre-BC CEOs.
    Taken together, the evidence speaks against a compensating reduction in pay, but is
instead suggestive of additional rents (higher pay). Combined with the evidence on an
increase in tenure, the estimates imply that lifetime compensation rises as a result of
exposure to the laws. However, any resulting wealth increases are unlikely to explain the
longevity results, given that the literature has found little evidence of a causal relation of
income and life expectancy for wealthy individuals (Cesarini et al. 2016). Where evidence
has been found of an effect of wealth on health, it appears to work through reductions in
stress (Schwandt 2018). The apparent lack of a compensating differential also casts doubt on
whether all parties fully account for the health implications of different governance regimes.

           4.   INDUSTRY-WIDE DISTRESS SHOCKS AND LIFE EXPECTANCY

Our second source of identification for variation in CEOs' job demands exploits the occur-
rence of industry-wide distress shocks. We will utilize this source of identification both for
an alternative approach to estimating mortality effects and for the apparent-age estimation.
    For the mortality analysis, we continue to use the CEO sample collected for the BC
analysis and described in Table I, which allows us to compare effect sizes across the
two approaches. We also retain the key features of the BC law analysis, including the
hazard specification, control variables, and primary robustness checks, albeit with a new
independent variable: the experience of industry-wide distress shocks. As discussed in
Section 2.4, the industry shock definition is based on observing an industry-wide 30%-
decline in equity value over a two-year horizon. In our sample, 648 out of the 1,605 CEOs,
or 40% of CEOs, witness at least one period of industry distress during their tenure (see
Table I). However, fewer than twenty percent of CEOs experience two or more industry
shocks, and fewer than ten percent experience three or more. Given that industry shocks are
infrequent, we specify industry distress exposure as an indicator variable; any cumulative or
incremental effects would be estimated off of very few and long-serving CEOs.
    We use the Cox (1972) proportional hazards model to estimate a modified version of (1):
                (t |BCi,t , Xi,t ) = 0 (t ) exp( Industry Distressi,t +  Xi,t )            (6)

                                              22
where Industry Distressi,t is an indicator equal to 1 if CEO i has experienced distress by
year t . In addition to the controls and fixed effects from Table III, we also control for BC
law exposure, given our evidence that these laws significantly affect a CEO's lifespan. We
cluster standard errors at the three-digit SIC code level, at which industry shocks are defined.
    Table VI reports the estimation results. Across specifications, the estimated hazard ratios
of Industry Distress reveal substantial adverse effects of industry-shock exposure on CEOs'
long-term health. The coefficient estimates are very similar across models, ranging from
1.179 to 1.190, and are significant at the 5% or 1% level.
    The estimated coefficients on the control variables are similar to above. The coefficients
on Age continue to be positive, with hazard ratios ranging from 1.115 to 1.125. The hazard
ratios on Year, in the linear time controls specifications, are again close to 1 and insignificant
or only marginally significant, indicating no strong time trends in mortality.
    The estimates point to meaningful effect sizes. Applying the approach from Section 3.3
to the hazard ratio estimates from the most conservative specification in column (3), 1.179
for Industry Distress and 1.125 for Age, we calculate that the effect of industry distress on
mortality is equivalent to being 1.4 years older, as calculated by solving 1.125x = 1.179.
Compared to the estimated effect size of exposure to BC laws, which corresponded to
2.14 years in CEO age, the effect of industry distress is of similar order of magnitude but
smaller. The smaller magnitude might reflect the more temporary nature of industry-shock
experiences relative to variations corporate-governance regimes. Overall, both approaches
to estimating the effect of variation in job demand on CEO mortality reveal substantial effect
sizes, also compared to other determinants of longevity and known health risks.
    Robustness. We present several robustness checks, with all tables relegated to Appendix
C. First, we re-estimate equation (6) with additional CEO and firm controls (CEO pay,
firm assets, and employees), mirroring the first robustness check of the BC analysis. The
estimated hazard ratios become slightly larger and remain highly significant (Panel A of
Appendix-Table C.1). In terms of economic magnitude, it is now equivalent to being 1.6
years older.
    Second, we re-estimate the model on an extended sample that includes the 295 CEOs
we had dropped from the analysis as they were appointed after the introduction of BC laws.
As shown in Panel B of Appendix-Table C.1, the estimated coefficients remain similar. The
estimated effect here is equivalent to being 1.1 years older.
    We have also explored specific recession periods, such as the 1987 stock-market down-
turn or the 1981-82 recession. However, fewer than 5% of the CEOs in our sample expe-

                                               23
rienced either of these shocks so that we lack statistical power when applying the same
methodology of comparing CEOs who did and did not experience an industry downturn in
their firms. While the corresponding estimates indicate that CEOs who experienced these
shocks tend to have a higher mortality hazard, they are not statistically significant. We have
also considered a more restrictive distress definition requiring, in addition, negative industry
sales growth, as in the robustness tests in Acharya et al. (2007), and in Opler and Titman
(1994) and Babina (2020). This definition classifies fewer than five percent of CEOs in our
sample as distressed and substantially increases standard errors. Nonetheless, we estimate
similar effect sizes as above, corresponding to an age effect between 0.8 and 1.7 years.
    We also estimate a linear probability model instead of the hazard model. As in the
LPM of Section 3.5, the dependent variable captures whether a CEO has passed away by
the cutoff date. The main independent variable is now an indicator that is 1 if a CEO ever
experienced industry distress during her tenure. We include control variables and fixed
effects as in the BC-based LPM in Appendix-Table B.8, and following the main Table
VI again control for a CEO's BC exposure. The results in Appendix-Table C.2 show that
industry-shock exposure is estimated to increase the likelihood of death by 3.6% to 6.2%,
with the effect being significant at 5% in the more flexible specifications with age or birth-
year fixed effects. The economic significance of the estimates is comparable to those in the
hazard models. For example, the midpoint of the estimate range implies an industry-shock
effect that corresponds to assuming the CEO position when 1.8 years older, which is similar
to the hazard-based age comparisons above. Thus, the LPM approach corroborates the
hazard-based findings despite it discarding the time-series variation in CEOs' lifespan.
    Differently from the analysis of BC law exposure, we do not implement robustness
checks using exposure length, non-linear effects, and predicted exposure. The reason is that
the dynamics of industry shocks and selection into the sample of multi-distress-year CEOs
complicate the implementation and interpretation of such analyses. Related evidence can be
found in the extensive literature on the effects of industry shocks.27 In the next section, we
focus on industry downturns generated by the Great Recession in a difference-in-difference
research design which sidesteps issues related to dynamics and sample selection.
    All together, the industry-shock analysis provides evidence that significant and unex-
pected changes in the work environment and job demands of CEOs have strong effects on
their health in terms of life expectancy.

  27 See, for example, Jenter and Lewellen (2015) on CEO turnover, including during recessions; and Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2001) and Garvey and Milbourn (2006) for the effects of industry performance on CEO pay.

                                                    24
           5. INDUSTRY-WIDE DISTRESS SHOCKS AND APPARENT AGING
In the final step of our analysis, we move from the focus on longevity to more immediate,
non-fatal manifestations of CEOs' health associated with demanding job environments.
Research in medicine and biology has established links between stress and signs of visible
aging, such as hair whitening (Zhang et al. 2020) and inflammation, which in turn accelerates
skin aging (Heidt et al. 2014, Kim et al. 2013). We ask whether experiencing industry
distress translates into accelerated apparent aging of CEOs.
    We use a more recent sample of 1,000 firms in the 2006 Fortune 500 list for this analysis
since picture availability and quality have substantially improved over time. It allows us to
exploit CEOs' differential exposure to industry shocks during the Great Recession.

                          5.1. Apparent-Age Estimation Software
To analyze visible CEO aging, we make use of recent advances in machine learning on
estimating people's age. Most of the earlier age estimation software focused on a person's
biological, i. e., "true" age (Antipov, Baccouche, Berrani, and Dugelay 2016). Recent
research has started to aim at estimating a person's apparent age, i. e., how old a person
looks. The progress in this area has been made possible by the development of deep learning
in convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and the increased availability of large datasets of
facial images with associated true and apparent ages, the latter estimated by people.
    For our analysis, we use a machine-learning based software (Antipov et al. (2016)) that
has been specifically developed for the problem of apparent-age estimation. This software
is the winner of the 2016 Looking At People apparent-age estimation competition. We
provide a detailed discussion of CNNs and the training steps associated with the software
in Appendix D and give a brief summary here. The software is based on Oxford's Visual
Geometry Group deep convolutional neural network architecture. In a first step, it was
trained on more than 250,000 pictures with information on people's true age using the
Internet Movie Database and pictures from Wikipedia. In a second step, it was fine-tuned
for apparent-age estimation using a newly available dataset of 5,613 facial pictures, each
of which was rated by at least ten people in terms of the person's age. The addition of
fine-tuning on this apparent age data is particularly important; this step led to the software's
largest accuracy improvement (amounting to more than 20%) in the apparent age estimation
of the competition data by far (see Table 2 in Antipov et al. 2016 and Appendix D).
    Both the distribution of true ages used for training and human age estimations used for
software fine-tuning covers people from all age groups, including elderly people. The output


                                              25
of the neural network is a 100 × 1 vector of probabilities associated with all apparent ages
from 0 to 99 years. The apparent age point estimate is derived by multiplying each apparent
age with its probability. The software also carries out an eleven-fold cross-validation,
drawing 5,113 images for each training and 500 (non-overlapping) images for each validation
sample. The ultimate output is the average apparent-age estimation of the eleven models.

                  5.2. Apparent-Age Distribution and Summary Statistics
We first document the estimated apparent-age distribution and provide summary statistics
for our sample of 3,086 collected pictures, described in Section 2.2.
    Figure 3 provides graphical evidence of the distributions and correlations of biological
and apparent ages. Panel (a) shows that the distributions of apparent and biological ages
largely overlap, though the apparent age distribution is somewhat shifted to the left. That is,
on average, the software estimates CEOs to look younger than their biological age. This
reflects that CEOs have high SES, have better access to health care, can afford healthier
food, and live longer than the average population (see Table I, and cf. Chetty et al. 2016).
Our results below on the effect of industry shocks on CEO aging do not rely on comparisons
between CEOs and the general population but entail solely within-CEO comparisons.
    Panel (b) shows a scatter plot of CEOs' apparent age against biological age, confirming
a high correlation between the two concepts of age, but also a greater mass below than above
the 45 -line. In this figure and in the regression analysis below, we winsorize the estimated
apparent age variable to ensure that the outliers in age estimation do not affect the results.
To do that, we first winsorize the top and bottom 0.5% of the difference between apparent
and biological age, and then add this winsorized difference to the biological age.
    Table VII provides the summary statistics for the 463 CEOs for whom we are able to
collect at least two dated pictures. On average, we are able to find about 7 pictures of a
CEO (conditional on finding at least two pictures). The average CEO is 56.35 years old in
2006, and the mean pre-2006 tenure is 8 years. The majority of CEOs head firms in the
manufacturing, transportation, communications, electricity and gas, and finance industries.
    To illustrate the proposed channel from industry shocks to aging, we first discuss a
specific example. James Donald was the CEO of Starbucks from April 2005 until January
2008, when he was fired after Starbucks' stock had plunged by more than 40% over the
preceding year. The top of Figure 4 shows two pictures of Donald: the left one was taken
on December 8, 2004, before his appointment at Starbucks, and the right one 4.42 years
later, on May 11, 2009, after his dismissal. Donald was 50.76 years old in the first picture,
and 55.18 years in the second. The machine-learning based aging software predicts his age

                                              26
in the earlier picture at 53.47 years, and in the later picture as 60.45 years. Thus, for both
pictures, the software determines that he looks older than his true age. Most importantly, the
software estimates that he aged by 6.98 years, i. e., 2.5 years more than actual time passed.

                 (a) Distribution                                  (b) Correlation




F IGURE 3. --CEO apparent and biological age. Notes: The figure plots apparent and biological
ages for our sample of 3,086 CEO images. Panel (b) shows CEOs' apparent-age distribution in
blue (medium grey), and their biological-age distributions in red (light grey), with the overlapping
areas appearing as purple (dark grey). Panel (b) shows a scatter plot of CEOs' apparent age against
biological age. The dotted line represents the 45 -line. We winsorize the apparent age by first
winsorizing the top and bottom 0.5% of the difference between apparent and biological age, and then
adding this winsorized difference to the biological age.


    Turning to the full set of 20 pictures of Donald that we are able to collect for the period
from three years before to three years after the onset of the crisis in 2007, i. e., 2004-2010, we
find that the mean difference between his apparent and his biological age is 0.96 years prior
to 2007 and increases to 4.97 years from 2007 on. The bottom half of Figure 4 summarizes
these estimates and visualizes the jump in Donald's apparent versus biological age in 2007
as well as the continued aging effects after the crisis. The example typifies our approach,
especially in light of Donald's struggles during his final year as Starbucks' CEO.
    The example also points to concerns one may have regarding picture heterogeneity. For
example, the lighting in the two pictures seems to be different, and the left picture, with
Donald smiling into the camera, might be from a more staged setting than the right one.
More broadly, researchers have pointed to the importance of accounting for picture context
and facial positioning in other settings, such as in inferring people's character, attractiveness,
or sexual orientation from facial images (Wang and Kosinski 2018, Dotsch et al. 2016,
Ag¨uera y Arcas et al. 2018). While the image pre-processing and fine-tuning steps described
in Appendix D help account for such image heterogeneity, we go one step further and

                                                27
F IGURE 4.--Sample pictures (James Donald, CEO of Starbucks from 2005 to 2008). Notes: The
first two pictures show James Donald, CEO of Starbucks from 2005 to 2008. Based on data from
Ancestry.com, Donald was born on March 5, 1954. The picture on the left was taken on December
8, 2004, that on the right on Monday, May 11, 2009. Biological ages: 50.76 and 55.18 years,
respectively. Apparent ages based on aging software: 53.47 and 60.45 years, respectively. The figure
at the bottom shows how James Donald's apparent age compares to his true age over time based on
20 pictures collected for the period from 2004 to 2010.


manually assess all pictures along seven dimensions: logo, side face, professional, magazine,
natural, natural lighting, and glasses. For logo, we construct an indicator variable that takes
value 1 if there is a logo (for instance, the "gettyimages" logo) on the face in the picture.
For side face, the indicator is 1 if the CEO in the picture shows a side face instead of front.
For professional, the indicator takes on 1 if the CEO is in work mode, say wearing business
clothes, and 0 if in casual mode, say wearing a short-sleeved shirt, T-shirt, etc. For magazine,
the variable takes on 1 if the picture is from a magazine cover. For natural, the variable


                                                28
reflects whether the CEO expects the picture or not, i. e., whether it is natural posing or a
photo call. For natural lighting, the variable reflects whether the lighting feels natural (with
light from all directions) or unusual, e.g., black and white, stage lighting, etc. The variable
glasses takes on 1 if the CEO in the picture wears glasses.
    Controlling for all of these variables in our estimations we further alleviate concerns
about spurious correlations between picture characteristics and changes in apparent age.

                           5.3. Difference-in-Differences Analysis
We formalize our analysis of job-induced apparent aging in a difference-in-differences
design. Following the approach from the mortality analysis, we continue to use three-digit
SIC codes and a 30% decline in equity value criterion to identify firms that experienced an
industry shock during the financial crisis. This approach classifies 79 out of a total of 149
industries as being in distress during at least one of the crisis years 2007 and 2008. Industries
classified as distressed during these years include real estate and banking. Non-distressed
industries include agriculture, food products, and utilities.
     We analyze differences in visible signs of aging between CEOs whose company was in
distress during the crisis years versus those whose company was not in distress. To account
for CEOs departing from their job during the Great Recession, potentially introducing
selection bias, we identify treated CEOs based on intended exposure. That is, we define the
treatment variable, Industry Distress, as equal to 1 if the CEO's firm operates in an industry
that was distressed in 2007, 2008, or both years, regardless of whether the CEO stepped
down between 2006 and 2008. In particular, Industry Distress is encoded as 1 for a CEO
departing in 2007 and whose firm's industry was distressed in 2008.28
     We start from plotting the difference in aging trends between the two groups of CEOs in
Figure 5. For this graphical illustration, we bin our data into nine roughly equal-sized groups
of pictures from the beginning of the sample period to the end, t  T = {pre-2004, 2004-05,
... post-2016}, and estimate the following difference-in-difference model:
       Apparent Agei, j,t = 0 + 1 Biological Agei, j,t +  2,t Industry Distress j × 1t
                                                                t T

                              + 3 Xi, j,t + t +  j + i, j,t                                            (7)
where i represents a picture, j represents a CEO, and t represents a time bin. 1t are time
indicators, where the t th indicator is equal to 1 for pictures taken at time t . They are interacted
with Industry Distress j , so that the interaction is 1 if the firm of CEO j shown in picture i
  28  Regressing actual 2007-2008 industry shock exposure on intended exposure yields a coefficient of 0.92
(F -statistic of 331.66).

                                                    29
F IGURE 5. --Differences in apparent aging between CEOs with and without industry distress
exposure during the Great Recession. Notes: This figure depicts the estimated coefficients 2 of
the interaction terms between the time-period indicators and the Industry Distress indicator from
estimating equation (7), where Industry Distress is equal to 1 if the CEO's firm was exposed to
industry-wide distress during 2007 or 2008. N denotes the number of pictures for each time period.
We winsorize the estimated apparent age variable by first winsorizing the top and bottom 0.5% of the
difference between apparent and biological age, and then adding this winsorized difference to the
biological age. Observations are weighted by the inverse of the number of pictures per CEO.


was distressed in 2007 or 2008. The vector of control variables Xi, j,t includes the number
of industry shocks a CEO experienced before 2006 and CEO tenure until 2006. We also
include CEO fixed effects  j and time fixed effects t . The CEO fixed effects absorb any
time-invariant CEO facial characteristics such as facial shape. The time fixed effects absorb
time trends, such as improving picture quality. While the aging software has been trained
on a large number of faces and pictures of differing quality, these fixed effects tighten the
identification further (and absorb the main effects of the time-industry shock interaction in
the regression). We note that for either of these variables to potentially affect the estimation
in the first place, they would have to systematically affect the software's age estimate (rather
than introducing noise) and be correlated with industry distress experience. As discussed
above, we additionally include extensive controls for picture setting and characteristics.
    Figure 5 plots the estimates of vector 2 = (2,pre-2004 , ..., 2,t , ..., t ,post-2016 ), capturing
the apparent-age differences between the treated group and the control group at the different
points in time, after controlling for the biological age and other covariates. We see that
the difference in apparent age between future distressed and non-distressed CEOs is small

                                                 30
and stable over time before the crisis, consistent with the notion that aging in both groups
follows parallel pre-trends. After the onset of the Great Recession, however, the apparent-
age difference increases markedly, first to about half a year, and then to a full year. It stays
and stabilizes at a high level of about one year of apparent-age difference after around five
years post-crisis. In other words, exposure to industry distress significantly accelerates aging
over the next few years, with the apparent-age difference stabilizing at one year.
    The large estimated difference in aging post-crisis is robust to estimating the standard
difference-in-differences regression model:
     Apparent Agei, j,t =0 + 1 Biological Agei, j,t + 2 Industry Distress j × 1{t >2006}
                          + 3 Xi, j,t + t +  j + i, j,t                                     (8)
where i represents a picture, j represents a CEO, and t represents a calendar year. We
continue to code Industry Distress as an indicator of intended industry-distress exposure
during the Great Recession to account for possible selection bias. The vector of control
variables, Xi, j,t , is the same as in estimating equation 7, and t and  j capture the year
and CEO fixed effects, respectively. The key coefficient of interest is 2 , indicating the
difference in how old CEOs look in post-crisis years depending on whether they personally
experienced industry shocks during 2007 to 2008.
    Table VIII presents the regression results. In column (1), the coefficient on the inter-
action term between Industry Distress and the post-2006 indicator, 1{t >2006} , is 0.948,
indicating that CEOs look around one year older during and post-crisis if they experienced
industry distress shocks between 2007 and 2008. In column (2), we add the extensive set of
picture controls described above ("logo," "side face," "professional," "magazine," "natural,"
"natural lighting," and "glasses"). This barely changes the coefficient on the post-treatment
interaction term (now 0.978, significant at 5%).
    In columns (3) and (4), we split the post-period into two sub-periods, capturing pictures
taken between 2007 and 2011 and since 2012, respectively. Our estimates imply a distress-
induced apparent aging effect of around 0.8 years over a five-year horizon that increases to
about 1.2 years over longer horizons. Again, the estimated effects are very similar whether
or not we include the additional picture controls. The fact that CEO aging effects appear to
be permanent also ameliorates potential concerns that our results may be confounded by
firms engaging in "picture management" or "CEO appearance management." Such efforts
by firms could in principle affect the apparent aging estimates if they are correlated with
distress exposure. However, by 2012, more than 50% of CEOs have departed from their
position. Arguably, firms have little incentives or ability to manage the appearance of former

                                              31
CEOs who have stepped down.
    We perform a series of additional tests. First, we verify that all results are similar when
we estimate the difference-in-differences model on the non-winsorized sample (Panel A of
Appendix-Table C.3). Second, we again explore using the more restrictive distress definition
that requires negative industry sales growth. One advantage of focusing on the Great
Recession period is that around 29% of the CEOs are still classified as experiencing distress
under this more stringent definition. This is also reflected in the results, which continue to
show economically and statistically significant aging effects (Panel B of Appendix-Table
C.3). If anything, the estimated effect of industry distress on apparent aging is slightly larger
under the more severe distress definition, with the differential aging coefficient increasing
from 0.948 to 1.173 in column (1) and from 0.978 to 1.064 in column (2). Unsurprisingly
given the results above, experiencing severe distress is also estimated to significantly affect
aging patterns in the long run when splitting the post-period into sub-periods in columns (3)
and (4).
    Lastly, we verify that our results are not affected by differential finding rates of pictures
depending on whether CEOs experienced distress during the crisis. For example, if expe-
riencing industry distress shocks makes CEOs more likely to step down earlier, it may be
more difficult to find recent, post-tenure pictures. Appendix-Figure C.1 depicts the average
number of pictures per CEO we find in each year, split by whether a CEO experienced
industry distress shocks in 2007-2008. In general, the finding rates closely follow each other
over time, though there is a small divergence after 2015. Therefore, we repeat our analysis
restricting our sample to the years up to 2015, as shown in Panel C of Appendix-Table C.3.
The size and significance of the coefficients on the interaction terms remain similar across
all columns.
    All together, the apparent aging analysis provides additional evidence that increased
job demands in the form of industry distress diminish the health of CEOs. Given our other
results, the appearance of visual aging may presage a shorter lifespan for CEOs whose
industries experienced downturns in the Great Recession.

                                      6.   CONCLUSION

In this paper, we assess the health consequences of being exposed to increased job demands
and a more stressful work environment while in a high-profile CEO position. We analyze
the consequences for CEOs' aging and mortality using two sources of variation in job
demands, the staggered introduction of anti-takeover laws and industry-wide distress shocks.

                                              32
We document that CEOs who serve under stricter governance die significantly earlier. We
estimate a four to five percent difference in mortality rates as result of one year of exposure
to less stringent corporate governance. The effect is driven by the initial years of reduced
monitoring. Incremental health benefits taper off at higher levels of exposure to more lenient
governance. In line with these results, we observe significantly reduced life expectancy for
CEOs who experienced periods of industry-wide distress during their tenure.
    We then show that industry distress is also reflected in more immediate signs of adverse
health consequences, namely faster visible aging. To the best of our knowledge, we are
the first to collect and utilize panel data of facial images and apply machine-learning based
apparent-age estimation software in social-science research. We implement a difference-in-
differences design that exploits variation in industry distress exposure during the financial
crisis. We estimate that CEOs who experienced industry distress during the 2007-2008
financial crisis look roughly one year older than those whose industry did not suffer the
same level of distress. Mirroring (inversely) the effect of more lenient corporate governance
over time, the effect of distress on aging becomes slightly larger over time, increasing to
1.178 years if we analyze pictures from 2012 and afterwards.
    In sum, our results indicate that stricter corporate governance regimes--which are gener-
ally viewed as desirable and welfare-improving--and financial distress impose significant
personal health costs to CEOs. While we lack direct physical or medical measures of
heightened stress, the evidence implies that stricter governance and economic downturns
constitutes a substantial personal cost for CEOs in terms of their health and life expectancy.
As such, our findings also contribute to the literature on the trade-offs between managerial
incentives and private benefits arising from the separation of ownership and control. We
document and quantify a previously unnoticed yet important cost--shorter life expectancy
and faster aging of the CEOs--associated with serving under strict corporate governance.
    Our findings suggest further avenues of investigation. One open question is whether
managers fully account for these personal costs as they progress in their careers and how
these costs affect selection into service as a CEO. Are there other dimensions of compensa-
tion? Are some high-ability candidates for a Forbes-level CEO career more aware of these
consequences than others and select out? Additionally, which jobs and hierarchy levels come
with the largest adverse health consequences, also in light of looming financial hardships?
    Another promising avenue is the more fine-grained identification of stressors. What
aspects of individual job situations and which decisions tend to have the largest adverse
health consequences, for either management or regular employees: pending layoffs and


                                              33
downsizing; restructurings; hostile merger attempts? Likewise, heightened workplace stress
can also adversely affect other aspects of life, including marriage, divorce rates, parenting,
and alcohol consumption. We leave these topics for future research.

                                       REFERENCES
  Abadie, A., S. Athey, G. W. Imbens, and J. Wooldridge (2017). When Should You Adjust
     Standard Errors for Clustering? Working Paper, No. w24003, National Bureau of
     Economic Research.
  Acharya, V. V., S. T. Bharath, and A. Srinivasan (2007). Does Industry-wide Distress
    Affect Defaulted Firms? Evidence from Creditor Recoveries. Journal of Financial
    Economics 85(3), 787­821.
  Ag¨
    uera y Arcas, B., A. Todorov, and M. Mitchell (2018). Do Algorithms Reveal
    Sexual Orientation or Just Expose Our Stereotypes? Medium. Available at:
    https://link.medium.com/GO7FJgFgM1.
  Aizer, A., L. Stroud, and S. Buka (2016). Maternal Stress and Child Outcomes: Evidence
     from Siblings. Journal of Human Resources 51(3), 523­555.
  Anderson, M. and M. Marmot (2012). The Effects of Promotions on Heart Disease:
    Evidence from Whitehall. The Economic Journal 122(561), 555­589.
  Angrist, J. D. and J.-S. Pischke (2008). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's
    Companion. Princeton University Press.
  Antipov, G., M. Baccouche, S.-A. Berrani, and J.-L. Dugelay (2016). Apparent Age
     Estimation from Face Images Combining General and Children-specialized Deep
     Learning Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
     Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 96­104.
  Atanassov, J. (2013). Do Hostile Takeovers Stifle Innovation? Evidence from Anti-
     takeover Legislation and Corporate Patenting. The Journal of Finance 68(3), 1097­
     1131.
  Babina, T. (2020). Destructive Creation at Work: How Financial Distress Spurs En-
     trepreneurship. The Review of Financial Studies 33(9), 4061­4101.
  Bandiera, O., R. Lemos, A. Prat, and R. Sadun (2018). Managing the Family Firm:
     Evidence from CEOs at Work. The Review of Financial Studies 31(5), 1605­1653.
  Bandiera, O., A. Prat, S. Hansen, and R. Sadun (2020). CEO Behavior and Firm Perfor-
     mance. Journal of Political Economy 128(4), 1325­1369.
  Bennedsen, M., F. Perez-Gonzalez, and D. Wolfenzon (2020). Do CEOs Matter? Evi-
     dence from Hospitalization Events. The Journal of Finance 75(4), 1877­1911.
  Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (1998). Corporate Governance and Executive Pay:
     Evidence from Takeover Legislation. Working Paper, No. w6830, National Bureau of
     Economic Research.

                                             34
Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2001). Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck? The Ones
   Without Principals Are. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(3), 901­932.
Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2003). Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate Governance
   and Managerial Preferences. Journal of Political Economy 111(5), 1043­1075.
Black, S. E., P. J. Devereux, and K. G. Salvanes (2016). Does Grief Transfer across Gen-
   erations? Bereavements during Pregnancy and Child Outcomes. American Economic
   Journal: Applied Economics 8(1), 193­223.
Borgschulte, M. and J. Vogler (2019). Run for Your Life? The Effect of Close Elections
   on the Life Expectancy of Politicians. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organiza-
   tion 167, 18­32.
Boyce, C. J. and A. J. Oswald (2012). Do People Become Healthier after Being Promoted?
   Health Economics 21(5), 580­596.
Brondolo, E., K. Byer, P. Gianaros, C. Liu, A. Prather, K. Thomas, C. Woods-Giscombe,
   L. Beatty, P. DiSandro, and G. Keita (2017). Stress and Health Disparities: Contexts,
   Mechanisms, and Interventions among Racial/Ethnic Minority and Low Socioeco-
   nomic Status Populations. American Psychological Association (APA) Working Group
   Report.
Cain, M. D., S. B. McKeon, and S. D. Solomon (2017). Do Takeover Laws Mat-
   ter? Evidence from Five Decades of Hostile Takeovers. Journal of Financial Eco-
   nomics 124(3), 464­485.
Camacho, A. (2008). Stress and Birth Weight: Evidence from Terrorist Attacks. American
   Economic Review 98(2), 511­515.
                               ¨
Cesarini, D., E. Lindqvist, R. Ostling, and B. Wallace (2016). Wealth, Health, and Child
   Development: Evidence from Administrative Data on Swedish Lottery Players. The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(2), 687­738.
Cheng, S., V. Nagar, and M. V. Rajan (2004). Identifying Control Motives in Manage-
   rial Ownership: Evidence from Antitakeover Legislation. The Review of Financial
   Studies 18(2), 637­672.
Chetty, R., M. Stepner, S. Abraham, S. Lin, B. Scuderi, N. Turner, A. Bergeron, and
   D. Cutler (2016). The Association Between Income and Life Expectancy in the United
   States, 2001-2014. JAMA 315(16), 1750­1766.
Cox, D. R. (1972). Regression Models and Life Tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical
   Society: Series B 34(2), 187­202.
Cremers, M. and A. Ferrell (2014). Thirty Years of Shareholder Rights and Firm Value.
   The Journal of Finance 69(3), 1167­1196.
Cutler, D., A. Deaton, and A. Lleras-Muney (2006). The Determinants of Mortality.
   Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(3), 97­120.


                                         35
Dotsch, R., R. R. Hassin, and A. Todorov (2016). Statistical Learning Shapes Face
   Evaluation. Nature Human Behaviour 1(1), 1­6.
East, C. N., S. Miller, M. Page, and L. R. Wherry (2017). Multi-generational Impacts
   of Childhood Access to the Safety Net: Early Life Exposure to Medicaid and the
   Next Generations Health. Working Paper, No. w23810, National Bureau of Economic
   Research.
Easterbrook, F. H. and D. R. Fischel (1981). The Proper Role of a Target's Management
   in Responding to a Tender Offer. Harvard Law Review 94(6), 1161­1204.
Edmans, A. and X. Gabaix (2011). The Effect of Risk on the CEO Market. The Review
  of Financial Studies 24(8), 2822­2863.
Eisfeldt, A. L. and C. M. Kuhnen (2013). CEO Turnover in a Competitive Assignment
    Framework. Journal of Financial Economics 109(2), 351­372.
Engelberg, J. and C. A. Parsons (2016). Worrying about the stock market: Evidence from
   hospital admissions. The Journal of Finance 71(3), 1227­1250.
Epel, E. S., E. H. Blackburn, J. Lin, F. S. Dhabhar, N. E. Adler, J. D. Morrow, and R. M.
   Cawthon (2004). Accelerated Telomere Shortening in Response to Life Stress. Pro-
   ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101(49),
   17312­17315.
Evans, W. N. and C. L. Garthwaite (2014). Giving Mom a Break: The Impact of Higher
   EITC Payments on Maternal Health. American Economic Journal: Economic Pol-
   icy 6(2), 258­290.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1997). Industry Costs of Equity. Journal of Financial
   Economics 43(2), 153­193.
Fitzpatrick, M. D. and T. J. Moore (2018). The Mortality Effects of Retirement: Evidence
    from Social Security Eligibility at Age 62. Journal of Public Economics 157, 121­
    137.
Franceschi, C., P. Garagnani, P. Parini, C. Giuliani, and A. Santoro (2018). Inflammaging:
   A New Immune­Metabolic Viewpoint for Age-related Diseases. Nature Reviews
   Endocrinology 14(10), 576­590.
Ganster, D. C. and C. C. Rosen (2013). Work Stress and Employee Health: A Multidisci-
   plinary Review. Journal of Management 39(5), 1085­1122.
Garvey, G. T. and T. T. Milbourn (2006). Asymmetric Benchmarking in Compensation:
   Executives are Rewarded for Good Luck But Not Penalized for Bad. Journal of
   Financial Economics 82(1), 197­225.
General, S. (2014). The Health Consequences of Smoking ­ 50 Years of Progress: A
   Report of the Surgeon General. In US Department of Health and Human Services.



                                          36
Gibbons, R. and K. J. Murphy (1992). Optimal Incentive Contracts in the Presence
   of Career Concerns: Theory and Evidence. Journal of Political Economy 100(3),
   468­505.
Giroud, X. and H. M. Mueller (2010). Does Corporate Governance Matter in Competitive
   Industries? Journal of Financial Economics 95(3), 312­331.
Gompers, P., J. Ishii, and A. Metrick (2003). Corporate Governance and Equity Prices.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1), 107­156.
Gompertz, B. (1825). XXIV. On the Nature of the Function Expressive of the Law of Hu-
  man Mortality, and on a New Mode of Determining the Value of Life Contingencies.
  In a Letter to Francis Baily, Esq. FRS &c. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
  Society of London 115, 513­583.
Gormley, T. A. and D. A. Matsa (2016). Playing it Safe? Managerial Preferences, Risk,
   and Agency Conflicts. Journal of Financial Economics 122(3), 431­455.
Heidt, T., H. B. Sager, G. Courties, P. Dutta, Y. Iwamoto, A. Zaltsman, C. von Zur Muhlen,
   C. Bode, G. L. Fricchione, J. Denninger, et al. (2014). Chronic Variable Stress
   Activates Hematopoietic Stem Cells. Nature Medicine 20(7), 754.
Hernaes, E., S. Markussen, J. Piggott, and O. L. Vestad (2013). Does Retirement Age
   Impact Mortality? Journal of Health Economics 32(3), 586­598.
Human Mortality Database (2019). USA, 1x1 Cohort Mortality Rates. University of
  California, Berkeley (USA), and Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research
  (Germany).
Hummels, D., J. Munch, and C. Xiang (2016). No Pain, No Gain: the Effects of Exports
  on Effort, Injury, and Illness. Working Paper, No. w22365, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.
Insler, M. (2014). The Health Consequences of Retirement. Journal of Human Re-
    sources 49(1), 195­233.
Jenter, D. and K. Lewellen (2015). CEO Preferences and Acquisitions. The Journal of
   Finance 70(6), 2813­2852.
Jha, P., C. Ramasundarahettige, V. Landsman, B. Rostron, M. Thun, R. N. Anderson,
   T. McAfee, and R. Peto (2013). 21st-Century Hazards of Smoking and Benefits of
   Cessation in the United States. New England Journal of Medicine 368(4), 341­350.
Johnston, D. W. and W.-S. Lee (2013). Extra Status and Extra Stress: Are Promotions
   Good for Us? ILR Review 66(1), 32­54.
Kaplan, G. and S. Schulhofer-Wohl (2018). The Changing (Dis-)Utility of Work. Journal
   of Economic Perspectives 32(3), 239­258.
Karpoff, J. M. and M. D. Wittry (2018). Institutional and Legal Context in Natural
   Experiments: The Case of State Antitakeover Laws. The Journal of Finance 73(2),
   657­714.

                                          37
Keloharju, M., S. Kn¨
                    upfer, and J. T°
                                   ag (2020). CEO Health and Corporate Governance.
   Working Paper, No. 1326, Research Institute of Industrial Economics.
Kennedy, B. K., S. L. Berger, A. Brunet, J. Campisi, A. M. Cuervo, E. S. Epel,
   C. Franceschi, G. J. Lithgow, R. I. Morimoto, J. E. Pessin, et al. (2014). Geroscience:
   Linking Aging to Chronic Disease. Cell 159(4), 709­713.
Kim, S. R., Y. R. Jung, H. J. An, D. H. Kim, E. J. Jang, Y. J. Choi, K. M. Moon, M. H. Park,
   C. H. Park, K. W. Chung, et al. (2013). Anti-Wrinkle and Anti-Inflammatory Effects
   of Active Garlic Components and the Inhibition of MMPs via NF-B Signaling. PloS
   One 8(9), e73877.
Koijen, R. S. J. and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2020). Combining Life and Health Insurance.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 135(2), 913­958.
Kuka, E. (2020). Quantifying the Benefits of Social Insurance: Unemployment Insurance
   and Health. Review of Economics and Statistics 102(3), 490­505.
Lavetti, K. (2020). The Estimation of Compensating Wage Differentials: Lessons from
   the Deadliest Catch. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 38(1), 165­182.
Lazarus, R. S. and S. Folkman (1984). Stress, Appraisal, and Coping. Springer Publishing
   Company.
LeCun, Y., Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton (2015). Deep Learning. Nature 521(7553), 436­444.
Marmot, M. (2005). Status Syndrome: How Your Social Standing Directly Affects Your
  Health. A&C Black.
Mas, A. and A. Pallais (2017). Valuing Alternative Work Arrangements. American
  Economic Review 107 (12), 3722­3759.
McEwen, B. S. (1998). Protective and Damaging Effects of Stress Mediators. New
  England Journal of Medicine 338(3), 171­179.
Olshansky, S. J. and B. A. Carnes (1997). Ever Since Gompertz. Demography 34(1),
   1­15.
Opler, T. C. and S. Titman (1994). Financial Distress and Corporate Performance. The
   Journal of Finance 49(3), 1015­1040.
Parkhi, O. M., A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman (2015). Deep Face Recognition.
Persson, P. and M. Rossin-Slater (2018). Family Ruptures, Stress, and the Mental Health
   of the Next Generation. American Economic Review 108(4-5), 1214­1252.
Pickett, K. E. and R. G. Wilkinson (2015). Income inequality and health: a causal review.
   Social Science & Medicine 128, 316­326.
Porter, M. E. and N. Nohria (2018). How CEOs Manage Time. Harvard Business Re-
   view 96(4), 42­51.



                                           38
Puterman, E., A. Gemmill, D. Karasek, D. Weir, N. E. Adler, A. A. Prather, and E. S.
   Epel (2016). Lifespan Adversity and Later Adulthood Telomere Length in the Nation-
   ally Representative US Health and Retirement Study. Proceedings of the National
   Academy of Sciences 113(42), E6335­E6342.
Rablen, M. D. and A. J. Oswald (2008). Mortality and Immortality: The Nobel Prize
   as an Experiment into the Effect of Status upon Longevity. Journal of Health Eco-
   nomics 27 (6), 1462­1471.
Sapolsky, R. M. (2005). The Influence of Social Hierarchy on Primate Health. Sci-
   ence 308(5722), 648­652.
Scharfstein, D. (1988). The Disciplinary Role of Takeovers. The Review of Economic
   Studies 55(2), 185­199.
Schwandt, H. (2018). Wealth Shocks and Health Outcomes: Evidence from Stock Market
   Fluctuations. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10(4), 349­377.
Simonyan, K. and A. Zisserman (2014). Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-
   scale Image Recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556.
Smith, J. P. (1999). Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: the Dual Relation between Health
   and Economic Status. Journal of Economic perspectives 13(2), 145­166.
Snyder-Mackler, N., J. R. Burger, L. Gaydosh, D. W. Belsky, G. A. Noppert, F. A. Campos,
   A. Bartolomucci, Y. C. Yang, A. E. Aiello, A. ORand, et al. (2020). Social Determi-
   nants of Health and Survival in Humans and Other Animals. Science 368(6493).
Sullivan, D. and T. Von Wachter (2009). Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis
   Using Administrative Data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3), 1265­1306.
Viscusi, W. K. and J. E. Aldy (2003). The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review
   of Market Estimates throughout the World. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 27 (1),
   5­76.
Wang, Y. and M. Kosinski (2018). Deep Neural Networks Are More Accurate Than
  Humans at Detecting Sexual Orientation from Facial Images. Journal of Personality
  and Social Psychology 114(2), 246.
Yen, G. and L. Benham (1986). The Best of All Monopoly Profits is a Quiet Life. Journal
   of Health Economics 5(4), 347­353.
Zhang, B., S. Ma, I. Rachmin, M. He, P. Baral, S. Choi, W. A. Goncalves, Y. Shwartz,
   E. M. Fast, Y. Su, L. I. Zon, A. Regev, J. D. Buenrostro, T. M. Cunha, I. M. Chiu,
   D. E. Fisher, and Y.-C. Hsu (2020). Hyperactivation of Sympathetic Nerves Drives
   Depletion of Delanocyte Stem Cells. Nature 577 (7792), 676­681.




                                         39
                                         TABLE I
                                    S UMMARY S TATISTICSa

                                                       Main CEO Sample
                                N         Mean          SD         P10         P50        P90
 Birth Year                   1,605       1925          8.96      1914        1925       1937
 Dead (by October 2017)       1,605       0.71          0.45        0           1          1
 Year of Death                1,140       2004          9.98      1989        2006       2016
 Age at Death                 1,140       81.95         9.92      67.58       83.42      93.50
 Age Taking Office            1,605       51.63         6.95       43          52          60
 Year Taking Office           1,605       1977          7.21      1968        1977        1986
 Tenure                       1,605       10.62         6.86        3         9.08         20
 BC                           1,605        2.21         4.19        0            0        8.24
 BC | BC>0                     625         5.68         5.05      0.54         4.41      12.37
 Industry Distress            1,605        0.40         0.49         0          0          1
   a Allvariables are defined at the CEO level. BC denotes years of exposure to business combination
laws. Industry Distress is an indicator variable that equals one if a CEO experienced industry-wide
distress during his tenure. All variables are defined in Appendix A.




                                  TABLE II
       M ORTALITY BY C OHORT AND B USINESS C OMBINATION L AW E XPOSUREa

                               BC Exposure                               No BC Exposure
 Birth Year            N     % Dead    Age at Death             N          % Dead Age at Death
 Before 1915           12     100%         91.83               209         98.1%       84.87
 1916 - 1920           25    92.0%         88.45               248         99.2%       84.58
 1921 - 1925          115    82.6%         86.76               235         88.9%       82.98
 1926 - 1930          202    62.4%         83.96               137         70.1%       81.86
 1931 - 1935          134    35.6%         82.08                77         40.3%       81.97
 1936 - 1940           82    23.2%         77.70                39         35.9%       74.68
 After 1941            55    23.6%         72.12                35         14.3%       71.67

   a Thistable splits the sample of CEOs by cohort and BC law exposure. Each cell shows the
percentage deceased by October 1, 2017 and the age at death conditional on having passed away.




                                                  40
                                    TABLE III
            E XPOSURE TO B USINESS C OMBINATION L AWS AND M ORTALITYa

   Dependent Variable: Deathi,t
                            (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)
   I(BC)                 0.764***     0.769***    0.777***
                          [0.062]      [0.068]     [0.067]
   BC                                                          0.955***    0.958***     0.959***
                                                                [0.005]     [0.005]      [0.005]
   Age                   1.113***     1.123***    1.124***     1.111***    1.121***     1.122***
                          [0.006]      [0.005]     [0.004]      [0.007]     [0.005]      [0.005]
   Year                    1.005        1.002                    1.005       1.001
                          [0.004]      [0.005]                  [0.004]     [0.004]
   Location FE (HQ)          Y           Y             Y           Y           Y            Y
   FF49 FE                               Y             Y                       Y            Y
   Year FE                                             Y                                    Y
   Number of CEOs         1,605         1,605      1,605         1,605       1,605        1,605
   Observations           50,530       50,530      50,530       50,530      50,530       50,530

   a Thistable shows hazard ratios estimated from a Cox (1972) proportional hazards model. The
dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if the CEO dies in a given year. The main
independent variables are a binary indicator of BC law exposure, I (BC), in the left three columns
and a count variable of years of exposure, BC, in the right three columns. All variables are defined in
Appendix A. Standard errors, clustered at the state-of-incorporation level, are shown in brackets. *,
**, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                  41
                                        TABLE IV
                      N ONLINEAR E FFECTS AND P REDICTED E XPOSUREa

   Dependent Variable: Deathi,t
                             (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
       (min - p50)
   BC                     0.908***     0.913***     0.916***
                           [0.021]      [0.024]      [0.023]
   BC( p51- max)            0.992        0.993        0.992
                           [0.015]      [0.017]      [0.017]
   BC                                                            0.943***     0.951**      0.952**
                                                                  [0.018]     [0.023]      [0.023]
   Age                    1.111***     1.122***     1.122***     1.110***     1.120***     1.120***
                           [0.010]      [0.009]      [0.009]      [0.007]      [0.005]      [0.005]
   Year                     1.005        1.001                    1.007*        1.004
                           [0.006]      [0.007]                   [0.004]      [0.004]
   Location FE (HQ)           Y            Y            Y            Y            Y            Y
   FF49 FE                                 Y            Y                         Y            Y
   Year FE                                              Y                                      Y
   Number of CEOs          1,605         1,605       1,605         1,605        1,605        1,605
   Observations            50,530       50,530       50,530       50,530       50,530       50,530

   a This
        table shows hazard ratios estimated from a Cox (1972) proportional hazards model. The
dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if the CEO dies in a given year. The main
independent variable in the left three columns is BC, a count variable of years of predicted cumulative
                                                                                               (min - p50)
exposure to a BC law. The main independent variables in the right three columns are BCi,t
        ( p51- max)
and BCi,t        , which capture BC law exposure up to the sample median and incremental exposure
above the median, respectively. All variables are defined in Appendix A. For the left three columns,
we present bootstrapped standard errors, using the block bootstrap method with 500 iterations, in
brackets. For the right three columns, we present standard errors clustered at the state-of-incorporation
level, in brackets. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                   42
                                    TABLE V
             B USINESS C OMBINATION L AWS , R ETIREMENT, AND CEO PAYa
                                       Panel A: Business Combination Laws and Retirement
     Dependent Variable: CEO Departurei,t
                               (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)      (5)             (6)
     I(BC)                  0.788***         0.801***         0.911
                             [0.055]          [0.054]        [0.097]
     BC                                                                    0.910***   0.907***        0.957**
                                                                            [0.019]    [0.019]        [0.020]
     Age                    1.100***         1.105***    1.104***          1.100***   1.107***       1.104***
                             [0.010]          [0.011]     [0.012]           [0.011]    [0.012]        [0.012]
     Year                   1.069***         1.072***                      1.096***   1.100***
                             [0.008]          [0.008]                       [0.015]    [0.015]
     Location FE (HQ)           Y               Y              Y               Y         Y              Y
     FF49 FE                                    Y              Y                         Y              Y
     Year FE                                                   Y                                        Y
     Number of CEOs          1,575            1,575           1,575          1,575      1,575         1,575
     Observations            49,556           49,556         49,556          49,556    49,556         49,556
                                        Panel B: Business Combination Laws and CEO Pay
     Dependent Variable: ln(Payi,t )
                                        (1)                            (2)                      (3)
     I(BC)                            0.086                          0.087*                    0.041
                                     [0.058]                         [0.047]                  [0.051]
     Age Controls                        Y                             Y                         Y
     Tenure Controls                                                   Y                         Y
     Firm Characteristics                                              Y                         Y
     Location FE (HQ)                    Y                             Y
     FF49 FE                             Y                             Y
     Year FE                             Y                             Y                         Y
     Firm FE                                                                                     Y
     Number of CEOs                    1,553                         1,553                    1,553
     Observations                      17,719                        17,719                   17,719
   a Panel A shows hazard ratios estimated from a Cox (1972) proportional hazards model. The
dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if the CEO leaves their position in a given year.
Panel B shows OLS estimates. The dependent variable is the logarithm of a CEO's total pay in a
given year. In column (1), "Age Controls" includes linear age, and in columns (2) and (3) "Age
Controls" includes linear and quadratic age. "Tenure Controls" includes linear and quadratic tenure.
"Firm Characteristics" includes logarithms of asset size and the number of employees. Standard
errors, clustered at the state-of-incorporation level, are shown in brackets. *, **, and *** denote
significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                        43
                                            TABLE VI
                           I NDUSTRY D ISTRESS AND M ORTALITYa

       Dependent Variable: Deathi,t
                                         (1)                 (2)                  (3)
       Industry Distress              1.189***            1.190**              1.179**
                                       [0.076]             [0.083]              [0.084]
       Age                            1.115***            1.124***             1.125***
                                       [0.006]             [0.007]              [0.007]
       Year                            1.010*               1.007
                                       [0.006]             [0.006]
       BC Exposure Control                Y                   Y                    Y
       Location FE (HQ)                   Y                   Y                    Y
       FF49 FE                                                Y                    Y
       Year FE                                                                     Y
       Number of CEOs                   1,605                1,605               1,605
       Observations                    50,530               50,530              50,530

   a Thistable shows hazard ratios estimated from a Cox (1972) proportional hazards model. The
dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if the CEO dies in a given year. The main
independent variable Industry Distress is an indicator of a CEO's exposure to industry distress
shocks. All variables are defined in Appendix A. Standard errors, clustered at the industry level, are
shown in brackets. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                 44
                                     TABLE VII
                 S UMMARY S TATISTICS FOR A PPARENT AGING A NALYSISa
                                                         Panel A: CEO Characteristics
                                         N         Mean         SD         P10       P50        P90
 Biological Age in 2006                  463       55.54        6.55       47        56         63
 Industry Distress (2007-2008)           463       0.65         0.48       0         1          1
 Industry Distress (Pre-2006)            463       0.54         1.13       0         0          2
 Tenure (Pre-2006)                       463       8.00         7.73       2         6          17
 No. of Pictures per CEO                 463       7.35         4.51       3         6          13
                                                         Panel B: Industry Distribution
 Industry (Number of CEOs)               Manufacturing (180)        Finance, Insur, Real Estate (65)
                                             Retail (53)           Services (44)         Others (50)
                                           Trans.; Commns.; Elec., Gas, and Sanitary Services (71)
    a Summary  statistics of CEOs with at least two pictures from different times during their tenure.
Industry Distress during 2007-2008 is an indicator for distress exposure during these years. Industry
Distress pre-2006 counts the number of industry distress experiences prior to 2006.



                                          TABLE VIII
                             I NDUSTRY D ISTRESS AND CEO AGINGa
        Dependent Variable: Apparent Agei, j,t
                                                  (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)
        Industry Distress × 1{t >2006}           0.948*      0.978**
                                                [0.484]      [0.478]
        Industry Distress × 1{2006<t <2012}                                0.790        0.799
                                                                          [0.533]      [0.525]
        Industry Distress × 1{t 2012}                                    1.178**      1.193**
                                                                          [0.547]      [0.538]
        Biological Age                         0.915***      0.910***    0.943***     0.938***
                                                [0.092]       [0.092]     [0.094]      [0.093]
        CEO FE                                    Y             Y           Y            Y
        Year FE                                   Y             Y           Y            Y
        Picture Controls                                        Y                        Y
        Number of CEOs                            463          463         463           463
        Observations                             3,086        3,086       3,086         3,086
   a This table shows OLS estimates of the effect of industry distress exposure during the Great
Recession on CEO apparent age. We winsorize the estimated apparent age by first winsorizing the
top and bottom 0.5% of the difference between apparent and biological age and then adding this
winsorized difference to the biological age. We weight observations by the inverse of the number of
pictures per CEO. Standard errors, clustered at the industry level, are shown in brackets. *, **, and
*** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.



                                                        45
                               ONLINE APPENDIX
                        APPENDIX A VARIABLE DEFINITIONS

Variable Name          Definition
Birth Year             CEO's year of birth
Dead (by Oct. 2017)    Indicator for whether a CEO has passed away by October 1st, 2017
Year of Death          CEO's year of death, calculated up to monthly level (e.g. 2010.5 for a person
                       who dies on 6/30/2010)
Age Taking Office      CEO's age when appointed as CEO
Year Taking Office     Year in which a CEO is appointed
Agei,t                 CEO i's age in year t
Tenurei,t              CEO i's cumulative tenure (in years) at time t
I (BCi,t )             Indicator equal to 1 if CEO i is insulated by a BC law in year t ; remains at 1 in
                       all subsequent years  > t , including after CEO departure.
BCi,t                  CEO i's cumulative exposure to a BC law during tenure up to time t (in years);
                       remains constant after CEO departure.
    (min - p50)
BCi,t                  CEO i's below-median (4.4 years) cumulative BC law exposure during tenure
                       up to time t (in years); remains constant after CEO departure.
    ( p51- max)
BCi,t                  CEO i's above-median (4.4 years) cumulative BC law exposure during tenure
                       up to time t (in years); remains constant after CEO departure.
I (FLi,t )             Indicator equal to 1 if CEO i is insulated by the first-time enactment of a 2nd
                       generation anti-takeover law (FL) in year t ; constant after CEO departure.
FLi,t                  CEO i's cumulative exposure to the first-time enactment of a 2nd generation
                       anti-takeover law (FL) during tenure up to time t (in years); constant after
                       CEO departure.
Industry Distressi,t   Indicator equal to 1 if CEO i is exposed to an industry shock by year t . Industry
                       shock is defined as median two-year stock return (forward-looking) of firms in
                       the same industry below -30%. As in Babina (2020), we (i) use SIC3 industry
                       classes, (ii) restrict to single-segment CRSP/Compustat firms, i. e., drop firms
                       with multiple segments in the Compustat Business Segment Database (CBSD),
                       (iii) drop firms if the reported single-segment sales differ from those in
                       Compustat by more than 5%, (iv) restrict to firms with sales of at least $20m,
                       and (v) exclude industry-years with fewer than four firms. We use firms' modal
                       SIC across CRSP, Compustat, and CBSD, and the latter in case of a tie.
Yeari,t                Year of a subspell; used in hazard models when linearly controlling for time.
Payi,t                 CEO i's total pay in year t (from Gibbons and Murphy 1992)
Assets j,t             Firm j's total assets in year t (from Compustat); missing data is interpolated.
Employees j,t          Firm j's total number of employees in year t (from Compustat); missing data is
                       interpolated.


                                               46
            APPENDIX B CORPORATE MONITORING: ROBUSTNESS TESTS

This appendix presents the robustness tests of the relation between anti-takeover laws and
CEOs' life expectancy referenced in Section 3.5.

CEO Cohorts

We implement a series of robustness tests addressing possible cohort effects, in light of
the fact that BC laws disproportionately protected more recent CEOs who are younger on
average. First, Panel A of Appendix-Table B.2 directly includes CEO birth-year fixed effects.
Coefficients and levels of significance are very similar in all specifications, whether using
the BC indicator, linear, or non-linear BC variables. Next, Panel B of Appendix-Table B.2
reverts to year fixed effects, but allows the effect of age on mortality to be cohort-specific:
we sort CEOs into quintiles based on birth year, and allow for separate age estimates. While
there are small differences in age effects across CEO cohorts, the three BC law variables
are barely affected and remain statistically and economically significant. We also consider
CEO cohorts based on the year of their appointment to the top position. In Panel C of
Appendix-Table B.2, we augment the main models with appointment-year fixed effects.
The BC law estimates are virtually unaffected. Finally, we consider estimation subsamples
with later start years or earlier end years. In Appendix-Figure B.2, we move forward the
starting year of the sample one year at a time. The results are stable across the different
sample year cutoffs. We then vary the censoring date for defining the death or alive status
of the CEOs to address the concern that CEOs with information in more recent years may
have characteristics that are correlated with longevity. Appendix-Figure B.3 shows that the
estimated coefficients for both I (BC) and BC remain stable with different censoring years.

Additional CEO and Firm Controls

Panel A of Appendix-Table B.3 contains the results when we include CEO pay (from
Gibbons and Murphy 1992) and firm size (assets and employees from CRSP and Compustat)
as additional control variables. Our main specification excludes these variables as they may
themselves be affected by the passage of the BC laws.29 We linearly interpolate any missing
data. (Nonetheless, the number of observations decreases, as there are observations where
data on one of the three additional controls is missing in all years.) Two findings emerge.
First, the coefficients on the BC law exposure variables are very similar to those in Table III
  29   See Section 3.6 for how CEO pay responds to BC laws.

                                                   47
and remain significant at 1%. Second, in none of the specifications, any of the additional
control variables is significant. This might reflect endogenous selection on observables. The
(non-)results on pay and size are also in line with the notion that income in the very upper
tail of the distribution is no longer correlated with health outcomes (Chetty et al. 2016).
     As another variation in firm-level controls, we use fixed effects for state of incorporation
instead of headquarters state. The results (in Panel B of Appendix-Table B.3) are barely
affected.

First-Time Enactment of Second-Generation Anti-Takeover Laws

Our main analysis exploits the enactment of BC laws as they have been shown to create sub-
stantial conflicts of interest between managers and shareholders (Bertrand and Mullainathan
2003, Gormley and Matsa 2016). Some researchers have questioned whether BC laws were
the most important legal development impacting corporate governance at the time (see the
discussion in Cain et al. (2017) and Karpoff and Wittry (2018)). Here, we replicate our
analyses for other anti-takeover legislation from the 1980s that induced plausibly exogenous
variation in corporate monitoring intensity.
    In addition to BC laws, four other types of anti-takeover laws were passed by individual
states since the 1980s: (1) Control Share Acquisition laws prohibited acquirers of large
equity stakes from using their voting rights, making it more difficult for hostile acquirers to
gain control. (2) Fair Price laws required acquirers to pay a fair price for shares acquired
in a takeover attempt. Fair could mean, for example, the highest price paid by the acquirer
for shares of the target within the last 24 months (cf. Cheng, Nagar, and Rajan 2004). (3)
Directors' Duties laws extended the board members' duties to incorporate the interests of
non-investor stakeholders, even if not necessarily maximizing shareholder value. (4) Poison
Pill laws guaranteed that the firms had the right to use poison pill takeover defenses. We
refer to the first of these five laws (including BC laws) passed by a state as the First Law (FL).
Anti-takeover law exposure is similar when jointly looking at all five second-generation
laws. For example, conditional on any FL exposure, the median CEO experiences 4.45
years, close to the 4.41 years in the BC-based analysis.
    Appendix-Figure B.1 visualizes the FL enactment by states over time.
    Appendix-Table B.4 re-estimates Table III using FL enactment as identifying variation.
We limit the sample to the 1,510 CEOs who are appointed in years prior to the FL enactment
of any of the five second-generation anti-takeover laws. Consistent with our main findings,
we estimate a significant increase in longevity for CEOs under less stringent governance

                                               48
regimes. The estimated effect sizes are very similar to our main specification using BC laws.
For example, for the specifications in Panel A based on cumulative law exposure, the hazard
ratios range from 0.955 to 0.957, compared to 0.955-0.959 in Table III. As Panel B shows,
the FL results are also robust to including the additional CEO and firm level controls from
Panel A of Appendix-Table B.3.

Institutional and Legal Context of the Anti-Takeover Laws

Karpoff and Wittry (2018) propose several robustness tests to address endogenous firm
responses to anti-takeover laws, which we implement in Appendix-Table B.5. For all sample
restrictions, we follow the procedure suggested in Karpoff and Wittry (2018): In Panel A,
we remove the 46 firms identified by these authors as having lobbied for the passage of
the second-generation laws. In Panel B, we use Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS)
Governance (formerly, RiskMetrics) data from 1990 to 2017 to identify firms that opted
out of coverage by the laws and exclude them from the analysis. In Panel C, we exclude
firm-years in which firms had adopted firm-level anti-takeover defenses. We identify firms
with firm-level defenses combining ISS data with data provided to us by Cremers and Ferrell
(2014), which extends the Gompers et al. (2003) G-index backwards to 1977-1989. We back
out whether firms used firm-level defenses in 1977-1989 by "subtracting" the state-wide
laws from the G-index, which combines firm- and state-level defenses. Firm-level defenses
include Golden Parachutes and Cumulative Voting (cf. Gompers et al. (2003) for details).
    In all subsamples, the hazard ratio on BC exposure remains significant at 1%, both when
using the indicator and the count variable for BC experience. In addition, the hazard ratio
estimates are nearly unchanged, ranging from 0.752 (Panel A, column 1) to 0.806 (Panel B,
column 3) for the indicator version, and from 0.954 (Panel C, column 4) to 0.960 (Panel A,
column 3; Panel B, columns 5 and 6) for the count version.
    Karpoff and Wittry (2018) also point to possible confounding effects of first-generation
anti-takeover laws. They raise the concern that firms without BC exposure might experience
lenient governance before 1982 because first-generation anti-takeover laws effectively lost
their effect only starting from June 1982 after the Edgar v. MITE ruling.
    We address this concern in Appendix-Table B.6 through three cuts of the data. In
subsample A, we drop all CEO-years prior to 1982, i. e., we restrict the sample to years from
1982 onward (albeit including the post-1982 years for CEOs who stepped down prior to
1982). In subsample B, we drop all CEOs who stepped down prior to 1982, i. e., we restrict


                                             49
the sample to CEOs who served during the "post-first-law period" (including CEO-years
prior to 1982). Note that in terms of number of CEOs remaining, subsample B is more
restrictive than subsample A. In subsample C, we restrict the sample to CEOs who began
their tenure in or after 1982, i. e., subsample C is a subset of subsample B. In all subsamples,
we continue to estimate hazard ratios substantially below one for both the indicator and
cumulative BC exposure variables, similar in size to those in the main table. The coefficients
remain significant at 1% in subsamples A and B as well as in the most restrictive subsample
C when using the indicator BC variable. In the latter sample, we lose statistical power when
using the cumulative BC exposure (standard errors quintuple), though the point estimate
remains similar.
    Finally, in a last set of robustness checks, we move beyond the tests suggested in
Karpoff and Wittry (2018) and create sub-samples based on firms' state of incorporation and
industry affiliation, inspired by similar robustness checks in Giroud and Mueller (2010) and
Gormley and Matsa (2016). In Appendix-Table B.7, we exclude firms that are incorporated
in Delaware or in New York, the two most common states of incorporation in our sample
(Panel A); firms in the Banking industry (Panel B); or firms in the Utilities industry (Panel
C). In all three panels, the hazard ratio estimates on binary and cumulative BC exposure are
barely affected by these data cuts.

Linear Probability Model

To address any potential concerns about the hazard model, we also estimate a linear proba-
bility model, using the same 1,605 CEOs as in the hazard analysis:
                       Yi, j,k,m,t = 0 + 1 Xi +  j + k + m + t + i, j,k,m,t

where i represents a CEO, j represents a headquarters state, k represents an industry, m
represents tenure-start age, and t either represents tenure-start year or birth year. The
dependent variable Yi, j,k,m,t is an indicator variable that takes value one if the CEO has died
by October 1st, 2017. The main independent variable of interest, Xi , is an indicator variable
that takes value one if the CEO has ever been protected by a BC law and zero otherwise.
    The results are shown in Appendix-Table B.8. In column (1), we linearly control for
tenure-start age, and also include tenure-start year, industry, and headquarters-state fixed
effects.30 In column (2), we add tenure-start age fixed effects instead of the linear term.

  30Since this analysis no longer uses CEO-year data, the industry classification is from the last year of a
CEO's tenure.

                                                    50
In column (3), we include birth-year fixed effects instead of tenure start-year fixed effects.
All specifications are constructed to map closely to the specifications in the hazard model
analysis. In all three columns, the estimated coefficients on the BC experience indicator are
similar, ranging from -0.063 to -0.069, statistically significant at conventional levels. To
interpret the economic magnitude of these estimates, we compare them to the coefficient on
the linear age term in column (1): the effect of being protected by BC laws corresponds to
that of assuming the CEO position when two and a half years younger (0.063/0.027 = 2.56).
Hence, the age-based effect size comparisons are very close to those estimated in the hazard
model.




A PPENDIX -F IGURE B.1. --First-time introduction of second-generation anti-takeover laws over
time. Notes: This figure visualizes the distribution of first-time enactments of any of the five most
common second-generation anti-takeover laws over time, i. e., business combination (BC), fair price
(FP), control share acquisition (CSA), poison pills (PP), and directors' duties (DD) laws. The graph
omits the states of Alaska and Hawaii. Alaska did not adopt any second-generation anti-takeover
laws. Hawaii adopted a CSA law on 4/23/1985, and DD and PP laws on 6/7/1988.




                                                 51
A PPENDIX -F IGURE B.2.--Estimated effect of the BC law exposure when varying the sample cutoff
year. Notes: This figure shows the estimated coefficients on the BC indicator variable I (BC) when
using the specification from Table III, column 3, but varying the sample. In the main sample, CEOs
end their tenure in or later than 1975. We vary this cutoff year from 1975 to 1985, when the first BC
law ever was passed. The blue (dark) bars are the number of CEOs in the sample. When the cutoff
year is 1975 (our main sample), the number is 1,605 and the estimated coefficient is the same as
shown in Table III, Column (3).




A PPENDIX -F IGURE B.3.--Estimated effect of the BC law exposure when varying the censoring
year. Notes: This figure shows the estimated coefficients on the BC indicator variable I (BC) and
the cumulative BC variable BC when using the specifications from Table III, columns 3 and 6, but
varying the censoring date defining death or alive status. In the main analysis, the cutoff date is Oct. 1,
2017, i. e., CEOs who did not pass away before this date are treated as censored. The alternative
censoring dates are Dec. 31, 2010; Dec. 31, 2011; ...; Dec. 31, 2016; and Oct. 1, 2017. The number
of CEOs in the sample remains unchanged when varying the cutoff, i.e. N = 1, 605.



                                                   52
A PPENDIX -F IGURE B.4. --Proportion of CEOs stepping down by age. Notes: This figure depicts
the proportion of CEOs stepping down at each age, split by whether or not a CEO was exposed to a
business combination (BC) law. The vertical dashed line indicates age 65.




                                              53
                                                                    APPENDIX-TABLE B.1
                                                         A DDITIONAL S UMMARY S TATISTICSa
                                                      Panel A: Summary Statistics for Different CEO Sub-Groups


                                   No BC Exposure (N =980)                    Below-Median BC Exposure (N =320)         Above-Median BC Exposure (N =305)
                           Mean        SD     P10       P50         P90     Mean      SD       P10     P50        P90   Mean    SD     P10     P50     P90
      Birth Year           1922       8.48    1913     1921     1934        1927      6.90    1921     1926    1938     1933    6.51   1926    1933    1942
      Dead (by 10/2017)    0.82        0.38     0        1         1        0.68      0.47      0        1       1      0.38    0.49     0        0      1
      Year of Death        2002       10.24   1987     2003     2015        2008      8.05   1994.08   2010    2016     2009    7.05   1997    2012    2017
      Age at Death         82.30      10.10   68.00    83.83    94.00       81.89     9.52    68.00    84.17   92.42    79.64   9.13   66.83   81.17   90.42
      Age Tak. Office      52.88       6.69    44        53       61        51.47     6.94     42        52      60     47.79   6.34     40      48     56
      Year Tak. Office     1975        7.08   1966     1974     1984        1979      6.60    1971     1980    1986     1981    5.89   1972    1982    1987
      Tenure                8.70       5.72     2       7.50      16        10.83     6.48      4       9.04   20.08    16.54   7.21    8.42   15.08   27.33
      BC                    0.00       0.00     0         0      0.00        1.93     1.24     0.5      1.86    3.82     9.61   4.52    5.41    8.33   14.74
54




                                                      Panel B: Most Common Industries and Incorporation States

                                                              All         No BC          p50 BC         > p50 BC
      Top 5 FF49 Industries                               Banking         Banking        Banking         Banking
                                                          Utilities       Utilities      Utilities       Utilities
                                                           Retail          Retail         Chem.           Retail
                                                           Petrol.         Trans.         Retail          Insur.
                                                           Trans.          Petrol.        Insur.          Petrol.

      Top 3 States of Incorporation                           DE            DE              DE               DE
                                                              NY            NY              NY               NY
                                                              OH            OH             NJ/OH             PA
        a This table presents additional summary statistics for our main sample covering 1,605 CEOs, with splits based on CEOs' exposure to BC laws. All
     variables are defined in Appendix A.
                                                       APPENDIX-TABLE B.2
                                           B USINESS C OMBINATION L AWS AND M ORTALITY ­
              CEO B IRTH -Y EAR F IXED E FFECTS , AGE -B Y-C OHORT C ONTROLS , AND A PPOINTMENT-Y EAR F IXED E FFECTSa
      Dependent Variable: Deathi,t
                                               (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)          (8)          (9)
                                                 Panel A: Birth Year FE             Panel B: Age-By-Cohort Controls           Panel C: Appointment Year FE
      I(BC)                                 0.772**                                  0.794**                                  0.774**
                                            [0.089]                                  [0.086]                                  [0.077]
      BC                                                0.958***                                 0.965***                                 0.956**
                                                         [0.007]                                  [0.006]                                 [0.006]
      BC(min - p50)                                                  0.918**                                  0.923**                                 0.910**
                                                                      [0.033]                                 [0.029]                                  [0.026]
      BC( p51- max)                                                    0.989                                   0.997                                    0.990
                                                                      [0.018]                                 [0.018]                                  [0.017]
      Age                                  1.130***     1.128***     1.129***                                                1.127***     1.124***    1.123***
                                            [0.006]      [0.005]      [0.006]                                                 [0.005]      [0.006]     [0.005]
      Age × Birth Cohort 1 (oldest)                                                 1.095***     1.092***    1.093***
                                                                                     [0.011]      [0.011]     [0.011]
      Age × Birth Cohort 2                                                          1.094***     1.090***    1.091***
55




                                                                                     [0.011]      [0.010]     [0.011]
      Age × Birth Cohort 3                                                          1.092***     1.088***    1.089***
                                                                                     [0.012]      [0.011]     [0.012]
      Age × Birth Cohort 4                                                          1.088***     1.085***    1.086***
                                                                                     [0.014]      [0.013]     [0.013]
      Age × Birth Cohort 5 (youngest)                                               1.082***     1.079***    1.081***
                                                                                     [0.014]      [0.013]     [0.013]
      Location FE (HQ)                         Y            Y           Y               Y            Y           Y               Y            Y           Y
      FF49 FE                                  Y            Y           Y               Y            Y           Y               Y            Y           Y
      Year FE                                                                           Y            Y           Y               Y            Y           Y
      Birth Year FE                            Y            Y           Y
      CEO Appointment Year FE                                                                                                    Y            Y           Y
      Number of CEOs                         1,605       1,605        1,605          1,605        1,605        1,605          1,605        1,605        1,605
      Observations                           50,530      50,530       50,530         50,530       50,530       50,530         50,530       50,530       50,530
        a Columns  (1), (4), and (7) show re-estimates of the regressions from column (3) of Table III. Columns (2), (5), and (8) show re-estimates of the
     regressions from column (6) of Table III, and column (3), (6), and (9) show re-estimates of the regression from column (3) of Table IV. Regressions in
     Panel A include birth-year fixed effects instead of year fixed effects. Regressions in Panel B allow for birth cohort-specific age effects. Birth cohorts are
     defined by sorting CEOs into quintiles by birth year. Regressions in Panel C add CEO appointment year fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the
     state-of-incorporation level, are shown in brackets. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
                               APPENDIX-TABLE B.3
                   B USINESS C OMBINATION L AWS AND M ORTALITY ­
         A DDITIONAL C ONTROLS AND S TATE - OF -I NCORPORATION F IXED E FFECTSa
 Dependent Variable: Deathi,t
                               (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                  Panel A: Additional Controls
 I(BC)                     0.770***     0.786***     0.799***
                            [0.056]      [0.068]      [0.066]
 BC                                                               0.956***     0.961***     0.962***
                                                                   [0.007]      [0.007]      [0.007]
 ln(Pay)                     0.986        1.008          1.003      0.977        0.988        0.985
                            [0.035]      [0.040]        [0.040]    [0.043]      [0.048]      [0.048]
 ln(Assets)                  1.015        0.968          0.960      1.023        0.986        0.979
                            [0.026]      [0.041]        [0.040]    [0.024]      [0.036]      [0.034]
 ln(Employees)               0.990        1.017          1.023      0.988        1.008        1.012
                            [0.021]      [0.039]        [0.038]    [0.021]      [0.037]      [0.038]
 Location FE (HQ)              Y            Y             Y           Y            Y            Y
 Number of CEOs             1,503        1,503          1,503      1,503         1,503       1,503
 Observations               49,052       49,052         49,052     49,052        49,052      49,052
                                        Panel B: State-of-Incorporation Fixed Effects
 I(BC)                     0.767***     0.760***     0.768***
                            [0.064]      [0.067]      [0.066]
 BC                                                               0.953***     0.955***     0.956***
                                                                   [0.007]      [0.007]      [0.007]
 Location FE (Incorp.)         Y            Y             Y           Y            Y            Y
 Number of CEOs             1,605        1,605          1,605      1,605         1,605       1,605
 Observations               50,530       50,530         50,530     50,530        50,530      50,530
 Year (Linear Control)         Y            Y                         Y            Y
 Age (Linear Control)          Y            Y             Y           Y            Y            Y
 FF49 FE                                    Y             Y                        Y            Y
 Year FE                                                  Y                                     Y
      a Panel A reports hazard ratios estimated as in Table III, with additional controls for CEO
pay, assets, and employees. Panel B reports hazard ratios estimated as in Table III, but including
state-of-incorporation fixed effects instead of state-of-headquarters fixed effects. Controls and fixed
effects (in addition to location fixed effects based on state-of-headquarters or state-of-incorporation)
for both panels are indicated at the bottom of the table. All variables are defined in Appendix A.
Standard errors, clustered at the state-of-incorporation level, are shown in brackets. *, **, and ***
denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                   56
                                APPENDIX-TABLE B.4
      F IRST-T IME S ECOND -G ENERATION A NTI -TAKEOVER L AWS AND M ORTALITYa
 Dependent Variable: Deathi,t
                              (1)          (2)            (3)       (4)           (5)        (6)
                                                   Panel A: Baseline Results
 I(FL)                     0.802***    0.802***      0.807***
                            [0.053]     [0.061]       [0.061]
 FL                                                               0.955***     0.957***   0.957***
                                                                   [0.006]      [0.006]    [0.006]
 Number of CEOs             1,510        1,510          1,510      1,510         1,510     1,510
 Observations               47,994       47,994         47,994     47,994        47,994    47,994
                                                  Panel B: Additional Controls
 I(FL)                     0.827***     0.844**       0.855**
                            [0.051]     [0.059]       [0.058]
 FL                                                               0.957***     0.961***   0.962***
                                                                   [0.008]      [0.007]    [0.008]
 ln(Pay)                     0.977       1.005           1.000      0.984        1.001      0.998
                            [0.036]     [0.037]         [0.037]    [0.042]      [0.045]    [0.045]
 ln(Assets)                  1.014       0.944          0.937*      1.026        0.976      0.970
                            [0.026]     [0.035]         [0.033]    [0.025]      [0.032]    [0.031]
 ln(Employees)               0.995       1.045           1.050      0.987        1.019      1.022
                            [0.020]     [0.036]         [0.036]    [0.019]      [0.036]    [0.037]
 Number of CEOs             1,464        1,464          1,464      1,464         1,464     1,464
 Observations               46,660       46,660         46,660     46,660        46,660    46,660
 Year (Linear Control)         Y           Y                         Y             Y
 Age (Linear Control)          Y           Y              Y          Y             Y          Y
 Location FE (HQ)              Y           Y              Y          Y             Y          Y
 FF49 FE                                   Y              Y                        Y          Y
 Year FE                                                  Y                                   Y
    a Thistable reports hazard ratios estimated as in Table III, but using the first-time introduction
of any of the five most common second-generation anti-takeover laws as measure of lenient
governance. The sample is restricted to CEOs appointed prior to the introduction of the anti-
takeover law(s). Panel B adds additional controls for CEO pay, assets, and employees. Controls
and fixed effects for both panels are indicated at the bottom of the table. All variables are defined
in Appendix A. Standard errors, clustered at the state-of-incorporation level, are shown in brackets.
*, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                   57
                                      APPENDIX-TABLE B.5
      E XCLUDING L OBBYING F IRMS , O PT-O UT F IRMS , AND F IRM -Y EARS WITH
                           F IRM -L EVEL D EFENSESa
 Dependent Variable: Deathi,t
                              (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                             Panel A: Excluding Lobbying Firms
 I(BC)                     0.752***     0.756***     0.762***
                            [0.067]      [0.069]      [0.069]
 BC                                                               0.955***     0.958***     0.959***
                                                                   [0.006]      [0.007]      [0.007]
 Number of CEOs              1,530        1,530         1,530      1,530         1,530        1,530
 Observations               48,106       48,106         48,106     48,106        48,106       48,106
                                                Panel B: Excluding Opt-out Firms
 I(BC)                     0.784***     0.797***     0.806***
                            [0.064]      [0.065]      [0.064]
 BC                                                               0.956***     0.960***     0.960***
                                                                   [0.006]      [0.006]      [0.006]
 Number of CEOs              1,532        1,532         1,532      1,532         1,532        1,532
 Observations               48,180       48,180         48,180     48,180        48,180       48,180
                                           Panel C: Excluding Firm-level Defenses
 I(BC)                     0.762***     0.765***     0.774***
                            [0.060]      [0.066]      [0.067]
 BC                                                               0.954***     0.957***     0.957***
                                                                   [0.005]      [0.005]      [0.005]
 Number of CEOs              1,599        1,599         1,599      1,599         1,599        1,599
 Observations               43,417       43,417         43,417     43,417        43,417       43,417
 Year (Linear Control)         Y            Y                         Y            Y
 Age (Linear Control)          Y            Y             Y           Y            Y            Y
 Location FE (HQ)              Y            Y             Y           Y            Y            Y
 FF49 FE                                    Y             Y                        Y            Y
 Year FE                                                  Y                                     Y
   a This table reports hazard ratios estimated as in Table III, but with additional sample restrictions.

In Panel A, we exclude 46 firms that Karpoff and Wittry (2018) identify as firms that lobbied
for the enactment of the second-generation anti-takeover laws. In Panel B, we exclude 61 firms
that opted out of the second-generation anti-takeover laws, based on data from the Institutional
Shareholder Services (ISS) Governance database. In Panel C, we exclude firm-years in which firms
used firm-level defenses as identified from the the ISS data and data from Cremers and Ferrell
(2014). Controls and fixed effects for all three panels are indicated at the bottom of the table.
All variables are defined in Appendix A. Standard errors, clustered at the state-of-incorporation
level, are shown in brackets. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level,
respectively.

                                                   58
                                      APPENDIX-TABLE B.6
    R ESTRICTION TO Y EARS A FTER            THE   E ND OF THE F IRST-G ENERATION L AWSa
 Dependent Variable: Deathi,t
                            (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)
                              Subsample A:                 Subsample B:             Subsample C:
                             Drop CEO-years             Drop CEOs stepping          CEOs starting
                                pre-1982                  down pre-1982            in or after 1982


 I(BC)                   0.766***                       0.803***                0.659***
                         [0.063]                         [0.059]                 [0.059]
 BC                                     0.957***                   0.960***                    0.965
                                         [0.005]                    [0.006]                   [0.027]
 Age                    1.124***        1.122***        1.128***   1.124***     1.132***     1.125***
                         [0.005]         [0.006]         [0.006]    [0.006]      [0.015]      [0.020]

 Location FE (HQ)           Y               Y              Y           Y            Y            Y
 FF49 FE                    Y               Y              Y           Y            Y            Y
 Year FE                    Y               Y              Y           Y            Y            Y
 Number of CEOs           1,573          1,573           1,231       1,231        477          477
 Observations             40,834         40,834          39,623      39,623      13,562       13,562
    a This table re-estimates columns (3) and (6) of Table III with the sample restricted to the period
when the first-generation anti-takeover laws lost their effect (in June 1982 after the Edgar v. MITE
ruling). In subsample A, we drop all CEO-years prior to 1982, i. e., we restrict the sample to years
from 1982 onward (albeit including the post-1982 years for CEOs who stepped down prior to 1982).
In subsample B, we drop all CEOs who stepped down prior to 1982, i. e., we restrict the sample
to CEOs who served during the "post-first-law period" (including CEO-years prior to 1982). Note
that in terms of number of CEOs remaining, subsample B is more restrictive than subsample A. In
subsample C, we restrict the sample to CEOs who began their tenure in or after 1982, i. e., subsample
C is a subset of subsample B. All variables are defined in Appendix A. Standard errors, clustered at
the state-of-incorporation level, are shown in brackets. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                   59
                                      APPENDIX-TABLE B.7
       E XCLUDING DE OR NY I NCORPORATED , BANKING , OR U TILITY F IRMSa
 Dependent Variable: Deathi,t
                               (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)
                                                Panel A: Excluding DE/NY Firms
 I(BC)                     0.707***     0.679***       0.688***
                            [0.079]      [0.085]        [0.086]
 BC                                                                0.958***     0.958**      0.962**
                                                                    [0.016]     [0.019]      [0.019]
 Number of CEOs               738          738             738       738          738          738
 Observations                22,103       22,103          22,103    22,103       22,103       22,103
                                              Panel B: Excluding Banking Firms
 I(BC)                     0.727***     0.717***       0.726***
                            [0.056]      [0.060]        [0.060]
 BC                                                                0.942***    0.944***     0.945***
                                                                    [0.007]     [0.007]      [0.007]
 Number of CEOs               1,328        1,328          1,328     1,328        1,328        1,328
 Observations                42,322       42,322          42,322    42,322       42,322       42,322
                                                  Panel C: Excluding Utility Firms
 I(BC)                     0.777***     0.785***       0.794***
                            [0.056]      [0.061]        [0.061]
 BC                                                                0.957***    0.961***     0.962***
                                                                    [0.005]     [0.004]      [0.005]
 Number of CEOs               1,422        1,422          1,422     1,422        1,422        1,422
 Observations                45,017       45,017          45,017    45,017       45,017       45,017
 Year (Linear Control)         Y            Y                          Y             Y
 Age (Linear Control)          Y            Y               Y          Y             Y           Y
 Location FE (HQ)              Y            Y               Y          Y             Y           Y
 FF49 FE                                    Y               Y                        Y           Y
 Year FE                                                    Y                                    Y
    a This table reports hazard ratios estimated as in Table III with the sample restricted by states of
incorporation or industries. In Panel A, we exclude firms that are incorporated in Delaware or New
York (the two most common states of incorporation in our sample, see Table I). In Panel B, we
exclude firms that are classified as "Banking" firms in the Fama-French 49 industry classification.
In Panel C, we exclude firms that are classified as "Utilities" firms in the Fama-French 49 industry
classification. Controls and fixed effects for all three panels are indicated at the bottom of the table.
All variables are defined in Appendix A. Standard errors, clustered at the state-of-incorporation
level, are shown in brackets. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level,
respectively.




                                                     60
                             APPENDIX-TABLE B.8
             L INEAR P ROBABILITY M ODEL AT THE CEO L EVELa
 Dependent Variable: Deathi
                                 (1)                  (2)                (3)
 BC Treatment                 -0.069***            -0.068**            -0.063*
                                [0.024]             [0.026]             [0.031]
 Tenure Start Age             0.027***
                                [0.002]
 Location FE (HQ)                Y                    Y                   Y
 FF49 FE                         Y                    Y                   Y
 Tenure Start Year FE            Y                    Y
 Tenure Start Age FE                                  Y                   Y
 Birth Year FE                                                            Y
 Observations                   1,605               1,605               1,605
    a This table reports regression results of a linear probability model at the CEO
level instead of a hazard model. Each observation represents one CEO in our dataset.
The dependent variable is an indicator that is one if the CEO passed away by October
1st, 2017, and zero otherwise. "BC Treatment" is an indicator variable that is one
if the CEO has ever been protected by a BC law and zero otherwise. Fixed effects
are indicated at the bottom of the table. Standard errors, clustered at the state-of-
incorporation level, are shown in brackets. *, **, and *** denote significance at the
10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                          61
    APPENDIX C INDUSTRY-WIDE DISTRESS SHOCKS: ROBUSTNESS TESTS

This appendix contains all robustness figures and tables on industry-wide distress shocks.




A PPENDIX -F IGURE C.1.--Average number of pictures per CEO across years. Notes: This figure
depicts the average number of pictures per CEO we are able to collect each year for the group of
CEOs that experienced industry shocks during 2007-2008 and the group that did not. The two black
vertical lines indicate the years 2006 and 2008.




                                              62
                                     APPENDIX-TABLE C.1
                           I NDUSTRY D ISTRESS AND M ORTALITY ­
                             A DDITIONAL C ONTROLS AND CEO Sa
 Dependent Variable: Deathi,t
                             (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)
                            Panel A: Additional Controls               Panel B: Additional CEOs


 Industry Distress       1.188***     1.219***    1.207***         1.130**     1.147**     1.138**
                          [0.076]      [0.085]     [0.085]          [0.065]     [0.065]     [0.065]
 Age                     1.115***     1.125***    1.125***         1.118***    1.125***    1.126***
                          [0.006]      [0.006]     [0.006]          [0.006]     [0.007]     [0.007]
 Year                      1.008        1.008                        1.009       1.007
                          [0.006]      [0.007]                      [0.006]     [0.006]
 ln(Pay)                   0.987        1.020       1.015
                          [0.036]      [0.045]     [0.045]
 ln(Assets)                1.010        0.950       0.944
                          [0.032]      [0.048]     [0.048]
 ln(Employees)             0.990        1.028       1.033
                          [0.035]      [0.057]     [0.058]
 BC Exposure Control         Y            Y           Y                Y           Y           Y
 Location FE (HQ)            Y            Y           Y                Y           Y           Y
 FF49 FE                                  Y           Y                            Y           Y
 Year FE                                              Y                                        Y
 Number of CEOs            1,553       1,553       1,553            1,900        1,900       1,900
 Observations              49,052      49,052      49,052           58,034       58,034      58,034
   a Panel A reports hazard ratios estimated as in Table VI but with additional controls for CEO pay,
assets, and employees. Panel B reports hazard ratios estimated as in Table VI but using an extended
sample that includes CEOs who were appointed after the passage of anti-takeover laws. All variables
are defined in Appendix A. Standard errors, clustered at the state-of-incorporation level, are shown in
brackets. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                  63
                                APPENDIX-TABLE C.2
              L INEAR P ROBABILITY M ODEL AT THE CEO L EVELa
 Dependent Variable: Deathi
                                 (1)                   (2)                    (3)
 Industry Distress              0.036                0.056**                0.062**
                               [0.025]               [0.026]                [0.025]
 BC Treatment                 -0.074**              -0.076**               -0.073**
                               [0.029]               [0.030]                [0.029]
 Tenure Start Age             0.027***
                               [0.002]
 Location FE (HQ)                 Y                     Y                      Y
 FF49 FE                          Y                     Y                      Y
 Tenure Start Year FE             Y                     Y
 Tenure Start Age FE                                    Y                      Y
 Birth Year FE                                                                 Y
 Observations                   1,605                 1,605                  1,605
   a This  table reports the regression results of a a linear probability model at the CEO
level instead of a hazard model. Each observation represents one CEO in our dataset. The
dependent variable is an indicator that is one if the CEO has passed away by October 1st,
2017, and zero otherwise. "Industry Distress" is an indicator variable that is one if the
CEO has ever experienced industry distress. "BC Treatment" is an indicator variable that
is one if the CEO has ever been protected by a BC law and zero otherwise. Fixed effects
are indicated at the bottom of the table. Standard errors, clustered at the industry level,
are shown in brackets. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level,
respectively.




                                             64
                                                                             APPENDIX-TABLE C.3
                                                      I NDUSTRY D ISTRESS AND CEO AGING ­
                         N O W INSORIZATION , M ORE R ESTRICTIVE I NDUSTRY D ISTRESS D EFINITION ,                                 AND     P RE -2016 S AMPLEa
      Dependent Variable: Apparent Agei, j,t
                                               (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)           (6)          (7)            (8)          (9)       (10)       (11)       (12)
                                                            Panel A:                                        Panel B:                                          Panel C:
                                                         Not Winsorized                          Restrictive Distress Definition                          Pre-2016 Sample


      Industry Distress × 1{t >2006}        0.940*     0.978**                          1.173**       1.064**                                  0.816*    0.839*
                                            [0.496]    [0.491]                          [0.469]       [0.463]                                  [0.487]   [0.485]
      Industry Distress × 1{2006<t <2012}                           0.807      0.841                              1.102**      1.007*                                 0.604      0.622
                                                                   [0.536]    [0.531]                             [0.504]      [0.510]                               [0.535]    [0.525]
      Industry Distress × 1{t 2012}                                1.135*    1.178**                             1.261**      1.135**                                1.323**    1.360**
                                                                   [0.576]    [0.564]                             [0.563]      [0.551]                               [0.566]    [0.568]
      Biological Age                        0.912***   0.908***   0.944***   0.940***   1.272***     1.274***    1.268***     1.269***        0.952***   0.943***   0.983***   0.974***
                                             [0.093]    [0.093]    [0.095]    [0.095]    [0.021]      [0.022]     [0.027]      [0.028]         [0.095]    [0.096]    [0.094]    [0.093]
65




      CEO FE                                   Y          Y          Y          Y          Y             Y           Y              Y            Y          Y          Y          Y
      Year FE                                  Y          Y          Y          Y          Y             Y           Y              Y            Y          Y          Y          Y
      Picture Controls                                    Y                     Y                        Y                          Y                       Y                     Y
      Number of CEOs                          463        463        463        463        463           463         463             463         463        463        463        463
      Observations                           3,086      3,086      3,086      3,086      3,086         3,086       3,086           3,086       3,086      3,086      3,086      3,086
       a PanelA shows OLS estimates of the effect of industry distress exposure during the Great Recession on CEO apparent age without winsorizing
     apparent age. Panel B uses a more restrictive industry distress definition requiring negative industry sales growth in addition to the 30%-equity-
     decline criterion, as in the robustness tests in Acharya et al. (2007), and in Opler and Titman (1994) and Babina (2020). Panel C restricts the
     sample to only pictures taken prior to 2016. In all the three panels, we weight observations by the inverse of the number of pictures collected per
     CEO. Standard errors, clustered at the industry level, are shown in brackets. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level,
     respectively.
                           APPENDIX D APPARENT-AGE ESTIMATION

Our goal is to trace visible signs of aging in CEOs' faces. That is, we are interested in
how old a person looks, which is referred to as the person's apparent age. By contrast,
biological age describes how old a person is (time elapsed since birth) and will in general
differ from a person's apparent age. To implement this analysis, we use machine learning
based software by Antipov et al. (2016), henceforth referred to as the ABBD software. This
software was specifically developed for the purpose of apparent-age estimation, and it was
the winning solution of the second edition of the ChaLearn Looking At People competition
in the apparent-age estimation track.
    At the core of ABBD's apparent-age estimation tool is the training of a convolutional
neural network (CNN). A CNN is a special class of neural networks that is particularly
useful for image recognition and computer vision problems. A neural network is a system
that learns to perform a task by studying training data.31 It is architectured with three classes
of layers: input, output, and hidden layers. The input layer receives the external data being
evaluated, and the output data contains the network's response to the input. The in-between
layers are the hidden layers, which abstractly determine intermediate features about the
data. A CNN is a neural network in which some of the hidden layers employ the method
of convolution, i. e., of transforming the input by sliding (or, convolving) over it, to detect
patterns (such as edges or corners), which are then passed on to the next layer.
    Appendix-Figure D.1 provides a simplified example of how convolution works in CNNs.
Here, the fictional input is a shape that is roughly recognizable as a face (numbers between
-1 and 1 determine pixel color). The filter matrix slides over the input and produces the
output as the sum of element-wise matrix multiplication of 3x3 pixel regions with the filter
matrix. As can be seen in the convoluted output, this specific filter matrix identifies right
vertical edges. Convolutional layers further along in a system may be able to detect more
advanced patterns such as, in our application, eyes or wrinkles.
    CNNs have become widely popular over the past ten to twenty years, with numerous
applications, in particular to image recognition and classification. In an influential article
on deep learning32 published in Nature, LeCun et al. (2015) summarize that CNNs have
"brought about a revolution in computer vision" and "breakthroughs in processing images,
video, speech and audio," and they are "now the dominant approach for almost all recognition
and detection tasks."
  31   The task is referred to as supervised learning if the data is labeled (annotated), as is our training data.
  32   A neural network is considered deep if it has multiple hidden layers.

                                                        66
A PPENDIX -F IGURE D.1.--Simplified example of convolution. Notes. This figure shows a simplified
example of convolution. The fictional input image (left) is roughly recognizable as a face. Each cell
(pixel) is encoded with a number that determines its color (between -1.0-black and +1.0-white). The
output image (right) is obtained through convolution. The 3 × 3 filter matrix (center) slides over each
possible 3 × 3 region in the input image and outputs the sum of element-wise matrix multiplication
of these 3x3 image regions and the filter matrix. Example inspired by material by Jeremy Howard
(youtube.com/watch?v=V2h3IOBDvrA) and deeplizard (deeplizard.com/learn/video/YRhxdVk sIs).


    ABBD's apparent-age estimation software starts from a pre-trained version of a state-of-
the-art CNN for face recognition called VGG-16,33 and involves two key steps: training and
fine-tuning of the CNN. In a first step, this CNN is trained on a large dataset of more than
250,000 facial images from the IMDb (Internet Movie Database) and Wikipedia, which also
contains information on the biological age of the person. The training step is implemented
by minimizing the mean absolute error between predicted age and biological age. In a
second step, the software is fine-tuned for apparent-age estimation on a unique dataset of
5,613 facial images, which also contains information on the apparent age of the person in
each picture. The information on people's apparent age consists of at least 10 age estimates
(per picture) by humans, which were specifically collected for the ChaLearn Looking At
People competition. The fine-tuning step is implemented by minimizing a metric that
penalizes deviations from the average (human) age estimate more when the disagreement
about the person's apparent age is low.34 Training and fine-tuning essentially mean that the
software learns to estimate the age of the people in the two datasets using the information
on biological and apparent age by adapting learning parameters in the hidden layers.

  33  Introduced by Simonyan and Zisserman (2014), VGG-16 is a deep CNN. ABBD's software uses a
VGG-16 version by Parkhi et al. (2015), which was trained for the purposes of face recognition (identifying
identities from facial images) on 2.6 million images. Both works have been widely used and cited.
                                              ^-µ)2
  34  The metric is defined as  = 1 - exp - (x 22
                                                    , where x
                                                            ^ is the predicted apparent age, and µ and  are
the image-level mean and standard deviation of across the human-based age estimates.

                                                      67
       ABBD's software and apparent-age estimation tool have a variety of notable features:
    Age distribution in training datasets. Both the IMDb-Wikipedia data and the dataset
employed for human-based fine-tuning include people from all age groups, and in particular
people aged 50 and above. This ensures that the software is trained and fine-tuned on data
that includes people with similar facial characteristics as our CEOs, such as with regard to
baldness patterns, hair color, and wrinkle development. For reference, the CEO at the 10th
(50th , 90th ) percentile in our dataset is 47 (56, 63) years old in 2006 (see Table VII).
    Image pre-processing. Before feeding the pictures into the CNN for training and fine-
tuning, ABBD "standardize" them, a process they label picture pre-processing. Specifically,
they use existing software solutions to detect, scale, and align the face in each image, and
resize each image to 224 × 224 pixels. Intuitively, standardizing images reduces the noise
present when training and fine-tuning the software and improves performance (cf. Table 2
in Antipov, Baccouche, Berrani, and Dugelay 2016). The software's performance on the
ChaLearn Looking At People competition data improves by approximately 1% as a result of
image-preprocessing (cf. Table 2 in Antipov, Baccouche, Berrani, and Dugelay 2016).
    ABBD's trained software does not include image pre-processing code (and can, in fact,
be applied to "raw images" so long as they are resized). We nonetheless replicate some
of their pre-processing steps in order to increase the similarity between our CEO images
and the images used for software training. We use the Python-based "face recognition"
package35 to detect the picture region showing the CEO's face, extract the face, center it in
the image, and resize the image to 224 × 224 pixels. Note that any remaining differences
to ABBD's image pre-processing might increase the noise in our apparent age estimates,
but not introduce bias as any potential systematic differences in pre-processing steps would
need to be correlated with industry shock exposure during the Great Recession. Before
pre-processing a picture, we make sure that the image contains only the face of the CEO. If
a picture contains multiple faces, such as a CEO with their partner, other managers, or a
journalist, we first manually crop the picture and keep only the portion that shows the CEO.
    Appendix-Figure D.2 shows several examples of pre-processed facial images. Panel (a)
shows pre-processed images used to train ABBD's software. One can see that they differ
in terms of "tint" and background. For example, the leftmost picture has a bluish tint and
dark background, whereas the rightmost picture has a yellowish tint and light background.
This underscores the spectrum of image characteristics the software is "exposed" to while
being trained for apparent-age estimation. Panel (b) shows pre-processed CEO images from
  35   The full package documentation is at github.com/ageitgey/face recognition/blob/master/README.md.

                                                   68
our sample. Again, there are differences in terms of tint and background, so it is worth
reiterating that these are image features that the software can learn to take into account in its
estimation during the training stage. Furthermore, comparing images across the two panels
illustrates that our implementation of the image pre-processing step indeed leads to similar
results compared to ABBD's original implementation on the training datasets.

                                       (a) Training sample




                                        (b) CEO sample




A PPENDIX -F IGURE D.2.--Examples of pre-processed images. Notes. This figure shows examples
of pre-processed facial images. Panel (a) shows examples of images used in the training of the
apparent-age estimation software. Panel (b) shows examples of pre-processed CEO images from our
sample.

    Accuracy gains from software fine-tuning. As described above, ABBD's software
development includes a fine-tuning step using a dataset on human-based age estimates.
Across all training and image pre-processing steps, the fine-tuning on this apparent age
led to the biggest accuracy improvement on the competition data, amounting to more than
20% (cf. Table 2 in Antipov, Baccouche, Berrani, and Dugelay 2016). This underscores the
importance of using a software specifically trained for apparent-age estimation, rather than
an "off-the-shelf" software solely trained on images annotated with people's biological age,
for our study of CEO visual aging.
     Cross-validation. Rather than training one CNN on the 5,613 training images, ABBD's
apparent-age estimation merges eleven CNNs, which were trained using eleven-fold cross-
validation. Cross-validation is a popular technique in prediction problems. As part of the
training step, a portion of the data (the validation sample) is set aside for out-of-sample tests,
i. e., tests on data the algorithm was not trained on. Moreover, instead of fixing the validation

                                               69
sample, it is common to train separate models using non-overlapping validation samples and
to then average the results. In ABBD's implementation, each of the eleven "sub-CNNs" uses
5,113 images for training and 500 (non-overlapping) images for validation; this corresponds
to a near-complete partition of the full training data into equal-sized validation samples
(5, 613/11  500). Each sub-model outputs a 100 × 1 vector of probabilities associated with
all apparent ages between 0 and 99 years. ABBD's final solution, on which our analyses are
based, uses the average of the probabilities across all sub-models.
    Data augmentation. In the fine-tuning step of the software development, ABBD use
five-times data augmentation to reduce overfitting. This is a popular technique to enlarge
the training (or fine-tuning) sample, i. e., to allow the software to learn on more data.
Specifically, each apparent-age annotated image is fed into the algorithm jointly with five
modified versions: the mirrored image, a rotated image (±5 ), a horizontally shifted image
(±5%), and a scaled image (±5%). To see the potential benefit of data augmentation in our
application, suppose that among the fine-tuning sample of 5,613 images, people who look
older happen to look slightly to the upper right. Including mirrored and rotated images in the
fine-tuning step reduces the likelihood that the software may learn to associate apparent age
with camera angle.36 In our application, data augmentation also further alleviates concerns
about effects of slight differences in image pre-processing.
    To match the steps during training, ABBD's final solution uses the same image modi-
fications also on new images that are fed into the tool, i. e., it estimates different apparent
ages for each image in our CEO sample based on the original image and modified images as
outlined above. The final apparent age is the average across the different estimates.




  36These specific image modifications assume that there is no intrinsic relation between apparent age and
camera angle. This appears reasonable but highlights that data augmentation choices involve judgment.

                                                   70
