                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  WHY DID BANK STOCKS CRASH DURING COVID-19?

                                       Viral V. Acharya
                                      Robert F. Engle III
                                        Sascha Steffen

                                      Working Paper 28559
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28559


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




We thank Jennie Bai, Tobias Berg, Allen Berger, Christa Bouwman, Olivier Darmouni, Darrel
Duffie, Max Jager, Rafael Repullo, Phil Strahan, Daniel Streitz, Anjan Thakor, Josef Zechner and
participants at the 2020 Federal Reserve Stress Testing Conference and seminar participants at
the Annual Columbia SIPA/BPI Bank Regulation Research Conference, Banco de Portugal, Bank
of England, CAF, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, NYU Stern Finance, RIDGE Workshop on
Financial Stability, University of Southern Denmark, University of Durham, Villanova Webinars
in Financial Intermediation, the Volatility and Risk Institute, World Bank, WU Vienna, for
comments and suggestions and Sophie-Dorothee Rothermund and Christian Schmidt for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Viral V. Acharya, Robert F. Engle III, and Sascha Steffen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Did Bank Stocks Crash During COVID-19?
Viral V. Acharya, Robert F. Engle III, and Sascha Steffen
NBER Working Paper No. 28559
March 2021
JEL No. G01,G21

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the crash of bank stock prices during the COVID-19 pandemic. We find evidence
consistent with a "credit line drawdown channel". Stock prices of banks with large ex-ante
exposures to undrawn credit lines as well as large ex-post gross drawdowns decline more. The
effect is attenuated for banks with higher capital buffers. These banks reduce term loan lending,
even after policy measures were implemented. We conclude that bank provision of credit lines
appears akin to writing deep out-of-the-money put options on aggregate risk; we show how the
resulting contingent leverage and stock return exposure can be incorporated tractably into bank
capital stress tests.

Viral V. Acharya                                Sascha Steffen
Stern School of Business                        Frankfurt School of Finance & Management
New York University                             Adickesallee 32-34
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65                  60322 Frankfurt
New York, NY 10012                              Germany
and CEPR                                        s.steffen@fs.de
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu

Robert F. Engle III
Department of Finance,
Stern School of Business
New York University, Salomon Center
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
rengle@stern.nyu.edu
1. Introduction

This paper investigates the crash of bank stocks during the COVID-19 pandemic and studies

its causes, consequences and policy implications.

        The pandemic and subsequent government-imposed lockdowns put the liquidity-

insurance function of banks for the U.S. economy to a real-life test, as firms' cash flows dropped

as much as 100%, while operating and financial leverage remained sticky. As a consequence,

U.S. firms with pre-arranged credit lines from banks drew down their undrawn facilities at a far

greater intensity than in past recessions. Panel A of Figure 1 shows a sharp acceleration of

credit-line drawdowns of publicly listed U.S. firms since March 1, 2020.1 Within three weeks,

public firms drew down more than USD 300bn, with drawdowns particularly concentrated

among riskier BBB-rated and non-investment-grade firms.2 Recent data shows that firms

benefited from having access to credit lines during the pandemic when capital market funding

froze (e.g., Acharya and Steffen, 2020a; Chodorow-Reich et al., 2020; Greenwald et al., 2020).

Banks, however, faced unprecedented aggregate demand for credit-line drawdowns when the

pandemic broke out at the beginning of March 2020. Since then, banks' share prices have

persistently underperformed those of non-financial firms (Panel B of Figure 1).3

                                                [Figure 1 about here]

        We construct a new measure of the balance-sheet liquidity risk of banks defined as

undrawn commitments plus wholesale finance minus cash or cash equivalents (all relative to




1
  Ford Motor Company was one of the largest U.S. firms to draw down its credit lines in March 2020, withdrawing
USD 15.4bn (Appendix I shows the SEC filings). It was still BBB- rated by S&P at this time. With USD 20bn in
cash, credit lines make up a large part of its overall liquidity. Based on its loan contracts, Ford pays 15bps in
commitment fees for any dollar-undrawn credit and 125bps once credit lines have been drawn down. Ford thus
paid USD 23.1mn as long as the credit line was undrawn, and USD 192.5mn annually once the credit line was
fully utilized. Importantly, once Ford was downgraded to non-investment grade, commitment fees increased to
25bps and credit spreads to 175bps, an increase of 67% and 40%, respectively.
2
  Li et al. (2020) show ­ using call report data ­ that drawdowns amounted to more than USD 500bn, likely because
of private firms, even further increasing the pressure on bank balance sheets.
3
  Bank stock prices hardly recovered even after the monetary and fiscal measures (i.e., after 3/23/2020) until the
end of Q2 2020. However, average stock returns increased about 17% during this period (relative to a mean decline
of 65% in the month before).

                                                        2
assets).4 We show that our measure of the liquidity risk of banks is important to understand the

decline of bank stock prices during the first phase of the pandemic, i.e. from 1/1/2020 until

3/23/2020, before decisive monetary and fiscal support measures were introduced. During this

phase of the pandemic, stock prices of banks with high balance-sheet liquidity risk

underperformed relative to those of banks with low balance-sheet liquidity risk, controlling for

market beta and key bank performance measures (capitalization, asset quality, profitability,

liquidity and investments).5 A one-standard-deviation increase in liquidity risk decreased stock

returns by about 5% during this period, or 7.4% of the unconditional mean return.

         We also posit alternative explanations for the underperformance of bank stock prices

such as real estate exposure, warehousing activities of dealer-banks, or the presence of large

derivative portfolios. Several other bank exposures came under stress during the pandemic (e.g.,

to the retail, hotel and leisure sectors). Exposure to oil prices also emerged as an important risk

that might have contributed to the crash of bank stocks.6 Moreover, bank exposures to retail

credit line commitments and consumer loans were also at risk of losses when unemployment

rates and furloughs rose. Using bank-loan-level exposure data to these sectors sourced from the

Dealscan database, we show that these risk factors do significantly affect bank stock returns.

These exposures, however, appear to be orthogonal to balance-sheet liquidity risk. Furthermore,



4
  We develop and use a comprehensive measure of liquidity risk because the relative importance of its components
(unused C&I commitments or wholesale funding) might change over time. For example, bank reliance on
wholesale funding has continued to decline since the global financial crisis while unused C&I loans have increased
over 2017-2019.
5
  In contrast to bank capital, there is no consensus in the literature on how to measure liquidity, and those measures
that have been used follow different concepts. For example, Deep and Schaefer (2004) use the difference between
scaled liquid assets and liabilities, focusing on on-balance-sheet components of liquidity. Berger and Bouwman
(2009) construct a comprehensive liquidity measure using on- and off-balance-sheet components. Both measures
follow the concept of liquidity creation. Our measure focuses on liquidity risk, particularly during aggregate
economic downturns, through credit lines and short-term wholesale funding. Bai et al. (2018) use on- and off-
balance-sheet items to construct a measure of liquidity risk incorporating current market liquidity conditions.
While their measure is more complex and reacts (contemporaneously) once market liquidity conditions deteriorate,
our measure is a relatively simple (ex-ante) measure of bank exposure to liquidity risk. We compare our measure
to both previous measures, highlighting similarities and differences in section 8 of this paper.
6
  The energy sector was severely hit when on March 9, 2020 oil prices dropped by more than 20% on a single day.
Both Saudi Arabia and Russia, two of the world's largest oil producers, decided to increase their oil output
considerably having failed to reach an agreement with OPEC on possible production cuts. After this oil price
shock, oil price volatility increased by more than six times (to more than 100% on an annualized basis) and energy
stocks crashed. Banks are heavily exposed through loans provided to this sector.

                                                          3
when we include measures of a bank's capital shortfall conditional on a severe market

correction (for example, SRISK7, which relies in turn on LRMES, a measure of stock returns

conditional on market downturns), but do not take into account the role of undrawn credit lines,

the explanatory power for bank stock returns remains unaffected.

        To summarize, while other factors are important in understanding the performance of

bank stock prices at the beginning of the pandemic, the aggregate drawdown risk associated

with bank credit lines does not appear to be captured in traditional measures of bank exposure

or systemic risk. That is, a bank's "contingent leverage" associated with aggregate drawdowns

is akin to a deep out-of-the-money put option that is neither captured by a bank's stock beta nor

by its (long-run) marginal expected shortfall (MES), or is possibly captured only ex-post, i.e.

with a lag, as the event causing aggregate drawdowns unfolds.

        We then show that this cross-sectional explanatory power of balance-sheet liquidity risk

for bank stock returns is episodic in nature. Using separate cross-sectional regressions during

the months of January 2020, February 2020 and during the 3/1/2020 to 3/23/2020 period, we

show that liquidity risk explains stock returns only during the last period, when firms' liquidity

demand through credit line drawdowns becomes highly correlated, but not before. We then

employ time-series tests for bank stock returns to shed further light on this result. Interacting

our bank-level liquidity risk measure with the aggregate measure of realized cumulative credit

line drawdowns, we show that (daily) bank stock returns are significantly lower when aggregate

drawdowns in the economy increase and banks have more balance-sheet liquidity risk. Further,

stock returns for banks with greater liquidity risk are lower, particularly when drawdowns of

riskier firms accelerate. Finally, these effects reverse only after monetary policy and fiscal

policy measures. There is a reversal of undrawn C&I credit lines on banks' balance sheets in

Q2 and Q3 2020, but not to pre-COVID-19 levels. Consistently, we find that the episodic



7
 See NYU Stern Volatility & Risk Institute, https://vlab.stern.nyu.edu/welcome/srisk, Acharya et al. (2016) and
Brownlees and Engle (2017) for definition and estimation of LRMES and SRISK.

                                                       4
explanatory power of balance-sheet liquidity risk for bank stock returns also reverses following

policy measures.8

         We confirm that the episodic co-movement of stock returns and the balance-sheet

liquidity risk of banks is not specific to aggregate drawdown risk during the pandemic, but was

also a feature of the global financial crisis (GFC) during 2007 to 2009. We use the same cross-

sectional tests as before and run them quarterly over the Q1 2007 to Q1 2009 period. We show

that liquidity risk for banks ignited in Q3 2007, i.e., in the first phase of the GFC when the

Asset Backed Commercial Paper (ABCP) market froze, as documented in Acharya et al.

(2013). Liquidity risk remained priced in the cross-section of bank stock returns (even increased

in economic magnitude) until the end of Q2 2008. The Federal Reserve and the U.S.

government responded to the economic fallout of the Lehman Brothers default with a variety

of measures to support the banking sector, following which we do not see any effect of liquidity

risk on bank stock returns. Acharya and Mora (2015) show that banks had deposit shortfalls

relative to credit line drawdowns during the GFC, unlike during the pandemic. In other words,

the episodic nature of liquidity risk contributing to bank stock returns during the pandemic finds

similar undertones during the GFC; the former caused by aggregate drawdown risk (credit lines)

and the latter by aggregate rollover risk (wholesale finance). Our liquidity risk measure for

banks spans both of these risks.

         Next, we examine the reasons why bank stock prices were particularly sensitive to

undrawn C&I credit lines when the pandemic broke out. Does funding liquidity to source new

loans become a binding constraint for banks as deposit funding does not keep pace with credit

line drawdowns (the "funding channel")? Or, does the drawdown of credit lines lock up bank

capital against term loans and impair bank loan origination, preventing banks from making



8
 Interestingly, the Fed already conducted large interventions in the repo market on 3/12/2020. The OIS-spread, a
measure for liquidity conditions in financial markets, reverted already following these interventions. They were,
however, insufficient to stop the further decline of bank stock prices suggesting that liquidity was not the binding
constraint for banks at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic.

                                                         5
possibly more profitable loans (the "capital channel")?9 To distinguish between these channels,

we construct two proxies: (1) Gross drawdowns as the percentage change in credit line

drawdowns; and (2) Net drawdowns as the percentage change in drawdowns minus the change

in deposit funding. Holding gross drawdowns fixed, our measure of net drawdowns helps us

understand the importance of changes in bank deposits for bank stock returns. We find that

while bank stock returns during 1/1/2020 to 3/23/2020 are particularly sensitive to gross

drawdowns, they do not load significantly on net drawdowns. Importantly, a higher level of

bank capital buffer attenuates the negative effect of gross drawdowns on stock returns. These

results suggest that at the onset of the pandemic bank capital and not bank liquidity appears to

have been perceived as the binding constraint causing liquidity risk to adversely affect bank

stock returns. In this regard, the pandemic fallout for banks differs from that during the GFC

when banks struggled on the liquidity front to meet drawdowns (Acharya and Mora, 2015).

        The development of credits spreads at the beginning of the pandemic suggests that this

phenomenon might have also affected loan market originations. We plot the time-series of

credit spreads in the loan and bond market over the Q1 2019 to Q3 2020 period in Figure 2. In

particular, we plot the loan-bond differential (Panel A of Figure 2) and find that that difference

between loan and bond spreads increased from about 2.5% to 3.5% following the outbreak of

COVID-19 and remained highly elevated, particularly driven by loans to riskier firms (Panel B

of Figure 2). Bond spreads, however, reverted back almost to pre-COVID levels (not shown).

This is consistent with the interpretation that bank health was materially affected by the



9
 For the banks that provided credit lines to Ford Motors (as described in our introductory example in footnote 1
above), these commitments were (in aggregate) a USD 15.4bn off-balance-sheet C&I loan commitment as of
12/31/2019. The capital treatment of their commitment depends on whether banks follow the standardized (SA)
or internal ratings-based (IRB) approach for credit risk. Under Basel III, the standardized approach differentiates
between irrevocable and revocable commitments. Revocable commitments carry a credit conversion factor (CCF)
of 10% and irrevocable commitments (with a maturity of more than 12 months) a CCF of 50%. Assuming an 8%
capital requirement, an undrawn credit line thus requires funding in the range of 0.8% to 4% for banks using the
SA. For IRB banks ­ as applies to most of our sample banks ­ the CCF might be considerably lower (Behn et al.,
2016). In other words, a bank might need to fund 90% or more of the required capital when a credit line is drawn
down and becomes a balance-sheet loan, which adversely impacts other business activities, particularly in an
aggregate downturn.

                                                        6
pandemic, and not just temporarily, impacting the access of firms to bank loans as well as the

cost of bank credit.10

                                                           [Figure 2]

Investigating new loan originations, we find that banks with large credit-line drawdowns indeed

significantly reduced their supply of newly issued loans.11 We use a Khwaja and Mian (2008)

estimator and aggregate our data at a borrower x bank x loan type x month level, collapse the

sample into a pre- and post-COVID-19 period (where "post" is the period after 4/1/2020), and

saturate the estimation with borrower x bank x loan type fixed effects. We show that both the

number of loans as well as loan amounts are lower for banks with both higher gross and net

drawdowns after the breakout of the COVID-19 pandemic. Importantly, when we estimate

separately the effect on term loans and credit lines (using borrower x bank fixed effects), term

loan originations are substantially lower for banks with higher gross drawdowns, whereas new

credit line commitments decrease mainly for banks with higher net drawdowns. This confirms

that gross drawdowns reduce the capital available to banks and thus term lending, whereas

banks experiencing net drawdowns are reluctant to take on additional liquidity risk, but they

can issue term loans as long as they have capital to provide for them. Overall, there appear to

be long-term real consequences because of banks' contingent leverage materializing from a

drawdown of credit lines during an aggregate shock.

         A final key question is how can policy makers address aggregate drawdown risk in an

ex-ante manner? One possible way is for regulators to add the effect of drawdowns to stress

tests and require banks to fund these exposures with equity.12 In our last step, we therefore


10
   The Senior Loan Officer Survey of the Federal Reserve also shows that at the end of Q3 2020, about 75% of
loan officer reported a tightening of bank lending standards for small and medium/large firms.
11
   The theoretical literature argues that a key function of bank capital is to absorb risk, i.e., more capital facilitates
bank lending. Bhattacharya and Thakor (1993), Repullo (2004), von Thadden (2004), and Coval and Thakor
(2005), among others, argue that capital increases risk-bearing capacity. Allen and Santomero (1998) and Allen
and Gale (2004) show that banks with less capital might have to dispose of illiquid assets when facing an adverse
shock.
12
   We find that banks do not account for aggregate drawdown risk in fees or spreads when initiating new loan
contracts. Moreover, drawdowns do also not appear to be constrained through covenants. We investigate all loan
amendments during the post-COVID period and find that not a single loan amendment was initiated through a

                                                            7
quantify the capital shortfall that arises due to banks' balance-sheet liquidity risk and show how

it can be incorporated tractably into bank stress tests. Acharya et al. (2012), Acharya et al.

(2016) and Brownlees and Engle (2017) developed the concept of SRISK, a measure of the

capital shortfall of a stressed aggregate market correction (e.g., 40% decline in the S&P 500

index), measured relative to an 8% requirement in terms of market value of equity to debt plus

market value of equity. This measure, however, does not account for the impact of credit lines,

which are off-balance-sheet or contingent liabilities. Given our results, such an impact can be

broken down into two components. First, contingent liabilities enter banks' balance sheets as

realized liabilities during periods of stress. Using drawdown data during the COVID crisis, the

GFC and the 2000-2003 recession, we extrapolate the expected drawdown in a stress scenario

with a 40% market correction based on each of these three stressed periods. We find the

expected (incremental) drawdown rates in such a stress scenario to be in the range 11% to 23%.

Using these expected drawdown rates, we calculate the additional equity capital that would be

required to maintain adequacy against higher realized liabilities in periods of stress. Second,

we have to account for the negative episodic effect of liquidity risk on bank stock prices during

periods of stress. Using the loadings from our cross-sectional regressions of bank stock returns

on balance-sheet liquidity risk during the COVID-19 crisis, we estimate the additional equity

shortfall of banks based on their end of Q4 2019 market values of equity.

        Summing both components, we show that the additional capital shortfall for the U.S.

banking sector as a whole due to balance-sheet liquidity risk amounted to more than USD 270bn

as of 12/31/2019 in a stress scenario of a 40% correction to the global stock market with the

top 10 banks contributing about USD 230bn. The incremental capital shortfall of the top 10

banks is about 1.5 times larger than the capital shortfall estimate without accounting for

contingent liabilities.


covenant violation. On the contrary, banks and firms regularly negotiated a covenant relief period early in the
pandemic. In other words, contractual mechanisms also did not attenuate aggregate drawdowns at the start of the
pandemic.

                                                      8
       The paper proceeds as follows. We first describe the related literature. In Section 3, we

present the data. In Section 4, we describe our measure of balance-sheet liquidity risk and

investigate the effect of liquidity risk on bank stock returns. We investigate the liquidity

measure's components in Section 5. Section 6 analyzes the funding vis-à-vis the capital channel

and also studies the consequences for the real economy. Section 7 illustrates how to incorporate

episodic liquidity risk of bank balance sheets in stress tests and assess capital shortfalls. We

provide a discussion of our results in section 8. Section 9 concludes.



2. Related literature

Our paper relates to the literature highlighting the role of banks as liquidity providers. Kashyap

et al. (2002) proposed a risk-management motive to understand the unique role of banks as

liquidity providers to both households and firms. As long as demand for deposits and loans is

not too highly correlated, banks can pool both types of customers and hold less (costly) liquid

assets. Gatev and Strahan (2006) build this idea and argue that banks can insure firms even

against systematic declines in liquidity because of deposit inflows during crises. Ivashina and

Scharfstein (2010) provide evidence of an acceleration of credit-line drawdowns during the

2007-2009 crisis as well as an increase in deposits. Acharya and Mora (2015) show that during

the 2007-2009 crisis ­ in which the banking system itself was at the center of the crisis ­ banks

faced a crisis as liquidity providers and could only perform this role because of significant

support from the government. Li et al. (2020) show that during the COVID-19 crisis, aggregate

deposit inflows were sufficient to fund the increase in liquidity demand. Acharya and Steffen

(2020b) use simulations based on drawdown scenarios from prior crises and arrive at similar

conclusions. Kapan and Minoiu (2020) show that banks exposed to larger credit-line

drawdowns reduce lending. None of these papers, however, explores the implications of banks

as liquidity providers for bank stock returns when drawdowns affect bank capital availability

for other intermediation functions, and especially when the realized risk is aggregate in nature.

                                                9
         There is a growing literature on the implications of COVID-19 for corporate finance,

and the use of credit lines in particular. Chodorow-Reich et al. (2020) show that drawdowns of

credit lines came exclusively from large firms during the first phase of the pandemic and

document that banks did not honor commitments to smaller firms. Greenwald et al. (2020) also

show that particularly large firms used their credit lines and banks with larger drawdowns

reduced term lending to small firms more relative to other banks. Darmouni and Siani (2020)

show that a large percentage of credit lines were repaid through bond issuances in Q2 and Q3

2020. By examining both gross drawdowns and net (of deposit inflows) drawdowns, we

demonstrate that credit-line drawdowns reduce banks' franchise value because of binding

capital constraints. While banks with higher gross drawdowns reduce term lending, banks with

higher net drawdowns reduce credit line originations.13

         Other papers consider stock price reactions to the COVID-19 pandemic, emphasizing

the importance of financial policies (Ramelli and Wagner forthcoming), financial constraints

and the cash needs of affected firms (Fahlenbrach, Rageth, and Stulz 2020), changing discount

rates because of higher uncertainty (Gormsen and Koijen 2020, Landier and Thesmar 2020),

and social-distancing measures (Pagano, Wagner and Zechner 2020). These papers focus on

stock prices of non-financial firms, not banks. Demirguc-Kunt et al. (2020) investigate the bank

stock market response to the COVID-19 pandemic and policy responses globally. They

highlight that the effectiveness of policy measures was dependent on bank capitalization and

fiscal space in the respective country. We focus instead on the implications of credit line

drawdowns for bank stock returns and the consequences for bank lending.




13
   Other papers explore the determinants of credit-line drawdowns in previous crises. Ivashina and Scharfstein
(2010) document an acceleration of credit line drawdowns during the 2007-2009 crisis; their evidence is consistent
with ours. Berg et al. (2016) show that credit lines are more likely to be used if a borrower's economic performance
deteriorates, particularly for non-IG and unrated firms. Berg et al. (2017) show that U.S. firms' drawdown behavior
is particularly sensitive to the overall market return. We show that pandemic drawdowns have been more intense
but similar in spirit.

                                                        10
        Our paper also contributes methodologically to the literature on bank stress tests. After

the 2007-2009 crisis, a variety of measures were developed to quantify the systemic risk of the

banking sector. In addition to the SRISK measure of Acharya et al. (2012), Acharya et al.

(2016) and Brownlees and Engle (2017), which we discussed in the introduction, Adrian and

Brunnermeier (2015) develop the concept "CoVaR", which measures the risk to the financial

system conditional on a bank being in distress. These measures, however, do not look at the

role of contingent liabilities of banks or their episodic impact on bank returns; we show how

these important considerations can be embedded into bank stress tests.



3. Data

We collect data for all publicly listed bank-holding companies of commercial banks in the U.S.

To construct or main dataset, we follow Acharya and Mora (2015) and drop all banks with total

assets below USD 100mn at the end of 2019 and also only keep those banks that we can match

to the CRSP/Compustat database. All financial variables (on the holding-company level) are

obtained from the call reports (FR-Y9C) and augmented with data sourced from SNL Financial.

We keep only those banks for which we have all data available for our main specifications

during the COVID-19 pandemic, which limits our sample to 127 U.S. bank-holding companies

(accounting for about 80% of all outstanding credit lines).14 All variables are explained below

or in Appendix II.

        We obtain daily stock returns for our sample banks from CRSP. We manually match

these banks to the Thomson Reuter Dealscan database to obtain loan-level exposure data for

the banks in our data set. For some tests and statistics, we use secondary market data about

different industry sectors (e.g., the oil or retail sector) from Refinitiv. We obtain information



14
  Berger and Bouwman (2009), among others, document that off-balance-sheet credit commitments are important
for large banks, but not medium-sized and small banks. The smaller number of banks in our dataset is a
consequence of changes in reporting requirements over time (i.e. an increase in the size threshold above which
banks have to provide specific information).

                                                     11
about a bank's systemic risk from the Volatility and Risk Institute at NYU Stern. Other market

information is downloaded from Bloomberg (e.g. oil volatility (CVOX), VIX, S&P 500 market

return).



4. Can balance-sheet liquidity risk explain bank stock returns?

4.1. Balance-sheet liquidity risk of banks

To construct our measure of balance-sheet liquidity risk, we collect bank balance sheet

information as of Q4 2019 from call reports and construct three key variables associated with

bank liquidity risk following Acharya and Mora (2015): (1) Unused Commitments: The sum of

credit lines secured by 1-4 family homes, secured and unsecured commercial real estate credit

lines, commitments related to securities underwriting, commercial letter of credit, and other

credit lines (which includes commitments to extend credit through overdraft facilities or

commercial lines of credit); (2) Wholesale Funding: The sum of large time deposits, deposits

booked in foreign offices, subordinated debt and debentures, gross federal funds purchased,

repos, and other borrowed money; (3) Liquidity: The sum of cash, federal funds sold and reverse

repos, and securities excluding MBS/ABS securities. All variables are defined in Appendix II.

         We construct a comprehensive measure of bank balance-sheet liquidity risk (Liquidity

Risk):



                          -.$*/%0122"&2/.&* + 416/*76/8$.%".9 - !"#$"%"&'
      !"#$"%"&')"*+ = 
                                           ;1&76<**/&*



Figure 3 shows the time-series of the mean of Liquidity Risk (using our sample banks and

weighted by total assets) quarterly since January 2010 as well as its components, i.e. Unused

C&I Credit Lines and Wholesale Funding, both relative to total assets.

                                     [Figure 3 about here]


                                              12
Liquidity Risk has decreased since Q1 2010 to a level of about 20% relative to total assets (Panel

A of Figure 3). In 2017, Liquidity Risk started to increase until Q4 2019, i.e. before the start of

the COVID-19 pandemic. At the beginning of the pandemic in Q1 2020, liquidity risk dropped

about 40% and continued to decline somewhat in Q2 and Q3 of 2020.

         Panel B of Figure 3 shows the components. The decrease is driven by the declining

share of wholesale funding relative to total assets that accelerated during the COVID-19

pandemic. Since 2017, the marginal increase in the importance of unused C&I loans has been

larger than the marginal decline in wholesale funding exposure and Liquidity Risk started to

increase again. The large decline of Liquidity Risk during the first quarter in 2020 was driven

by the decrease in unused C&I credit lines consistent with the increase in drawdowns

documented in Figure 1 above. We saw an immediate reversal of Unused C&I Credit Lines in

Q2 and Q3 2020; however, not to pre-COVID-19 levels, pointing to a partial repayment of

credit lines by U.S. firms. In Online Appendix B, we show that particularly non-investment

grade rated firms did not repay their credit lines, likely as they only gradually regained access

to capital markets as documented by Acharya and Steffen (2020). Banks experience only

limited capital relief when high-quality firms repay their credit lines, with possible implications

for their lending and investment activities. We investigate the importance of unused C&I credit

lines for the stock price crash of U.S. banks as well as their lending activities further in this

paper.

4.2. Methodology

To show that balance-sheet liquidity risk is priced in the cross-section of bank stock returns,

we run the following ordinary-least-squares (OLS) regressions:



                        =! = > + ?!"#$"%"&')"*+! +  AB! + C!                                   (1)




                                                13
We compute daily excess returns (=! ), which we define as the log of one plus the total return on

a stock minus the risk-free rate defined as the one-month daily Treasury bill rate. X is a vector

of control variables (e.g., bank balance-sheet characteristics) that have been shown to affect

bank stock returns. All control variables are measured at the end of 2019 and capture key bank

performance measures (capitalization, asset quality, profitability, liquidity and investments)

that prior literature has shown to be important determinants of bank stock returns (e.g.,

Fahlenbrach et al., 2012; Beltratti and Stulz, 2012). More specifically, these variables include

among others: a bank's Equity Beta, constructed using monthly data over the 2015 to 2019

period and the S&P 500 as market index, the natural logarithm of total assets (Log(Assets)), the

non-performing loans to loan ratio (NPL/Loans), the equity-asset-ratio (Equity Ratio), Non-

Interest Income15, return-on-assets (ROA) and the deposit-loan-ratio (Deposits). All variables

are described in detail in Appendix II and are shown in the regression specifications in the

sections below. Standard errors in all cross-sectional regressions are heteroscedasticity robust.

4.3. Descriptive evidence

We first investigate graphically whether differences in ex-ante liquidity risk across banks can

explain their stock price development since the outbreak of COVID-19. We classify banks into

two categories, with high or low balance-sheet liquidity risk using a median split of our

Liquidity Risk variable. We then create a stock index for each subsample of banks indexed at

1/2/2020 using the (market-value weighted) average stock returns of banks in each sample. The

difference between both subsamples is shown in Panel A of Figure 4. Bank stock prices

collapsed as the COVID-19 pandemic started at the beginning of March 2020. Consistent with

the idea that liquidity risk explains bank stock return, we find that banks with higher liquidity

risk perform worse than other banks. In Panel B of Figure 4, we show bank stock returns on

our measure of Liquidity Risk. The regression line through the scatter plot has a negative (and



15
  Demsetz and Strahan (1997) use non-interest income to net interest income ratio as a measure how bank holding
companies rely on off-balance sheet activities more broadly (e.g. through derivatives contracts).

                                                      14
statistically significant) slope. That is, banks with higher Liquidity Risk had lower stock returns

in the cross-section of our sample banks.

                                      [Figure 4 about here]

       Panel A of Table 1 shows the stock returns of the firms in our sample for different

periods, January 2020, February 2020 and the 3/1/2020 to 3/23/2020 period, and we calculate

excess returns over these time periods. The average excess return is negative in all periods,

ranging from -7.9% in January 2020 to -47.1% during the period 3/1/2020 to 3/23/2020 (and

even -67.5% from 1/1/2020 to 3/23/2020).

       Panel B of Table 1 shows descriptive statistics of bank characteristics as of Q4 2019. In

addition to the control variables used in our regression, we also provide summary statistics of

Liquidity Risk and its components. All these risk measures appear to be economically relevant.

For example, the average Liquidity Risk is 0.209, the average bank has unused C&I loan

commitments of about 8.1% relative to total assets, and the average wholesale funding-asset-

ratio is 13.2%. The average bank has a beta of 1.2 measured against the S&P 500 (i.e. it broadly

resembles the U.S. economy) and a capitalization (equity-asset ratio) of 12%. We have omitted

a discussion of the other variables but include their summary statistics to facilitate the

interpretation of our estimates in the coming sections.

                                      [Table 1 about here]

4.4. Multivariate results

The estimation results for regression (1) are reported in Panel A of Table 2.

                                      [Table 2 about here]

       As a dependent variable we use bank stock returns measured as excess returns in

1/1/2020 to 3/23/2020, i.e. the first phase of the current COVID-19 pandemic and before the

decisive fiscal and monetary interventions. In column (1), we only include Liquidity Risk and

Equity Beta and show that banks with a higher ex-ante balance-sheet liquidity risk and (as

expected) high beta have lower stock returns during this period. When we add the different

                                                15
control variables, the coefficient of Liquidity Risk becomes, if anything, economically stronger

and the explanatory power of the regressions increases as well (by more than 50% from column

1 to column 5). Economically, a one standard deviation increase in Liquidity Risk reduces stock

returns during this period by about 5%. The other control variables behave as expected

(focusing on those that turn out to have significant explanatory power): banks with more non-

performing loans (NPL/Loans), lower return-on-assets (ROA), lower Distance-to-Default and

higher deposit ratios (Deposits/Assets) have lower stock returns during this period.16

         A possible explanation for bank stock returns during this period could be a large

exposure to the real estate sector (as measured using a Real Estate Beta), large warehouses as

banks act as dealer banks (Current Primary Dealer Indicator) or larger derivative portfolios

(Derivates/Assets). Our regressions show, however, that stock returns do not load significantly

on these factors (columns 3 to 5) once the other control variables are accounted for.

Robustness tests. Panel B of Table 2 shows the results of our robustness tests. For example, it

could be that those banks with high unused C&I credit lines are also those with high retail credit

card commitments. Given the potential stress in the retail sector due to e.g. lay-offs and

furloughs, our Liquidity Risk measure might pick up these effects. We collected each bank's

exposure (though we could not identify this clearly for one bank in our sample) to off-balance-

sheet credit card commitments and add this to our regression model (we use the model from

column 5 of Panel A of Table 2). This variable does not enter significantly in our regression

(column 1), more importantly, the coefficient on Liquidity Risk remains unchanged. Using on-

balance-sheet Consumer Loans / Assets (column 2) does not change our results either.

         Exposure to oil price risk is another important (macro) risk factor that might have also

contributed to the crash of bank stocks. After the oil price shock on March 9, 2020, the market

performance of the oil & gas sector considerably deteriorated.17 Moreover, other sectors were


16
  Gatev and Strahan (2006) show that banks with large credit-line commitments are also high deposit banks.
17
  We provide some descriptive evidence consistent with this in Online Appendix A. Figure A.1 shows the
performance of the oil & gas sector vis-à-vis other sectors directly affected by the pandemic (e.g., retail, leisure

                                                        16
particularly impacted by the pandemic, e.g., the retail, leisure, and hotel & gaming industry.

Banks with large exposures to these sectors (through credit-line and also term loan exposures)

might experience larger stock price declines. We evaluate a bank's exposure to the oil & gas

and other sectors using its loan exposures as of 12/31/2019. We obtain this data from Thomson

Reuters LPC and allocate loan amounts among syndicate banks following the prior literature

(e.g., Ivashina, 2009). We construct a new variable, Oil Exposure / Assets, which is the sum of

a bank's active loan exposures to oil & gas firms scaled by total assets. Similarly, we construct

a similar measure of exposures to firms in the retail, leisure, and hotel & gaming industry, add

all these exposures and scale them by total assets (Other Sectoral Exposures / Assets).

         We include both exposure variables in our regression (columns 3 and 4). Moreover, as

all oil & gas and sectoral exposures are based on loans reported in Dealscan and thus available

only for a subset of banks, we include a dummy for those banks for which we could not find

exposure data (unreported). The results show that banks with larger exposures to oil and the

other sectors experienced lower stock returns during the first phase of the pandemic. Stock

returns still load significantly on Liquidity Risk, but the economic magnitude is somewhat

lower, which was expected given the smaller subset of banks for which exposure data is

available.18



5. Understanding balance-sheet liquidity risk of banks



and hotel & gaming) using returns from loans traded in the secondary market in these sectors. While the returns
in the loan market declined substantially in all sectors, the loan return of oil & gas and mining firms significantly
underperformed the other sectors even after the announcement of the interventions by the Fed on March 23, 2020.
Figure A.2 shows the time-series of oil-price volatility using the CVOX oil price volatility index. While oil price
volatility increases episodically during economic downturns (e.g., during the global financial crisis (GFC) of 2007
to 2009), the European sovereign debt crisis (2011-2012), and the oil & gas crisis in 2015-2016), volatility
increased by more than six times (to more than 100% on an annualized basis) around March 9, 2020 and energy
stocks crashed.
18
   We also compute a bank's beta with respect to the oil and other sectors (based on Fama-French (FF) 49 industry
portfolios) over the 12-month period prior to the pandemic and included these betas as proxy for bank exposures.
E.g., the correlation between the beta with respect to the oil sector and banks' Dealscan exposure to the oil sector
is about 50%. Estimating regression (1) using the beta does not change the coefficient of Liquidity Risk. Interaction
the exposure beta with the realized performance in March of the same FF industry portfolio does not change our
results.

                                                        17
Our previous results show that the liquidity risk of banks helps to explain bank stock returns

during the first phase of COVID-19. The pandemic started in western economies at the

beginning of March 2020; before then, firms had no problems accessing liquidity. But at the

beginning of March 2020, it became a major concern for most firms (e.g., compare the increase

in aggregate drawdowns in Figure 1 above).19 Does liquidity risk also become apparent as an

explanatory risk factor when aggregate drawdown risk increased? Which components of

Liquidity Risk matter and how important are undrawn C&I credit lines relative to, e.g. wholesale

funding, during the COVID-19 pandemic? Did the fiscal and monetary response help attenuate

aggregate drawdown risk? And, is this pattern unique for the COVID-19 pandemic or do we

observe the same dynamic repeatedly during episodes of aggregate drawdown risk? These are

the questions we set out to address in this section.

5.1. Does balance-sheet liquidity risk have an impact on bank stock returns?

Panel A of Table 3 shows the estimation results from equation (1) separately for the three

periods.

                                            [Table 3 about here]

        The coefficient estimates for January 2020 are shown in columns 1 to 2, for February

2020 in columns 3 to 4 and for the 3/1/2020 to 3/23/2020 period in column 5 to 6, with and

without the control variables described above. During the first two months in 2020, bank stock

returns do not load significantly on liquidity risk. However, during the March 1 to March 23

period, it emerges as an important risk factor, i.e., banks with higher balance-sheet liquidity

risk had significantly lower stock returns during this period. Also, the economic magnitude of

the equity beta increases substantially during this stress period.




19
  Refinitiv surveyed banks as to the key risks (investment grade) corporate clients were concerned about in March
2020. The key risks mentioned include cash flow impact, availability and access to liquidity, and access to future
capital, highlighting the aggregate demand for credit-line drawdowns at the beginning of the pandemic.

                                                       18
        Time-series evidence. Using time-series regressions, we show aggregate drawdowns

can explain bank stock returns with high ex-ante exposure to Liquidity Risk during the 3/1/2020

to 3/23/2020 period. We run the following time-series regression:



        =!,# = > + ?!"#$"%"&')"*+! DE=7F%1F.*# + A=$&&,# +  G! + C!,#                                      (2)



We interact Liquidity Risk with the natural logarithm of the realized daily aggregate credit line

drawdowns (Log(Cumulative Total Drawdowns)) and add the daily realized return of the S&P

500 stock index (=$&&,# ) as well as a bank fixed effect (G! ). We use Newey-West standard errors.

The results are reported in Panel B of Table 3.

        Column 1 shows total aggregate credit-line drawdowns. We aggregate credit-line

drawdowns across BBB-rated firms (column 2, non-investment-grade rated firms (column 3)

and unrated firms (column 4).20 Bank (daily) stock returns are significantly lower when

aggregate drawdowns in the economy increase and banks have more balance-sheet liquidity

risk. Stock returns for banks with greater liquidity risk are lower, particularly when drawdowns

of riskier firms accelerate. Overall, both our cross-sectional and time-series tests suggest that

bank balance-sheet liquidity risk can episodically explain bank stock returns, emerging in an

aggregate downturn with an increase aggregate liquidity demand for credit lines.

5.2. Components of liquidity risk and bank stock returns

Figure 2 shows that Liquidity Risk decreased since the global financial crisis but has increased

again since 2016. This increase is driven by a surge in unused C&I credit lines, while wholesale

funding (a major driver of liquidity risk during the GFC) continued to decrease relative to total

assets. In the next step, we split Liquidity Risk into its components to investigate their

differential impact on bank stock returns during the first phase of the pandemic. The results are



20
  Due to the high correlations between cumulative credit-line drawdowns across different rating classes,
common variance inflator tests reject using them together in a single regression.

                                                      19
reported in Table 4. We include all control variables described in model (5) in Panel A of Table

2.

                                       [Table 4 about here]

       We first include only Unused C&I Loans / Assets (column 1), then add Liquidity / Assets

(column 2) and then add Wholesale Funding / Assets (column 3) to the regression model. The

results suggest that ex-ante balance-sheet liquidity risk of banks is driven by banks' exposure

to unused C&I loans. Bank stock returns load significantly on this factor while the coefficients

on both wholesale funding and liquidity are economically small and statistically insignificant.

In other words, banks' exposure to unused C&I loans are key to understanding bank stock

returns during the early stages of the pandemic.

       In columns 4 and 5, we add oil exposure and other sectoral exposure to the hotel, leisure

and retail industry (all scaled by total assets) to the regression model. All oil & gas and sectoral

exposures are based on loans reported in DealScan and thus are available only for a subset of

banks. In column 6, we add SRISK/Assets as an additional control. These regressions include a

dummy for banks for which we do not find exposure data or no SRISK (unreported). As before,

banks with more exposure to the oil and other affected sectors as well as higher systemic risk

have lower stock returns but the coefficient on Unused C&I Loans / Assets does not change.

5.3. Reversal of the effect of liquidity risk on bank stock prices

Our previous tests show that liquidity risk explains bank stock returns during the first few weeks

of the COVID-19 pandemic, i.e. before the monetary and fiscal response in the U.S. toward the

end of March 2020. In a related paper, Acharya and Steffen (2020) show that capital market

funding became immediately available after the Federal Reserve interventions on 3/23/2020,

stopping the credit line drawdowns for all but the riskier firms as bond market access still eluded

them. Aggregate demand for credit-line drawdowns attenuated after the interventions.

Importantly, Figure 2 above suggests that high-quality firms have repaid credit lines, leading to



                                                20
a reversal of unused C&I credit lines on bank balance sheets. We thus investigate whether we

observe a similar reversal in bank stock prices following the Fed interventions in March 2020.

       Panel A of Table 5 shows descriptive statistics of bank stock returns in April, May and

June 2020 and during the 3/24/2020 to 6/30/2020 period. On average, the stock prices of our

sample banks increased about 18% over the entire period, which is small given the mean drop

of 67% during the 1/1/2020 to 3/23/2020 period. In other words, bank market capitalization

has, on average, hardly improved during this period.

                                      [Table 5 about here]

       We show the results from regressions of bank stock return on Liquidity Risk and its

components and all control variables used before in Panel B of Table 5. Columns 1 and 2 show

the results for April and May 2020. While the coefficient of Liquidity Risk is positive, it does

not significantly enter into the regression. The effects somewhat increase in June 2020 and

become statistically significant (column 3) but are driven largely by banks with high ex-ante

unused C&I lines of credit (column 4). The results become less noisy when measuring stock

returns over the 3/24/2020 to 6/30/2020 period and also become economically larger (columns

5 and 6). That is, stock prices of those banks that have experienced a large decline in stock price

during the first weeks of the pandemic recover somewhat in the period after the Fed

interventions. The control variables (not reported) show a similar reversal.

       Taken together, our results so far show that liquidity risk episodically explains bank

stock returns. Banks with high liquidity risk experience a stock price decline during the first

phase of the COVID-19 pandemic, i.e. during a period of high aggregate liquidity demand for

bank credit lines of firms, but not before. This relationship even reverses when capital market

funding became available after policy stabilization measures were put in place.



5.4. Balance-sheet liquidity risk of banks during the global financial crisis (2007-2009)



                                                21
Are these effects specific to the COVID-19 pandemic or did liquidity risk also episodically

explain stock returns during other times of aggregate risk? To understand whether this effect

occurs more generally during aggregate economic downturns, we first plot the stock prices of

banks with high vs. low Liquidity Risk over the 2007 to 2009 period in Figure 5.

                                      [Figure 5 about here]

       We plot the difference in the stock price of banks with high vs. low Liquidity Risk

indexed at January 1, 2007. The difference in the stock price performance between the two

groups of banks is even more pronounced than during the COVID-19 crisis. Stock of banks

with high Liquidity Risk fell by about 40% more than banks with low liquidity risk between Q2

2007 and Q3 2008. The stock price performance was then similar until the end of 2009.

       We construct our variables at the end of Q4 2006 for our regressions in 2007 and at the

end of Q4 2007 for the regressions in 2008 and 2009, and estimate equation (1) quarterly over

the Q1 2007 to Q1 2009 period. The estimation results are reported in Table 6.

                                      [Table 6 about here]

       In Panel A of Table 6, we confirm that liquidity risk also episodically explained bank

stock returns during the GFC, i.e., during the 2007 to 2009 period. Liquidity risk for banks rose

in Q3 2007, i.e., in the first phase of the GFC, when the Asset Backed Commercial Paper

(ABCP) market froze as documented in Acharya et al. (2013). Thereafter, liquidity risk

remained priced in the cross-section of bank stock returns (and even increased in economic

magnitude) until the end of Q2 2008. The Federal Reserve and U.S. government responded to

the economic fallout of the Lehman Brothers default with a variety of measures to support the

liquidity of the banking sector including large guarantee programs, following which we do not

see any effect of liquidity risk on bank stock returns.

       In Panel B of Table 6, we split Liquidity Risk into its components. While unused C&I

credit lines are clearly important, the results also show that wholesale funding exposure as well

as having access to liquidity (i.e. cash) impacts bank stock returns, highlighting that a holistic

                                                22
measure of balance-sheet liquidity risk is useful. Otherwise we would force an average effect

across banks for individual components.

       Overall, episodes in which the balance-sheet liquidity risk of banks explains their stock

returns seem to occur more broadly in aggregate economic downturns, when an aggregate

liquidity demand for bank credit lines emerges.



6. Understanding the mechanisms: Funding versus bank capital

In this section, we investigate the mechanisms as to the effect of balance-sheet liquidity risk on

bank stock returns during the COVID-19 pandemic. Does funding liquidity to source new loans

become a binding constraint for banks when deposit funding dries up (the "funding channel")?

Or, does the drawdown of credit lines lock up bank capital against term loans and impair bank

loan origination, preventing banks from making possibly more profitable loans (the "capital

channel")?

6.1. Net versus gross credit-line drawdowns and bank stock returns

To distinguish between the funding and capital channels, we construct two measures based on

actual drawdowns experienced by our sample banks during the first quarter in 2020. Gross

Drawdowns are defined as the percentage change of banks' off-balance-sheet unused C&I loan

commitments between Q4 2019 and Q1 2020 using call report data. Ivashina and Strahan (2012)

and Li et al. (2020) show that lagged unused C&I credit commitments are a good predictor for

changes in banks' C&I loans. We construct a second proxy, Net Drawdowns, which is defined

as the absolute change in banks' unused C&I commitments minus the change in deposits (all

relative to total assets) over the same period. Holding gross drawdowns fixed, our measure of

net drawdowns helps us understand the importance of changes in bank deposits on bank stock

returns. In other words, Gross Drawdowns proxies for the importance of capital, while Net

Drawdowns is a proxy for the importance of bank deposit funding; both measures help us

identify the importance of the funding vs. capital channel.

                                               23
       We plot the time-series of both measures since Q1 2010 in Figure 6. Panel A of Figure

6 shows the evolution of Gross Drawdowns. While Gross Drawdowns have been relatively

stable since 2015, we observe a sudden increase in credit-line drawdowns by about 13.5% from

Q4 2019 to Q1 2020. As observed for banks' off-balance-sheet levels of unused C&I loans,

gross drawdowns had already reverted back to pre-COVID-19 levels by the end of Q2 2020.

                                      [Figure 6 about here]

       Panel B of Figure 6 displays the development of Net Drawdowns since Q1 2010. Net

Drawdowns have been relatively stable since 2015 and decreased by about 5% in Q1 2020. In

other words, the change in deposits during the first quarter 2020 has been larger than the change

in unused C&I commitments, suggesting that funding of new loans should not be a binding

constraint for banks. Similar to gross drawdowns, net drawdowns also returned to pre-COVID-

19 levels over the next two quarters (i.e. in Q3 2020).

       We investigate the effect of gross and net drawdowns on bank stock returns more

formally using the model specification and control variables from column 5 of Panel A of Table

2. Instead of Liquidity Risk, we use our two new proxies to understand the importance of the

funding vis-à-vis the capital channel. Table 7 reports the results.

                                      [Table 7 about here]

       We introduce both proxies sequentially in columns 1 and 2 and then together in column

(3). The coefficient of Net Drawdowns is small and insignificant, while the coefficient of Gross

Drawdowns is statistically significant and economically meaningful (column 2). A one-

standard-deviation increase in Gross Drawdowns reduces bank stock returns by about 4.2%,

which is large. In magnitude it is similar to our Liquidity Risk proxy used in Table 2 earlier in

this paper. We include both proxies in column 3 and find that, holding gross drawdowns fixed,

net drawdowns have still no significant effect on bank stock returns. That is, as variation in net

drawdowns is driven by changes in bank deposits (holding gross drawdowns fixed), funding of

drawdowns through bank deposits does not appear to be a binding constraint for banks.

                                                24
       In column 4, we observe the interaction between Gross Drawdowns and the Capital

Buffer, which is the difference between a bank's equity-asset ratio and the cross-sectional

average of the equity-asset-ratio of all sample banks in Q4 2019. A larger difference implies

that a bank has a higher capital buffer. The coefficient of the interaction term is positive and

significant emphasizing that the negative effect of drawdowns on stock returns is attenuated if

banks fund their credit line exposure with more capital. Consistently, the coefficient of the

interaction term of Capital Buffer and Net Drawdowns is not significant (column (5)). Using

the change in bank deposits (Change Deposits) instead of net drawdowns provides qualitatively

the same results (column (6)). Finally, adding SRISK/Assets as additional control (column 5)

does not change the coefficient of Gross Drawdowns, suggesting that SRISK does not capture

systemic implications associated with aggregate credit-line drawdowns.

6.2. Implications for bank lending during the COVID-19 pandemic

What does balance-sheet liquidity risk mean for bank lending during the COVID-19 pandemic?

The increase in loan vis-à-vis bond spreads documented in Figure 2 in the introduction suggests

that bank health was materially affected by the pandemic, and not just temporarily, impacting

the access of firms to bank loans as well as the cost of bank credit. Loan-level data shows that

bank issuance of new corporate loans has indeed substantially declined since the start of the

COVID-19 pandemic. It is a testable hypothesis that banks with more balance-sheet liquidity

risk reduced lending more relative to other banks. Moreover, if banks' capital constraints

matter, we expect (term loan) lending to be particularly sensitive to gross (but not to net)

drawdowns.

       We use data from Dealscan to investigate these important issues. We use data on new

loan originations in January 2019 to October 2020 and divide our sample into a pre and post

period, where post is defined as the period starting April 1, 2020 (Q2 2020), i.e. during the

COVID-19 pandemic. In unreported tests, we collapse our sample at the bank x month level

and show that banks with higher Liquidity Risk and higher Gross Drawdowns decrease lending

                                              25
in the post relative to the pre-period and relative to banks with lower exposures using bank and

month fixed effects. Net Drawdowns have no effect on lending. Banks reduce lending

particularly to riskier borrowers consistent with higher capital requirements associated with

these loans. However, while these tests are promising they do not allow us to control for loan

demand. A plausible alternative explanation could be a reduction in loan demand due to lower

investments from firms in a period characterized by high uncertainty. Another alternative

explanation for a reduction in lending could be a loss of intermediation rents due to the low-

interest-rate environment.

       Methodology. We use a Khwaja and Mian (2008) estimator to formally disentangle

demand and supply in a regression framework, investigating the change in lending of banks to

the same borrower before and after the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. We construct a

new variable, Loani,b,m,t, which is the loan amount (or number of loans) issued to firm i by bank

b as loan-type m in month t. As our data contains syndicated loans, we use all banks and their

lending to firm i in a syndicate in the pre- and post-COVID-19 period. Absorbing loan demand

shocks using borrower (!! ), x bank (!" ), x loan-type fixed effect (!# ), we can isolate the effect

of balance-sheet liquidity risk on bank loan supply:



         !17.!,',( =  A)  × I1*& +  A*  × EE'  × I1*& + J!$  ×  !% × !& K +  &$,%,&



       Following Bertrand et al. (2004), we collapse our data on a firm x bank x loan-type level

into a pre- and post-COVID-19 period to account for possible autocorrelation in the standard

errors. Loani,b,m is the natural log of the loan amount (or natural log of 1 plus the number of

loans) issued to firm i by bank b as loan-type m. A negative A* implies that a bank with more

exposure to drawdown risk (EE' ) ­ measured as either Gross or Net Drawdowns ­ decrease

lending more than banks with less exposure during the COVID-19 pandemic after controlling

for loan demand and other bank- and loan-specific effects via borrower x bank x tranche type

                                                26
fixed effects J!$  ×  !% × !& K. Gross and Net Drawdowns are measured over the Q1 2020 period

and the post period starts, as explained above, in Q2 2020. We cluster standard errors on the

borrower x bank x tranche level in all regressions.

       Results. We provide results with the nat. log of loan amounts as dependent variable in

Panel A of Table 8.

                                      [Table 8 about here]

       Banks that experienced larger gross drawdowns during Q1 2020 reduced lending more

during the COVID-19 pandemic. The effect is highly statistically significant and economically

large (column 1). A one-standard-deviation increase in Gross Drawdowns decreases loan

amounts by 5%. While the effect of Net Drawdowns is also significant (column 2), its economic

meaning is smaller than Gross Drawdowns. When including both proxies in the regression, we

find that the coefficient of Gross Drawdowns becomes smaller and statistically insignificant

(column 3). A) is negative and significant suggesting that bank lending has, on average,

decreased after the outbreak of COVID-19 across all banks. A possible explanation is the loss

of intermediation rents for banks at large.

       This regression, however, might mask the fact that both proxies are important but that

capital or liquidity might play different roles depending on whether or not the loan needs to be

fully funded at origination. We thus split the sample into term loans (column 4) and credit lines

(column 5) and run the same regressions. As expected, banks with larger Gross Drawdowns

reduce term lending more post-COVID-19 and banks with larger Net Drawdowns reduce credit

commitments. That is, banks that experience net drawdowns appear to be reluctant to take on

additional liquidity risk. Banks, however, can make term loans as long as they have capital to

provide for them. Gross drawdowns reduce the available capital and thus term lending. The

economic magnitudes of both proxies are similar to columns 1 and 2. The statistical




                                               27
significance, however, is somewhat lower, as standard errors have increase, likely due to the

smaller samples. 21

        We find very similar results when using the nat. log of 1 plus the number of loans as the

dependent variable. The economic magnitude of Gross Drawdowns and thus the relative

importance of the capital vis-à-vis the funding channel is even more pronounced.



7. Contingent capital shortfall in a crisis

Balance-sheet liquidity risk of banks ­ mainly driven by undrawn credit lines ­ has severe

implications on their ability to extend new loans, because it requires capital once these credit

lines are drawn. How can policy makers address aggregate drawdown risk in an ex-ante

manner? One possible way is for regulators to add the effect of drawdowns to stress tests and

require banks to fund these exposures with equity. In the last part of the paper, we quantify the

capital shortfall that arises due to balance-sheet liquidity risk and show how balance sheet

liquidity risk can be incorporated tractably into bank stress tests. Existing stress tests do not

account for the impact of banks' contingent liabilities in times of stress. This is what we set out

to do in this section.

7.1. Methodology

Capital shortfall in a systemic crisis (SRISK). SRISK is defined as the capital that a firm is

expected to need if we have another financial crisis. Symbolically it can be defined as:



                             L)MLN!,# = O# (07Q"&76L1=&R766! |0="*"*)

That is,



21
   Several papers provide evidence consistent with a reduction of banks' intermediation activity during COVID-
19. Chodorow-Reich et al. (2020) and Greenwald et al. (2020) show that banks cut credit lines and term lending
to small firms because of credit line drawdowns of large firms, likely due to capital constraints. Moreover, we
show in the Online Appendix that loan spreads of small firms in secondary loan markets have significantly
increased vis-à-vis spreads of large firms since the beginning of the pandemic, consistent with a loss of
intermediation activity for small firms dependent on bank financing.

                                                      28
                     L)MLN!,# = O [+(E/V& + O#$"&') - O#$"&' |0="*"*]

                     = NE/V&!,# - (1 - N)(1 - !)YOL!,# )O#$"&'!,#



where E/V&!,# is assumed to be constant between time t and Crisis over t to t+h. LRMES is the

Long Run Marginal Expected Shortfall, approximated in Acharya et al. (2012) as

1 - / (,)-×/0$ ), where MES is the one-day loss expected in bank i's return if market returns

are less than -2% and Crisis is taken to be a scenario where the broad index falls by 40% over

the next six months (h=6m). K is the regulatory capital ratio of 8%.

       As described above, such an impact can be broken down into two components. First,

off-balance-sheet (i.e., contingent) liabilities enter banks' balance sheets as loans and need to

be funded with capital. Second, we also have to account for the effects on stock returns as

demonstrated in our calculations above.

"Contingent" capital shortfall in a systemic crisis (SRISK-C). We calculate the capital

shortfall of banks in a systemic crisis with contingent liabilities as follows:

               )                      )*                    *+,-.          !
          '()'*!,( =  ),-./0/,123'()'*!,( + ),-./0/,123'()'*!,(



                    12
(i) M.Z=/2/.&76L)MLN!,# recognizes that drawdowns of credit lines in crisis states represent

contingent liabilities of banks ( E/V&!,#34 |0="*"*  E/V&!,# ):



                             12
             M.Z=/2/.&76L)MLN!,# = N\O\E/V&!,#34 |0="*"*] - E/V&!,# ]

             = N × O [E=7F%1F.=7&/|0="*"*]  × -.$*/%0122"&2/.&*!,#



O [E=7F%1F.=7&/|0="*"*] is estimated using past drawdown rates extrapolated for a market

index fall of 40%.




                                                29
                     25/0$            !
(ii) M.Z=/2/.&76L)MLN!,#   recognizes that LRMES estimated using "small" (or local) -

2% market corrections in normal times does not account for the episodic effect of balance-sheet

liquidity risk on bank stock returns:

                                 25/0$          !        1
                 M.Z=/2/.&76L)MLN!,#   = (1 - N) ×  !)YOL!,# × O#$"&'!,# ,



           1
where !)YOL!,# =?
                _ ×  !"#$"%"&')"*+!,# and ?
                                          _ is the estimated episodic effect from our

tests on balance-sheet liquidity risk.

7.2. Estimating the drawdown function

           To calculate the expected percentage drawdown in a crisis, we use drawdown data

during the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the GFC crisis and estimate the expected drawdown

in a stress scenario with a 40% market correction for both stressed periods. We show plots of

this exercise in Figure 7.

                                                    [Figure 7]

           In Panel A of Figure 7, we plot the cumulative quarterly drawdown rates during the

COVID-19 pandemic (i.e. Q4 2019 and Q1 2020) and the GFC (i.e. the Q1 2007 to Q4 2009

period) on the respective quarterly S&P 500 returns. We also show the linear regressions for

both periods. In Panel B of Figure 7, we use the lowest cumulative daily S&P 500 return within

each quarter (instead of the quarterly return). This presentation has two advantages. First, it

shows that for quarters with relatively low negative S&P 500 returns (i.e. "normal times"),

drawdowns are somewhat clustered.22 Second, drawdown decisions are arguably based on how

bad a quarter has actually been rather than on the situation at the end of each quarter. We

therefore calculate drawdown rates based on Panel B of Figure 7.

           We find that the sensitivity of credit-line drawdowns to changes in market returns was

higher during the COVID-19 pandemic (the slope coefficient, the A , is -0.57) compared with



22
     The intercept in the COVID-19 pandemic and the GFC are 17% and 15%, respectively.

                                                       30
the GFC (the slope coefficient is -0.27). The projected drawdown rate in a market downturn of

40% (-40% xA ) is thus also substantially higher in the COVID-19 pandemic (22.91% vs.

10.82%). A possible explanation of the differential impact on absolute drawdowns could be

that corporate balance sheets were less impacted during the GFC, which originated in the

banking and household sector. The COVID-19 pandemic, however, had an immediate effect on

firms' balance sheets, resulting in elevated demand for liquidity from pre-arranged credit lines

compared with the GFC.

       The quarterly drawdown rates in both stress scenarios or crises are summarized together

with the sensitivities of the drawdown rates in a market correction in Panel A of Table 9.

                                      [Table 9 about here]

7.3. Incremental SRISK due to credit line drawdowns

Using these expected drawdown rates, we calculate the equity capital that would be required to

fund these new loans based on banks' unused commitments at the end of Q4 2019

(M.Z=/2/.&76L)MLN!12 ). We use the Q4 2019 unused credit line commitments of banks and

apply the drawdown rates calculated in the three different stress scenarios assuming a prudential

capital ratio of 8%:



M.Z=/2/.&76L)MLN!12 = E=7F%1F.=7&/ × 8% × -.$*/%0122"&2/.&*                               (4)



In Panel B of Table 9, we show the top 10 banks with the largest undrawn commitments as of

Q4 2019 and report M.Z=/2/.&76L)MLN!12 individually for each of these banks. We also report

the total M.Z=/2/.&76L)MLN 12 for the top 10 and for all banks in our sample. Overall, we find

that M.Z=/2/.&76L)MLN 12 , i.e, the additional capital, amounts to about USD 36bn to USD

65bn depending on the estimates of the drawdown rate.

7.4. Incremental SRISK due to MESC and contingent SRISK (SRISKC)



                                               31
We also accounte for the effect of liquidity risk on bank stock returns as demonstrated in our

calculations above. Using the loadings from our regressions of bank stock returns on balance-

sheet liquidity risk during the COVID-19 crisis (i.e, the ? in equation (2)), we estimate the

additional (marginal) equity shortfall of banks based on their end of Q4 2019 market values of
                                                   !
equity (MV), called the M.Z=/2/.&76L)MLN!25/0$ :



                                             !
                   M.Z=/2/.&76L)MLN!25/0$ = (1 - +) × Yb! × !)YOL!1

                            =  (1 - +) × Yb! ×  ?
                                                _ × !"#$"%"&')"*+!                     (5)



      !)YOL!1 is contingent marginal expected shortfall due to the impact of liquidity risk on
                                                               !
bank stock returns. We report the M.Z=/2/.&76L)MLN!25/0$ in Panel C of Table 9.

      We use a minimum and maximum loading (?) estimated from different regressions based
                                              1            1
on equation (1) and calculate a range of !)YOL(!6 and !)YOL(78 , which is between 6.9%
                                                           !
and 24.9%. The corresponding M.Z=/2/.&76L)MLN!25/0$            amounts to USD 158bn to USD

250bn.

      In a final step, we calculate the conditional SRISK (L)MLN 1 ) adding the two incremental

SRISK components. Adding both components we show that the additional capital shortfall for

the U.S. banking sector due to balance-sheet liquidity risk amounts to more than $300 billion

as of 31 December 2019 in a stress scenario of a 40% correction to the global stock market,

with the top 10 banks contributing USD 265bn. The incremental capital shortfall of the top 10

banks is about 1.6 times the SRISK estimate without accounting for contingent liabilities and

the effect of liquidity risk.

         Overall, our estimates show that the incremental capital shortfall in an aggregate

economic downturn due to banks' contingent liabilities is sizeable, because it requires an

additional amount of capital to fund the new loans on their balance sheets, and, importantly,


                                              32
because of an (even larger) incremental capital requirement due to an episodic impact of bank

balance-sheet liquidity risk on bank stock returns.



8. Discussion

Finally, we discuss the robustness of our results and their extensions along three dimensions:

(1) alternative liquidity proxies used in the literature; (2) pricing of contingent drawdown

options through credit-line fees; and (3) the role of covenants during the pandemic.

8.1 Liquidity proxies

We propose and developed a new measure of balance-sheet liquidity risk as there is no

consensus in the literature on how to measure liquidity risk. In this section, we compare our

measure with two frequently used measures in the literature, the Berger and Bouwman (2009)

liquidity creation measure (BB) and the Bai et al. (2018) liquidity risk measure (LMI). BB is a

stock measure including banks' on and off-balance-sheet positions. In contrast, the LMI is a

contemporaneous measure as it incorporates current market liquidity conditions (using the OIS

- 3m Treasury Bill spread as a liability weight). We create two LMIs, one using liquidity

conditions as of Q4 2019 (LMI ­ 2019) and one using the worst liquidity condition in March

2020 (LMI ­ 2020). We provide a more detailed discussion of the creation of the liquidity

measures and the results in Online Appendix D. Below is a brief summary.

       We estimate regression (1) using the alternative liquidity proxies. We find that the BB

measure is negatively and significantly related to stock returns during the 3/1/2020 to3/23/2020

period; however, the effect is somewhat moderate compared with both Liquidity Risk and

Unused C&I / Assets. In unreported tests, we run a horse race of Liquidity Risk and both

alternative liquidity measures in separate regressions. Both LMI and BB become small and

insignificant, while Liquidity Risk remains negative and significant, suggesting that Liquidity

Risk contains information not captured in these alternative liquidity proxies. LMI ­ 2019 has

only a small and statistically insignificant effect due to benign liquidity conditions in financial

                                                33
markets at the end of 2019. LMI ­ 2020, however, has a large, significant impact on stock

returns and is also highly correlated with Liquidity Risk. This is consistent with the

interpretation that a worsening of liquidity conditions in financial markets increases aggregate

drawdown risk for banks, thereby increasing the value of the put option, which negatively

impacts bank stock returns.

8.2. Credit line fees

Do banks price aggregate drawdown risk through fees and/or credit spreads when issuing new

credit lines? In Online Appendix E, we investigate this question using all credit lines issued to

U.S. non-financial firms over the 2010 to 2019 period, sourced from Refinitiv Dealscan. We

first show that idiosyncratic drawdown risk (measured using a firm's realized equity volatility

over the past 12 months) and systematic drawdown risk (measured using a firm's stock beta)

are priced in both commitment fee (AISU) and spread (AISD). This is consistent with, for

example, Acharya et al. (2013) and Berg et al. (2015).

       However, while a higher Bank Beta and LRMES both somewhat increase the price of

credit lines, Liquidity Risk or Unused C&I / Assets, on average, do not. Also, SRISK / Assets,

which measures bank capital shortfall in times of aggregate market downturn, does not appear

to be priced either. In other words, banks do not appear to be considering the deep out-of-the-

money put option associated with aggregate drawdown risk when setting ex-ante price terms of

credit lines. This may partly explain their need to fund aggregate drawdown risk with equity

capital, as witnessed during the pandemic.

8.3. Covenants

Did covenants constrain drawdowns of credit lines at the beginning of the pandemic in March

2020, or later during the year when firms' financial situation had deteriorated? We follow the

extant literature (e.g., Roberts and Sufi, 2008) and use textual analysis to identify all loan

amendments of publicly listed U.S. non-financial firms in SEC filings sourced from EDGAR

from March to Q3 2020. We found that not a single loan amendment was initiated through a

                                               34
covenant violation. On the contrary, banks and firms regularly negotiated a covenant relief

period (usually up to Q1 2021 or later) early in the pandemic to account for its fallout. In

summary, credit line drawdowns (also by firms in the hardest-hit industries) did not appear to

be constrained by possible covenant violations during the pandemic.



9. Conclusion

We document that the balance-sheet liquidity risk of banks is an explanation for the significant

and persistent underperformance of bank stocks relative to other financial and non-financial

firms during the COVID-19 pandemic. It explains both the cross-section and the time-series of

bank returns during the pandemic but not before. This episodic impact of balance-sheet liquidity

risk on bank stock returns is not unique to the COVID-19 crisis, and was also seen during the

global financial crisis, i.e., during the 2007 to 2009 crisis. That is, balance-sheet liquidity risk

of banks affects bank stock prices during an aggregate economic downturn when firms'

liquidity demand through credit-line drawdowns becomes highly correlated, but not before.

       Importantly, bank stock returns react adversely to gross drawdowns rather than net

drawdowns (which account for inflows in bank deposits), suggesting that bank capital is a

binding constraint to intermediation activity by banks as perceived by markets. Consistently,

we show that banks with large gross drawdowns reduce their immediate supply of term loans

(not credit lines); banks with less deposit inflows, however, reduce credit line originations. We

demonstrate how the episodic nature of credit-line drawdowns and balance-sheet liquidity risk

can be incorporated tractably into bank stress tests.

       Darmouni and Siani (2020) show that U.S. non-financial firms issued bonds following

the monetary policy and fiscal interventions in March 2020 and used the proceeds to repay

credit lines. While a large proportion of credit lines has been repaid in Q2 and Q3 2020,

corporate preference for cash of firms has remained high (Online Appendix B) and total debt

on firms' balance sheet has substantially increased. The non-financial-sector leverage and

                                                35
exposure to capital markets has thus increased further during the COVID-19 pandemic. In other

words, ex-ante aggregate drawdown risk of banks is again high (e.g., in case of another wave

of the pandemic or due to another aggregate shock). In turn, the value of the put option in the

form of bank credit lines for corporates and capital markets would be even more pronounced if

liquidity conditions were to severely deteriorate. In summary, additional corporate leverage

accumulated during the initial phase of the pandemic has increased the likelihood of future

impact on bank stock returns via the credit-line drawdown channel.




                                              36
References

Acharya, V., R. Engle, and M. Richardson, 2012, Capital shortfall: a new approach to ranking

       and regulating systemic risks. American Economic Review 102, 59­64.

Acharya, V. and N. Mora, 2015, A Crisis of Banks as Liquidity Providers, Journal of Finance,

       2015, 70(1), 1-44.

Acharya, V., L. Pedersen, T. Philippon, and M. Richardson, 2016, Measuring systemic risk,

       Review of Financial Studies, 30, 2-47.

Acharya, V., P. Schnabl, G. Suarez, 2013, Securitization Without Risk Transfer, Journal of

       Financial Economics, 107, 515-536

Acharya, V., and S. Steffen, 2020a, `Stress tests' for banks as liquidity insurers in a time of

       COVID. CEPR VoxEU.org.

Acharya, V., and S. Steffen, 2020b, The risk of being a fallen angel and the corporate dash for

       cash in the midst of COVID. Review of Corporate Finance Studies 9 (3), 430-471.

Adrian, T. and M. Brunnermeier, 2016, American Economic Review 106 (7), 1705-1741.

Allen, F., and D. Gale. 2004. Financial Intermediaries and Markets. Econometrica 72:1023­61.

Allen, F., and A. M. Santomero. 1998. The Theory of Financial Intermediation. Journal of

       Banking and Finance 21:1461­85.

Bai, J., A. Krishnamurthy, C.-H. Weymuller, 2018, Measuring liquidity mismatch in the

       banking sector. Journal of Finance 73, 51-93.

Behn, M., R. Haselmann, and V. Vig, 2016, The limits of model-based regulation, Working

       Paper.

Berg, T., A. Saunders and S. Steffen, 2016, The Total Cost of Borrowing in the Loan Market ­

       Don't Ignore the Fees, Journal of Finance, 71(3), 1357-1392.

Berg, T., A. Saunders, S. Steffen and D. Streitz, 2017, Mind the Gap: The Difference between

       U.S. and European Loan Rates, Review of Financial Studies, 30(3), 948-987.



                                                37
Berger, A., and C. Bouwman, 2009, Bank liquidity creation, Review of Financial Studies, 22(9),

       3779-3837.

Bhattacharya, S., and A. V. Thakor. 1993. Contemporary Banking Theory. Journal of Financial

       Intermediation 3:2­50

Brownlees, C., and R. Engle, 2017, SRISK: A Conditional Capital Shortfall Measure of

       Systemic Risk, Review of Financial Studies, 30 (1), 48­79.

Chodorow-Reich, G., O. Darmouni, S. Luck, and M. Plosser, 2020, Bank liquidity provision

       across the firm size distribution, Working Paper.

Cornett, M., J. McNutt, P. Strahan, and H. Tehranian, 2011, Liquidity risk management and

       credit supply in the financial crisis. Journal of Financial Economics, 101(2), pp.297-

       312.

Coval, J. D., and A. V. Thakor. 2005. Financial Intermediation as a Beliefs-Bridge between

       Optimists and Pessimists. Journal of Financial Economics 75:535­69.

Darmouni, O., and K. Y. Siani, 2020. Crowding Out Bank Loans: Liquidity-Driven Bond

       Issuance. Working Paper, Columbia University.

Deep, A., and G. Schaefer. 2004. Are Banks Liquidity Transformers? Working Paper, Harvard

       University.

Demsetz, R., and P. Strahan, 1997, Diversification, size, and risk at bank holding companies,

       Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 29(3), 300-313.

Gatev, E., and P. Strahan, 2006, Banks' Advantage in Hedging Liquidity Risk: Theory and

       Evidence from the Commercial Paper Market. Journal of Finance 61(2), 867-892.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., A. Pedraza, and C. Ruiz-Ortega, 2020, Banking sector performance during

       the COVID-19 crisis, Working Paper, World Bank.

Egan, M., S. Lewellen, A. Sunderam, 2020, The cross section of bank value. Working Paper.




                                             38
Fahlenbrach, R., R. Prilmeier, and R.s M. Stulz, 2012, This Time is the Same: Using Bank

       Performance in 1998 to Explain Bank Performance During the Recent Financial

       Crisis, Journal of Finance 67, 2139-2185.

Fahlenbrach, R., K. Rageth, and R. M. Stulz, 2020, How valuable is financial flexibility when

       revenue stops? Evidence from the Covid-19 crisis. Review of Financial Studies,

       forthcoming.

Gilchrist, S., and E. Zakrajsek. 2012. "Credit Spreads and Business Cycle

       Fluctuations." American Economic Review 102 (4): 1692-1720.

Gormsen, N. J., and R. S. J. Koijen. 2020. Coronavirus: Impact on stock prices and growth

       expectations. Review of Asset Pricing Studies 10 (4), 574-597.

Greenwald, D. L., J. Krainer, and P. Paul, 2020, The credit line channel, Working Paper.

Holmstrom, B., and J. Tirole. 1998. Public and Private Supply of Liquidity. Journal of Political

       Economy 106:1­40.

Ivashina, V., and D. Scharfstein, 2010, Bank Lending During the Financial Crisis of 2008,

       Journal of Financial Economics, 97(3), 319­338.

Kapan, T., and C. Minoiu, 2020, Liquidity Insurance vs. Credit Provision: Evidence from the

       COVID-19 Crisis, Working Paper.

Kashyap, A., R. Rajan and J. Stein, 2002, Banks as Liquidity Providers: An Explanation for the

       Coexistence of Lending and Deposit-taking, Journal of Finance 57(1) 33.73.

Landier, A., and D. Thesmar, 2020, Earnings Expectations in the COVID Crisis, MIT Working

       Paper.

Li, L., and P. Strahan, 2020, Who Supplies PPP Loans (And Does it Matter)? Banks,

       Relationships and the COVID Crisis, NBER Working Paper.

Li, L., P. Strahan, and S. Zhang, 2020, Banks as Lenders of First Resort: Evidence from the

       COVID-19 Crisis, Review of Corporate Finance Studies 9(3), 472-500.



                                              39
Pagano, M., C. Wagner, and J. Zechner, 2020, Disaster resilience and asset prices. Working

       Paper, University of Naples.

Ramelli, S., and A. F. Wagner, 2020, Feverish stock price reactions to COVID-19. Review of

       Corporate Finance Studies 9 (3), 622-655.

Repullo, R. 2004. Capital Requirements, Market Power, and Risk-Taking in Banking. Journal

       of Financial Intermediation 13:156­82.

Saunders, A., A. Spina, S. Steffen, and D. Streitz, 2021, Corporate loan spreads and economic

       activity, Working Paper.

Von Thadden, E.-L. 2004. Bank Capital Adequacy Regulation under the New Basel Accord.

       Journal of Financial Intermediation 13:90­95.




                                             40
Figure 1. Cumulative drawdowns and bank stock prices
Panel A shows the cumulative credit line drawdowns of U.S. firms over the March 1, 2020 to July 1, 2020 period
in billion USD. Panel B shows the stock prices of U.S. firms by sector, specifically firms from the energy, banking
and other sectors, since Jan 1st, 2020. All variables are defined in Appendix II.



        Panel A. Cumulative drawdowns (in USD bn)




        Panel B. Stock prices of banks vs. non-financial firms




                                                        41
Figure 2. Loan vs. bond spreads
This figure shows the time-series difference of loan and bond spreads (Panel A) and splitting loans by rating classes
(Panel B). The loan spread is calculated based on Saunders et al. (2021). The sample is based on all loans traded
in 2020 that were traded in the U.S. Leveraged Loan Index (LLI) obtained from Leveraged Commentary and Data
(LCD) and matched to secondary loan market trading data from Refinitiv. The sample thus comprises about 1,000
U.S. non-financial firms. 3% of the observations are unrated (based on S&P ratings), 25% are CCC-C rated, 54%
are B rated, 15% BB rated and 3% BBB rated. Loans with a "D" rating are dropped from the sample (35 firms).
Loan spreads are constructed using a weighted average (with facility amounts as weights). Bond spreads are
constructed based on Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) and obtained from the Federal Reserve website.

Panel A. Loan-bond-spread difference




Panel B. Loan-bond-spread difference (by rating)




                                                        42
Figure 3. Bank balance-sheet liquidity risk
This figure shows the time-series of balance-sheet Liquidity Risk over the Q1 2010 to Q3 2020 period. We measure
Liquidity Risk as undrawn commitments plus wholesale finance minus cash or cash equivalents (all relative to
assets). All variables are defined in Appendix II.


                 Panel A. Liquidity risk




                 Panel B. Components of liquidity risk




                                                      43
Figure 4. Stock prices and liquidity risk of U.S. banks
This figure shows stock prices of U.S. banks with Low or High Liquidity Risk. We measure Liquidity Risk as
undrawn commitments plus wholesale finance minus cash or cash equivalents (all relative to assets) and use a
median split to distinguish between banks with Low vs. High Liquidity Risk. Panel A shows the stock prices of
both group of banks indexed at Jan 1, 2020, Panel B shows the difference between the stock prices (in percentage
point). Panel B plots bank stock returns during the March 1 ­ March 23, 2020 period on Liquidity Risk. All
variables are defined in Appendix II.

Panel A. Bank stock returns




Panel B. Bank stock return and liquidity risk




                                                      44
Figure 5. Stock prices and liquidity risk of U.S. banks (2007-2009)
This figure shows stock prices of U.S. banks with Low or High Liquidity Risk for the Jan 2007 to Jan 2010 period.
We measure Liquidity Risk.as undrawn commitments plus wholesale finance minus cash or cash equivalents (all
relative to assets) and use a median split to distinguish between banks with Low vs. High Liquidity Risk. Panel A
shows the stock prices of both group of banks indexed at Jan 1, 2007, Panel B shows the difference between the
stock prices (in percentage point). All variables are defined in Appendix II.




                                                       45
Figure 6. Net vs. gross drawdowns
This figure shows the time-series of Gross Drawdowns (Panel A) and Net Drawdowns (Panel B) over the Q1 2010
to Q3 2020 period. Gross Drawdowns is the percentage change in a bank's off balance sheet unused C&I loan
commitments (measured during Q1 2020). Net Drawdowns are defined as the change in a bank's off balance sheet
unused C&I loan commitments minus the change in deposits (all measured during Q1 2020) relative to total assets.
All variables are defined in Appendix II.


Panel A. Gross Drawdowns




Panel B. Net Drawdowns




                                                      46
Figure 7. Credit line drawdowns and market returns
This figure plots the cumulative drawdown of credit lines of non-financial firms on the cumulative market return
(using the S&P 500 as the market). In Panel A, we plot the cumulative quarterly drawdown rates during the
COVID-19 pandemic (i.e. Q4 2019 and Q1 2020) and the GFC (i.e. the Q1 2007 to Q4 2009 period) on the
respective quarterly S&P 500 returns. We also show the linear regressions for both periods. In Panel B of Figure
6, we use the lowest cumulative daily S&P 500 return within each quarter (instead of the quarterly return). All
variables are defined in Appendix II.


        Panel A. Quarterly drawdowns vs quarterly S&P 500 returns




        Panel B. Quarterly drawdowns vs lowest cumulative S&P 500 return in each quarter




                                                      47
Table 1. Descriptive statistics
Table 1 shows descriptive statistics of the variables included in the cross-sectional regressions. All variables are
defined in Appendix II.

Panel A. Bank stock returns

Variable                                      Obs.         Mean           Std. dev.          Min            Max
Return January 2020                           127          -0.079          0.039            -0.181         0.024
Return February 2020                          127          -0.125          0.037            -0.194         0.011
Return 3/1-3/23 2020                          127          -0.471          0.184            -1.084         -0.131
Return 1/1-3/23 2020                          127          -0.675          0.204            -1.225         -0.260


Panel B. Bank characteristics

Variable                                   Obs.            Mean            Std. dev.          Min              Max
Liquidity Risk                             127              0.209           0.128            -0.453            0.590
Unused LC / Assets                         127              0.081           0.051             0.000            0.263
Liquidity / Assets                         127              0.117           0.079             0.029            0.513
Wholesale Funding / Assets                 127              0.132           0.075             0.013            0.544
Beta                                       127              1.173           0.310             0.390            2.313
NPL / Loans                                127              0.007           0.007             0.000            0.044
Non-Interest Income                        127              0.227           0.118             0.005            0.732
Log(Assets)                                127             16.785           1.267            14.638           21.712
ROA                                        127              0.012           0.003             0.003            0.020
Deposits / Loans                           127              1.124           0.338             0.756            4.272
Income Diversity                           127              0.445           0.213             0.010            0.993
Distance-to-Default                        127              3.648           0.522             1.859            5.060
Loans / Assets                             127              0.702           0.113             0.196            0.899
Deposits / Assets                          127              0.766           0.062             0.549            0.874
Idiosyncratic Volatility                   127              0.202           0.044             0.121            0.417
Real Estate Beta                           127              0.555           0.193            -0.266            1.136
Primary Dealer                             127              0.031           0.175             0.000            1.000
Derivatives / Assets                       127              0.648           2.515             0.000           19.565




                                                         48
Table 2. Liquidity risk and bank stock returns
This table reports the results of OLS regressions of U.S. bank' beta adjusted stock returns over the 1/1/2020 ­
3/23/2020 period with different set of control variables. Panel A shows baseline results sequentially adding control
variables (as described in Table 1 and defined in Appendix A). Panel B shows robustness tests adding off-balance-
sheet credit card exposures (column (1)), consumer loans (column (2)), exposure to the oil & gas industry (column
(3)) and other sectoral exposures (to hotel, leisure and retail industry) (column (4)) as additional control variables.
Column (5) includes SRISK/Assets as additional control. All oil & gas and sectoral exposures are based on loans
reported in DealScan and thus available only for a subset of banks. SRISK is only available for banks in the vlab
database. These regressions include a dummy for banks for whom we do not find exposure data (unreported). P-
values based on robust standard errors are in parentheses. All variables are defined in Appendix II.

Panel A. Baseline results
                                               (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)
Liquidity Risk                             -0.363***        -0.341*       -0.532***        -0.526**       -0.538**
                                             (0.003)         (0.072)        (0.004)         (0.010)        (0.016)
Equity Beta                                -0.266***       -0.271***       -0.165**          -0.122         -0.123
                                             (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.025)         (0.112)        (0.113)
NPL / Loans                                                -6.641***       -5.726**        -4.728**       -4.671**
                                                             (0.001)        (0.013)         (0.034)        (0.050)
Equity Ratio                                                  0.206        -0.00843          -1.017         -0.996
                                                             (0.790)        (0.990)         (0.240)        (0.294)
Non-Interest Income                                          0.0231         0.0543           -0.218         -0.212
                                                             (0.894)        (0.806)         (0.368)        (0.405)
Log(Assets)                                                 0.00892                        -0.0299*        -0.0295
                                                             (0.588)                        (0.097)        (0.169)
ROA                                                           8.735                         13.56**        13.41**
                                                             (0.110)                        (0.041)        (0.048)
Deposits / Loans                                             0.0262                          0.0289         0.0279
                                                             (0.594)                        (0.631)        (0.654)
Income Diversity                                                             0.0106           0.191          0.189
                                                                            (0.942)         (0.198)        (0.217)
Distance-to-Default                                                          0.0582        0.0695**        0.0722*
                                                                            (0.102)         (0.045)        (0.052)
Loans / Assets                                                             -0.00441           0.115          0.128
                                                                            (0.984)         (0.735)        (0.713)
Deposits / Assets                                                            -0.263        -0.841**        -0.815*
                                                                            (0.457)         (0.038)        (0.094)
Idiosyncratic Volatility                                                     -0.741          -0.733         -0.733
                                                                            (0.139)         (0.156)        (0.169)
Real Estate Beta                                                            0.00727        -0.00554       -0.00561
                                                                            (0.958)         (0.968)        (0.968)
Current Primary Dealer Indicator                                                                           -0.0652
                                                                                                           (0.677)
Derivatives / Assets                                                                                       0.00551
                                                                                                           (0.626)
R-squared                                    0.243            0.334          0.361          0.392            0.392
Number obs.                                   127              127            127            127              127




                                                         49
Panel B. Robustness tests

                                       (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)        (5)
Liquidity Risk                      -0.522**    -0.542**       -0.409*     -0.369*    -0.552**
                                     (0.010)     (0.016)       (0.051)     (0.082)     (0.014)
Credit Card Commitments /Assets       0.616
                                     (0.120)
Consumer Loans / Assets                             0.0668
                                                    (0.878)
Oil Exposures / Assets                                        -2.325***   -2.001***
                                                                (0.007)     (0.010)
Other Sectoral Exposures / Assets                                          -6.326**
                                                                            (0.050)
SRISK / Assets                                                                        -8.209***
                                                                                        (0.005)

Controls                              Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
R-squared                            0.423          0.392       0.399       0.415       0.444
Number obs.                           126            127         127         127         127




                                               50
Table 3. Liquidity risk and bank stock returns by month
This table reports the results of OLS regressions of U.S. bank' realized stock returns during January 2020 (columns
(1)-(2), February 2020 (columns (4) to (4)) and 1-23 March 2020 (columns (5) to (6)). Regressions with control
variables are based on column (5) in Panel A of Table 2. Panel B reports the results of the regression of U.S. banks'
daily stock returns on Liquidity Risk interacted with natural logarithm of cumulative drawdowns from credit line
by U.S. firms until this day over the 1 ­ 23 March 2020 period. We include all firms (column (1)), the BBB-rated
firms only (column (2)), then focus on non-investment grade rated firms (column (3)) and then on unrated firms
(column (4)). We always include the contemporaneous return of the S&P 500 and bank fixed effects. P-values
based on robust standard errors are in parentheses. All variables are defined in Appendix II.


Panel A. Cross-sectional test

                       (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)                (5)              (6)
                           January 2020                     February 2020                      3/1-3/23/2020
Liquidity Risk       -0.0254          -0.0521          -0.0001         -0.0138         -0.338***          -0.472**
                     (0.231)          (0.208)          (0.997)         (0.739)           (0.002)           (0.020)
Equity Beta          -0.0112          -0.0200        -0.0404***        -0.0002         -0.214***            -0.103
                     (0.362)          (0.212)          (0.000)         (0.985)           (0.002)           (0.190)
Controls                                Yes                              Yes                                  Yes
R-squared            0.0167            0.157            0.113           0.282             0.211              0.359
Number obs.            127              127              127             127               127                127



Panel B. Time-series test

                          Dependent Variable: Banks' Daily Stock Returns (3/1 ­ 3/23/2020)
                                                                       (1)           (2)              (3)         (4)
Liquidity Risk x Log(Cumulative Total Drawdowns)                    -0.007**
                                                                     (0.031)
Liquidity Risk x Log(Cumulative BBB Drawdowns)                                   -0.017***
                                                                                   (0.002)
Liquidity Risk x Log(Cumulative NonIG Drawdowns)                                                   -0.0091**
                                                                                                     (0.024)
Liquidity Risk x Log(Cumulative Not Rated Drawdowns)                                                           -0.014***
                                                                                                                  (0.01)
S&P 500                                                             1.194***     1.203***          1.193***    1.193***
                                                                     (0.000)      (0.000)           (0.000)      (0.000)
Bank Fixed Effects                                                     Yes          Yes               Yes          Yes
R-squared                                                             0.632        0.630             0.632        0.630
Number obs.                                                           2595         2465              2595          2465




                                                        51
Table 4. Components of liquidity risk
This table reports the results of OLS regressions of U.S. bank' beta adjusted stock returns over the 1/3/2020 ­
3/23/2020 period on the different components of Liquidity Risk with control variables as in column (5) in Panel
A of Table 2. We add the different components sequentially in columns (1)-(3) and add exposure to the oil & gas
industry (column (4)) and other sectoral exposures (to hotel, leisure and retail industry) as additional control
variables (column (5)). We add SRISK/Assets as additional control (column (6)). All oil & gas and sectoral
exposures are based on loans reported in DealScan and thus available only for a subset of banks. SRISK is only
available for banks in the vlab database. These regressions include a dummy for banks for whom we do not find
exposure data (unreported). P-values based on robust standard errors are in parentheses. All variables are defined
in Appendix II.

                                 (1)            (2)               (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)
Unused C&I Loans / Assets    -1.278***      -1.308***        -1.383***    -1.148**      -1.012**      -1.278***
                               (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.001)     (0.013)       (0.043)        (0.002)
Liquidity / Assets                             0.284             0.293       0.204         0.153         0.347
                                              (0.376)          (0.357)     (0.541)       (0.642)        (0.273)
Wholesale Funding / Assets                                      -0.349      -0.401        -0.349         -0.290
                                                               (0.430)     (0.376)       (0.440)        (0.462)
Equity Beta                   -0.140**       -0.135*          -0.124*       -0.107       -0.122*       -0.0841
                               (0.043)       (0.052)           (0.089)     (0.132)       (0.096)        (0.205)
Oil Exposure                                                             -2.187***      -2.000**
                                                                           (0.009)       (0.012)
Other Sectoral Exposures                                                                  -4.763
                                                                                         (0.194)
SRISK /Assets                                                                                         -7.173**
                                                                                                       (0.016)
Controls                        Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes

R-squared                      0.386          0.390            0.393       0.417         0.425          0.450
Number obs.                     127            127              127         127           127            127




                                                        52
Table 5. Reversal of liquidity risk
Panel A reports descriptive statistics of bank stock returns for the months April, May and June 2020 (i.e. after the
Federal Reserve Intervention on 3/23/2020). Panel B reports the results of OLS regressions of U.S. bank' realized
stock returns on Liquidity Risk and its components during each of these months (columns (1) ­ (4)) and then for
the period 3/24/2020 ­ 6/30/2020 (columns (5) and (6)). Control variables as in column (5) in Panel A of Table 2
are included. P-values based on robust standard errors are in parentheses. All variables are defined in Appendix
II.

Panel A. Descriptive statistics of bank stock returns

                                       Obs.           Mean              Std Dev           Min             Max
Return April 2020                      127          .1140058           .0878647        -.0997281        .385558
Return May 2020                        127          -.039326            .080453        -.4542235       .2228914
Return June 2020                       127          .0119836           .0528534        -.1546759       .1514292
Return 3/24-6/30/2020                  127          .1793604           .1639635        -.3437108       .6509989


Panel B. Pricing of liquidity risk

                                     (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
                                   Apr 20      May 2020              June 2020                 3/24/-6/30/2020
Liquidity Risk                     0.0876       0.0626         0.103*                        0.349
                                   (0.466)      (0.433)        (0.089)                      (0.108)
Unused C&I Loans / Assets                                                    0.282**                      1.048***
                                                                             (0.028)                       (0.002)
Liquidity / Assets                                                           -0.0920                       0.0260
                                                                             (0.461)                       (0.949)
Wholesale Funding / Assets                                                   -0.0185                      1.206***
                                                                             (0.908)                       (0.004)
Controls                              Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
R-squared                            0.284        0.275         0.154         0.174          0.304          0.358
Number obs.                           127          127           127           127            127            127




                                                          53
Table 6. Liquidity risk and bank stock return during the Global Financial Crisis
This table reports the results of OLS regressions of U.S. bank' realized stock returns separately for each quarter
during the Q1:2007 to Q4:2009 period. We show the estimates of the coefficients of the Equity Beta of a bank
with the S&P 500 (measured monthly over the 2002-2006 period for tests in 2007 and measured monthly over the
2003-2007 period for tests in 2008/9), but include also all other control variables shown in Panel A of Table 2
(column (5)). P-values based on robust standard errors are in parentheses. All variables are defined in Appendix
II.

Panel A. Liquidity risk and bank stock returns
                         (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)          (1)         (2)             (3)      (4)           (5)
                       Q1 2007    Q2 2007    Q3 2007     Q4 2007       Q1 2008    Q2 2008       Q3 2008     Q4 2008       Q1 2009


Liquidity Risk          0.0118    -0.00262   -0.0727**   -0.153***     -0.160**   -0.262***      0.0469     -0.102        -0.00628
                       (0.745)    (0.962)     (0.046)     (0.002)      (0.017)     (0.000)       (0.644)    (0.386)       (0.956)


Equity Beta            -0.00720   -0.0117     0.0114      -0.0389      0.0377      -0.0707       0.0299     -0.0586        -0.149
                       (0.612)    (0.588)     (0.439)     (0.167)      (0.073)     (0.008)       (0.336)    (0.080)       (0.000)


Controls                 Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes              Yes     Yes            Yes


R-squared               0.030      0.030       0.084       0.173        0.097       0.326           0.338    0.201         0.301
Number obs.              225        225        225         225           237        237              237     237            237



Panel B. Components of liquidity risk
                                                 (1)                   (2)                   (3)                (4)
                                               Q3 2007               Q4 2007               Q1 2008            Q2 2008

Unused C&I Loans / Assets                     -0.222**               -0.0263               -0.360***            -0.188
                                               (0.013)               (0.864)                 (0.000)           (0.375)

Wholesale Funding / Assets                     -0.0360               -0.151**               -0.0436            -0.162*
                                               (0.519)                (0.037)               (0.602)            (0.077)

Liquidity / Assets                             0.0678                0.277***                0.171            0.523***
                                               (0.363)                (0.002)               (0.125)            (0.000)

Equity Beta                                    0.0247                -0.0622                0.0355             -0.0779
                                               (0.108)               (0.030)                (0.087)            (0.003)

Controls                                         Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes

R-squared                                       0.104                 0.221                  0.123              0.339
Number obs.                                      225                   225                    237                237




                                                         54
Table 7. Understanding the mechanisms: Funding versus capital
This table reports the results of OLS regressions of U.S. bank' realized stock returns during the 1/1/2020 to
3/23/2020 period on Net Drawdowns (column (1)) and Gross Drawdowns (column (2)) and control variables. Net
Drawdowns are defined as the change in a bank's off balance sheet unused C&I loan commitments minus the
change in deposits (all measured during Q1 2020) relative to total assets. Gross Drawdowns is the percentage
change in a bank's off-balance sheet unused C&I loan commitments (measured during Q1 2020). Column (4)
includes an interaction term of Gross Drawdowns with Capital Buffer. Column (5) includes an interaction term of
Net Drawdowns with Capital Buffer. In column (6), we use the change in bank deposits (Change Deposits) instead
of Net Drawdowns. Column (7) adds SRISK/Assets as additional control. SRISK is only available for banks in the
vlab database. These regressions include a dummy for banks for whom we do not find SRISK (unreported).
Control variables as in column (5) in Panel A of Table 2 are included. P-values based on robust standard errors
are in parentheses. All variables are defined in Appendix II.

                                              (1)       (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)
Net Drawdowns                               0.0926                    0.219      0.128      0.133               0.0866
                                            (0.885)                  (0.736)    (0.844)    (0.815)              (0.889)
Gross Drawdowns                                       -4.457**      -4.593**   -3.929**   -4.485**   -4.276*   -4.172**
                                                       (0.034)       (0.023)    (0.044)    (0.026)   (0.052)    (0.046)
Change Deposits / Assets                                                                             -0.0697
                                                                                                     (0.904)
Gross Drawdowns x Capital Buffer                                               1.588*
                                                                               (0.084)
Net Drawdowns x Capital Buffer                                                             -0.109
                                                                                          (0.688)
Change Deposits / Assets x Capital Buffer                                                             0.175
                                                                                                     (0.516)
SRISK / Assets                                                                                                 -6.706*
                                                                                                               (0.071)
Capital Buffer                                                                 -1.442      -0.759    -0.944
                                                                               (0.164)    (0.415)    (0.343)
Controls                                     Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes
R-squared                                   0.353      0.378         0.379      0.393       0.381     0.383     0.424
Number obs.                                  127        127           127        127         127       127       127




                                                               55
Table 8. Implications for bank lending during the COVID-19 pandemic
This table provides results of difference-in-differences regressions of the change in amount/number of loan
issuance pre- and post-COVID-19 on credit line drawdowns. The analysis is based on data on firm-bank-loan type
level between Jan 2019 October 2020 that is collapsed to a pre- and post-COVID-19 period (post is denoted as the
period starting 4/1/2020). Panel A (B) shows the results using gross (net) drawdowns. The dependent variables are
the natural log of 1 + the loan amount or the natural log of 1 + the number of loans issued. Columns (1)-(2) controls
for the demand side with borrower fixed effects; column (3) additionally controls for the supply side with borrower
x bank fixed effects; and column (4) additionally controls for tranche type effects with borrower x bank x tranche-
type fixed effects. Detailed variable definitions can be found Appendix A. Standard errors are clustered at level of
the fixed effect in each column. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. All
variables are defined in Appendix II.

Panel A. Loan amount

                                             (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)            (5)
                                                                                        Term Loans     Credit Lines
Post x Gross Drawdowns                    -15.69***                         -8.651        -16.35*          -3.129
                                            (0.001)                        (0.117)         (0.070)        (0.657)
Post x Net Drawdowns                                      -5.676***       -4.267**          -5.232       -4.099*
                                                            (0.001)        (0.028)         (0.141)        (0.078)
Post                                      -2.270***       -2.758***      -2.544***       -2.290***      -2.710***
                                            (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)
Borrower x Bank x Loan Type FE                Yes             Yes            Yes
Borrower x Bank FE                                                                          Yes            Yes
R-squared                                   0.200          0.200           0.200           0.186          0.208
Number obs.                                 17944          17944           17944           5770           12174

Panel B. Number of loans

                                           (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)
                                                                                       Term Loans      Credit Lines
Post x Gross Drawdowns                 -2.609***                         -1.710**        -2.315*           -1.086
                                         (0.000)                          (0.040)         (0.067)         (0.323)
Post x Net Drawdowns                                   -0.824***         -0.545**          -0.741        -0.548*
                                                         (0.001)          (0.048)         (0.137)         (0.098)
Post                                   -0.342***       -0.419***        -0.377***       -0.315***       -0.416***
                                         (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)
Borrower x Bank x Loan Type FE             Yes             Yes              Yes
Borrower x Bank FE                                                                         Yes             Yes
R-squared                                0.223           0.223           0.223            0.189           0.240
Number obs.                              17944           17944           17944            5770            12174




                                                        56
Table 9. Credit line drawdowns and Incremental SRISKCL
This table reports the predicted drawdown rates (Drawdown Rate) from credit lines in a stress scenario of 40%
correction to the global stock market (Panel A) and the Slope of the drawdown function (compare Figure 6). In
Panel B, we report the Unused Commitments (C&I loans), and the marginal required capital to fund the predicted
drawdowns (Marginal SRISK) using all three (stressed) historical drawdown rates. Incremental SRISKCL =
Drawdown rate x 8% x Unused Commitments (C&I loans). Debt is total liabilities (from vlab). Panel C reports
the calculation of Incremental SRISKMES-C due to the sensitivity of bank stock returns to Liquidity Risk using the
minimum (gmin) and maximum (gmax) sensitivity from different model specifications shown in prior tables. MES-
Cmin (%) is calculated as Liquidity Risk x gmin. MES-Cmin ($) is calculated as Liquidity Risk x gmin x MV. Other
variables are calculated accordingly. In Panel D, we show the Conditional SRISK (SRISK-C) which is the sum of
Incremental SRISKCL and Incremental SRISKMES-C. All variables are defined in Appendix II.


Panel A. Estimating the drawdown rates in a stress scenario
                                                     Slope              Drawdown Rate
                                                                         (S&P Return
                                                                            -40%)
Predicted        Quarterly    Q1 2020                    -0.57             22.91%
Drawdowns        Quarterly    2007-2009                  -0.27             10.82%


Panel B. Incremental SRISKCL

                                                   Unused C&I
                                                   Commitments      Drawdown        Drawdown
Name                                                (USD mn)       rate: 10.82%    rate: 22.91%   Debt (USD mn)
JPMORGAN CHASE & CO.                                 273,278           2,365           5,009         2,496,125
BANK OF AMERICA CORPORATION                          310,824           2,690           5,697         2,158,067
WELLS FARGO & COMPANY                                198,316           1,717           3,635         1,748,234
CITIGROUP INC.                                       200,912           1,739           3,682         1,817,838
U.S. BANCORP                                          96,020            831            1,760          433,158
PNC FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP, INC., THE               84,238            729            1,544          358,342
M&T BANK CORPORATION                                   9,260             80             170           109,692
FIFTH THIRD BANCORP                                   39,328            340             721           148,517
KEYCORP                                               33,070            286             606           129,380
CITIZENS FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.                        33,682            292             617           142,497
                                                    1,278,928         11,070          23,440         9,541,849
                                                    1,434,367         12,416          26,289        10,759,335
                                                    1,492,916         12,923          27,362




                                                       57
Panel C. Incremental SRISKLRMESC
                                                                                                                                 Incremental SRISK LRMESC
Name                                         MV       LRMES     Liquidity Risk       gmin    gmax        LRMESCmin   LRMESCmax   LRMESCmin LRMESCmax
JPMORGAN CHASE & CO.                       437,226     43.4%       20.3%             -0.34   -0.54          6.9%       10.9%        30,276       47,766
BANK OF AMERICA CORPORATION                316,808     45.9%       25.7%             -0.34   -0.54          8.8%       13.8%        27,761       43,799
WELLS FARGO & COMPANY                      227,540     44.9%       24.2%             -0.34   -0.54          8.2%       13.0%        18,768       29,610
CITIGROUP INC.                             174,415     47.3%       37.1%             -0.34   -0.54         12.6%       19.9%        22,047       34,784
U.S. BANCORP                                92,603     36.6%       46.3%             -0.34   -0.54         15.8%       24.9%        14,631       23,084
PNC FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP, INC., THE     69,945     40.1%       39.9%             -0.34   -0.54         13.6%       21.5%         9,514       15,011
M&T BANK CORPORATION                        22,400     38.7%       22.6%             -0.34   -0.54          7.7%       12.1%         1,724        2,720
FIFTH THIRD BANCORP                         21,815     51.1%       29.9%             -0.34   -0.54         10.2%       16.1%         2,222        3,506
KEYCORP                                     19,936     45.2%       41.7%             -0.34   -0.54         14.2%       22.4%         2,834        4,472
CITIZENS FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.              17,654     48.3%       46.1%             -0.34   -0.54         15.7%       24.8%         2,772        4,374
 Total (Top 10 Banks)                     1,400,341                                                                                132,550      209,126
 Total (Vlab Banks)                       1,601,754                                                                                149,543      235,935
 Total (All Sample Banks)                 1,756,619                                                                                158,024      249,316



Panel D. SRISKC
                                                   SRISK (Q4 2019)               SRISKCmin   SRISKCmax
                                               w/o neg     w/ neg
Name                                           SRISK           SRISK
JPMORGAN CHASE & CO.                               0           -27,848             32,641      52,775
BANK OF AMERICA CORPORATION                     14,898          14,898             30,452      49,496
WELLS FARGO & COMPANY                           24,425          24,425             20,485      33,245
CITIGROUP INC.                                  60,887          60,887             23,786      38,467
U.S. BANCORP                                       0           -19,352             15,462      24,843
PNC FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP, INC., THE            0            -9,895             10,243      16,555
M&T BANK CORPORATION                               0            -3,862              1,804       2,890
FIFTH THIRD BANCORP                              2,067           2,067              2,562       4,227
KEYCORP                                           299             299               3,121       5,078
CITIZENS FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.                   3,005           3,005              3,064       4,991
Total (Top 10 Banks)                           105,581          44,623            143,621     232,566
Total (Vlab Banks)                             111,135          36,680            161,958     262,224
Total (All Sample Banks)                                                          170,947     276,678




                                                                         58
Appendix I. Example ­ Drawdowns during COVID-19




                                     59
Appendix II. Variable definitions

 Variable name                      Definition                                                                                                                   Source

 Assets                             Total Assets                                                                                                                 Call Reports
 Capital Buffer                     Difference between a bank's equity-asset ratio and the cross-sectional average of the equity-asset-ratio of all sample       Call Reports
                                    banks in Q4 2019
 Consumer Loans / Assets            Consumer loans (%Assets)                                                                                                     Call Reports
 Credit Card Commitments / Assets   Unused credit card commitments (%Assets)                                                                                     Call Reports
 Credit Lines                       Indicator if loan type within list:                                                                                          Dealscan
 Cumulative Total Drawdowns         Natural logarithm of the realized daily cumulative credit line drawdowns across all firms                                    8-K
 Cumulative BBB Drawdowns           Natural logarithm of the realized daily cumulative credit line drawdowns across all BBB-rated firms                          8-K
 Cumulative NonIG Drawdowns         Natural logarithm of the realized daily cumulative credit line drawdowns across all NonIG rated firms                        8-K
 Cumulative Not Rated Drawdowns     Natural logarithm of the realized daily cumulative credit line drawdowns across all unrated firms                            8-K
 Current Primary Dealer Indicator   Indicator = 1 if bank is current primary dealer bank (https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealers#primary-             NY Fed
                                    dealers)
 Debt                               Market value of bank liabilities (12/31/2019)                                                                                Vlab
 Deposits / Assets                  Deposits (%Assets)                                                                                                           Call Reports
 Deposits / Loans                   Deposits (%Loans)                                                                                                            Call Reports
 Derivatives / Assets               Interest rate, exchange rat and credit derivatives (% Assets)                                                                Call Reports
 Distance-to-Default                Mean(ROA+CAR)/volatility(ROA) where CAR is the capital-to-asset ratio and ROA is return on assets                            Call Reports
 Drawdown Rate                      Sensitivity of changes in credit line drawdowns to changes in the market returns (projected in a market downturn of          Capital IQ, 8-K, CRSP
                                    40%)
 Equity Beta                        Constructed using monthly data over the 2015 to 2019 period and the S&P 500 as market index                                  CRSP
 Equity Ratio                       Equity (%Assets)                                                                                                             Call Reports
 Gross Drawdowns                    Percentage change of banks' off-balance sheet unused C&I commitments between Q4 2019 and Q1 2020                             Call Reports
 Idiosyncratic Volatility           Annualized standard deviation of the residuals from the market model                                                         CRSP
 Income Diversity                   1 minus the absolute value of the ratio of the difference between net interest income and other operating income to total    Call Reports
                                    operating income
 Incremental SRISKCL                Equity capital that would be required to fund new loans based on banks' unused commitments (CL = credit lines) at the        Call Reports
                                    end of Q4 2019
 Incremental SRISKLRMESC            (Marginal) equity shortfall of banks based on their end of Q4 2019 market values of equity due to effect of liquidity risk   Call Reports
                                    on stock returns
 Liquidity                          The sum of cash, federal funds sold & reverse repos, and securities excluding MBS/ABS securities.                            Call Reports
 Liquidity Risk                     Unused Commitments plus Wholesale Funding minus Liquidity (% Assets)                                                         Call Reports
 Loan                               Either natural log of loan amount or natural log of 1+number of loans                                                        Dealscan
 Loans / Assets                     Total loans (%Assets)                                                                                                        Call Reports
 Log(Assets)                        Natural log of Assets                                                                                                        Call Reports
 LRMES                              LRMES is the Long Run Marginal Expected Shortfall, approximated in Acharya et al. (2012) as                                  Call Reports
                                     1-e^((-18×MES)), where MES is the one-day loss expected in bank i's return if market returns are less than -2%
 LRMESC                             Contingent marginal expected shortfall due to the impact of liquidity risk on bank stock returns.                            Call Reports, CRSP
 MV                                 Market value of equity (12/31/2019)                                                                                          Vlab
 Net Drawdowns                      Absolute change in banks' unused C&I commitments minus the change in deposits (% Assets) over the same period                Call Reports


                                                                                        60
Non-Interest Income                 Non-interest-income (%Operating revenues)                                                                                         Call Reports
NPL / Loans                         Non-performing loans (%Loans)                                                                                                     Call Reports
Oil Exposure / Assets               Sum of a bank's active loan exposures to oil & gas firms (%Assets)                                                                Dealscan
Other Sectoral Exposures / Assets   Sum of a bank's active loan exposures to the retail, leisure, and hotel & gaming industry (%Assets)                               Dealscan
Post                                Post is defined as the period starting April 1, 2020
                                    Slope of the regression of weekly excess stock returns on the Fama and French real estate industry excess return in a             CRSP
Real Estate Beta                    regression that controls for the MSCI World excess return
Return 1/1-3/23/2020                Cumulative stock return from January 1 to March 23, 2020; log excess returns are calculated as the log(1 + r - rf), where         CRSP
                                    r is the simple daily return (based on the daily closing price, adjusted for total return factor and daily adjustment factor),
                                    and rf is the 1-month daily Treasury-bill rate
Return January 2020                 Cumulative stock return from January 1 to January 31, 2020                                                                        CRSP
Return February 2020                Cumulative stock return from February 1 to February 29, 2020                                                                      CRSP
Return 3/1-3/23/2020                Cumulative stock return from March 1 to March 23, 2020                                                                            CRSP
Return April 2020                   Cumulative stock return from 01.04.-30.04.2020                                                                                    CRSP
Return May 2020                     Cumulative stock return from 01.05.-31.05.2020                                                                                    CRSP
Return June 2020                    Cumulative stock return from 01.06.-30.06.2020                                                                                    CRSP
ROA                                 Return on assets: Net Income / Assets                                                                                             Call Reports
S&P 500 Return                      (Daily) excess return of the S&P 500 index; log excess returns are calculated as the log(1 + r - rf), where r is the simple       CRSP
                                    daily return (based on the daily closing price, adjusted for total return factor and daily adjustment factor), and rf is the 1-
                                    month daily Treasury-bill rate
SRISK                               Bank capital shortfall in a systemic crisis as in Acharya et al. (2012)                                                           Vlab
SRISK/Assets                        SRISK scaled by total assets                                                                                                      Vlab and Call Reports
SRISKC                              Incremental SRISKCL + Incremental SRISKLRMES-C                                                                                    Call Reports
Term Loan                           Indicator if loan type within list:                                                                                               Dealscan
Unused C&I Commitments              Unused C&I credit lines                                                                                                           Call Reports
Unused Commitments                  The sum of credit lines secured by 1-4 family homes, secured and unsecured commercial real estate credit lines,                   Call Reports
                                    commitments related to securities underwriting, commercial letter of credit, and other credit lines (which includes
                                    commitments to extend credit through overdraft facilities or commercial lines of credit)
Wholesale Funding                   The sum of large time deposits, deposited booked in foreign offices, subordinated debt and debentures, gross federal              Call Reports
                                    funds purchased, repos and other borrowed money.




                                                                                           61
              Why did bank stocks crash during COVID-19?


              Viral V. Acharya              Robert Engle           Sascha Steffen*



                                         March 8, 2021



                                     Online Appendix

                                    (Not for publication)





  NYU Stern School of Business, 44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-10, New York, NY 10012-1126, Email:
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu, Tel: +1 212 998 0354.

  NYU Stern School of Business, 44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-62, New York, NY 10012-1126, Email:
rengle@stern.nyu.edu, Tel: +1 212 998 0710.
*
  Frankfurt School of Finance & Management, Adickesallee 32-34, 60323 Frankfurt, Germany, Email:
s.steffen@fs.de, Tel: +49 (0)69 154008-794.
                                     Table of Content


A   Industry exposure and performance

    Figure A.1. Industry performance during COVID-19

    Figure A.2. Event study around the oil price shock (9 March 2020)



B   Reversal of credit line drawdowns

    Table B.1 Descriptive statistics of firm's capital structure (Q4 2019 vs. Q3 2020)

    Table B.2 Descriptive statistics of firm's capital structure (quarterly since Q4 2019)

    Figure B.1 Preference for cash



C   SRISK

    Table C.1 SRISK-C using only unused C&I loans


D   Alternative liquidity proxies

    Figure D.1. Dynamic LMI during COVID-19

    Table D.1. Liquidity risk measures and pricing of drawdown options

    Table D.2. Pricing of drawdown options in credit line fees


E   Pricing of drawdown options in credit line fees

    Table E.1. Pricing of drawdown options in credit line fees




                                           63
Appendix A. Industry exposure and performance

After the oil price shock on March 9, 2020, the market performance of the oil & gas sector

considerably deteriorated. Panel A of Figure A.1. shows the performance of this sector vis-à-

vis other sectors directly affected by the pandemic (i.e., retail, leisure and hotel & gaming)

using returns from loans traded in the secondary market in these sectors. While the returns in

the loan market declined substantially in all sectors, loan return of oil & gas and mining firms

significantly underperformed the other sectors even after the announcement of the interventions

by the Fed on March 23, 2020.

           Panel B of Figure A.1. show the time-series of oil-price volatility using the CVOX oil

price volatility index. While oil price volatility increases episodically during economic

downturns (e.g., during the global financial crisis (GFC), i.e., the 2007 to 2009 period), the

European sovereign debt crisis (2011-2012), and the oil & gas crisis in 2015-2016), volatility

has increased by more than 6 times (to over 100% on an annualized basis) around March 9th,

2020 and energy stocks crashed.

           Banks are heavily exposed through loans provided to this sector. Both bank exposures

and the riskiness of energy firm balance sheets have risen steadily in the recent years. We

measure a bank's exposure to the oil sector using all active loans at the end of Q4:2019 and

scaled by Tier 1 capital.

           In addition to the tests in the main paper, we perform an event study using a 2-day

window around 9 March 2020 and plot banks' 2-day beta adjusted return (= "! - $! ""&$ )23 on

banks' exposure to the oil & gas sector scaled by Tier 1 capital (Figure A.2.). We find a

significant negative correlation suggesting that oil price risk is priced in bank stock returns.




23
     The beta is measured pre-crisis, i.e., at the end of Q4 2019.

                                                           64
Figure A1. Industry performance during COVID-19
This figure shows the performance of some sectors during COVID-19 using different measures. In Panel A, we
plot the total loan return since Jan 1, 2020 of traded in the secondary market in the following sectors: mining, oil
& gas retail, leisure, hotel & gaming. In Panel B, we plot oil price volatility (CVOX) since July 1, 2007.


Panel A. Total loan return by industry




Panel B. Oil price volatility




                                                        65
Figure A2. Event study around the oil price shock (9 March 2020)
This figure plots the 2-day beta adjusted bank stock return around the oil price shock on March 9, 2002 on banks'
loan exposure to the oil & gas industry scaled by Tier 1 capital.




                                                       66
Appendix B. Reversal of Credit Line Drawdowns

To investigate the effect of credit risk on corporate cash holdings during the COVID-19
pandemic, we construct a sample of all publicly listed U.S. firms, for which financial variables
are available at the end of 2019 in Capital IQ. We drop financial firms and utilities and firms
with total assets below US$100 million at the end of 2019. Our final sample comprises 1,971
U.S. nonfinancial firms. We construct the sample following Acharya and Steffen (2020).

We use quarterly debt capital structure data from CapitalIQ and investigate changes in different
debt capital structure components during Q4 2019 and Q4 2020 (Table A.1) and quarterly from
Q4 2019 to Q3 2020 (Table A.2). Specifically, we inspect the following: drawn credit lines
(Drawn CL/Assets), credit line usage (Drawn CL/(Drawn CL + Undrawn CL)), bond debt
(Bonds /Assets), term loans (Term loans/Assets), total debt (Total Debt / Assets), and preference
for cash (Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL)).


B.1 Descriptive statistics of firm's capital structure (Q4 2019 vs. Q3 2020)

                                              Q4 2019       Q3 2020       Delta         t-stat
A. Full sample
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL)             0.188         0.193         0.005        -1.469
Drawn CL / Assets                              0.036         0.033        -0.003       2.874***
Bonds / Assets                                 0.156         0.166          0.01      -4.589***
Term Loans / Assets                            0.078         0.070        -0.008       4.761***
Total Debt / Assets                            0.344         0.355         0.011      -5.153***
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL)                     0.497         0.580         0.083     -16.892***
B. AAA-A rated firms
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL)             0.031         0.027        -0.004         0.394
Drawn CL / Assets                              0.003         0.002        -0.001         1.445
Bonds / Assets                                 0.299         0.308         0.009        -0.894
Term Loans / Assets                            0.007         0.007            0          0.386
Total Debt / Assets                            0.349         0.363         0.014      -2.647***
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL)                     0.498         0.548          0.05      -2.723***
C. BBB rated firms
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL)             0.072         0.079         0.007        -0.412
Drawn CL / Assets                              0.011         0.010        -0.001         0.531
Bonds / Assets                                 0.274         0.290         0.016      -3.395***
Term Loans / Assets                            0.017         0.018         0.001        -0.357
Total Debt / Assets                            0.356         0.372         0.016      -4.641***
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL)                     0.333         0.437         0.104      -8.574***
D. NonIG rated firms
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL)             0.162         0.215        0.053       -3.706***
Drawn CL / Assets                              0.033         0.036        0.003          -1.57
Bonds / Assets                                 0.235         0.246        0.011        -2.042**
Term Loans / Assets                            0.142         0.132        -0.01        3.264***
Total Debt / Assets                            0.482         0.499        0.017       -3.861***
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL)                     0.363         0.482        0.119      -10.894***
E. Unrated firms
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL)             0.259         0.237        -0.022         1.303
Drawn CL / Assets                              0.046         0.040        -0.006       4.227***
Bonds / Assets                                 0.080         0.089         0.009      -3.139***
Term Loans / Assets                            0.070         0.061        -0.009       3.775***
Total Debt / Assets                            0.280         0.286         0.006       -2.241**
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL)                     0.592         0.658         0.066     -10.344***




                                               67
Table B.2. Descriptive statistics of firm's capital structure (Q4 2019 to Q3 2020)

Panel A. Full sample
Variable                                            Mean    Std dev      Min         Max
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q4 2019        0.188    0.269      0.000        1.000
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q1 2020        0.381    0.353      0.000        1.000
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q2 2020        0.277    0.332      0.000        1.000
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q3 2020        0.193    0.288      0.000        1.000
Drawn CL / Assets - Q4 2019                         0.036    0.073      0.000        0.355
Drawn CL / Assets - Q1 2020                         0.058    0.086      0.000        0.400
Drawn CL / Assets - Q2 2020                         0.046    0.081      0.000        0.396
Drawn CL / Assets - Q3 2020                         0.033    0.069      0.000        0.340
Bonds / Assets - Q4 2019                            0.156    0.192      0.000        0.909
Bonds / Assets - Q1 2020                            0.158    0.194      0.000        0.923
Bonds / Assets - Q2 2020                            0.167    0.198      0.000        0.873
Bonds / Assets - Q3 2020                            0.166    0.198      0.000        0.855
Term Loans / Assets - Q4 2019                       0.078    0.134      0.000        0.645
Term Loans / Assets - Q1 2020                       0.078    0.132      0.000        0.617
Term Loans / Assets - Q2 2020                       0.078    0.131      0.000        0.598
Term Loans / Assets - Q3 2020                       0.070    0.124      0.000        0.565
Total Debt / Assets - Q4 2019                       0.344    0.229      0.002        1.134
Total Debt / Assets - Q1 2020                       0.370    0.240      0.002        1.180
Total Debt / Assets - Q2 2020                       0.368    0.243      0.002        1.242
Total Debt / Assets - Q3 2020                       0.355    0.241      0.002        1.228
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q4 2019                0.497    0.344      0.002        1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q1 2020                0.608    0.333      0.005        1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q2 2020                0.593    0.329      0.004        1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q3 2020                0.580    0.331      0.006        1.000

Panel B. AAA-A rated firms
Variable                                            Mean    Std dev      Min         Max
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q4 2019        0.031    0.113      0.000        0.911
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q1 2020        0.156    0.290      0.000        1.000
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q2 2020        0.069    0.195      0.000        0.958
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q3 2020        0.027    0.085      0.000        0.445
Drawn CL / Assets - Q4 2019                         0.003    0.014      0.000        0.125
Drawn CL / Assets - Q1 2020                         0.013    0.028      0.000        0.142
Drawn CL / Assets - Q2 2020                         0.007    0.023      0.000        0.147
Drawn CL / Assets - Q3 2020                         0.002    0.008      0.000        0.053
Bonds / Assets - Q4 2019                            0.299    0.154      0.000        0.754
Bonds / Assets - Q1 2020                            0.308    0.151      0.000        0.781
Bonds / Assets - Q2 2020                            0.319    0.138      0.011        0.779
Bonds / Assets - Q3 2020                            0.308    0.133      0.000        0.770
Term Loans / Assets - Q4 2019                       0.007    0.017      0.000        0.108
Term Loans / Assets - Q1 2020                       0.008    0.019      0.000        0.145
Term Loans / Assets - Q2 2020                       0.007    0.013      0.000        0.058
Term Loans / Assets - Q3 2020                       0.007    0.013      0.000        0.060
Total Debt / Assets - Q4 2019                       0.349    0.145      0.046        0.753
Total Debt / Assets - Q1 2020                       0.369    0.147      0.045        0.757
Total Debt / Assets - Q2 2020                       0.376    0.135      0.062        0.757
Total Debt / Assets - Q3 2020                       0.363    0.130      0.057        0.754
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q4 2019                0.498    0.322      0.002        1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q1 2020                0.585    0.308      0.005        1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q2 2020                0.564    0.296      0.004        1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q3 2020                0.548    0.304      0.006        1.000




                                               68
Panel C. BBB rated firms
Variable                                            Mean    Std dev    Min    Max
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q4 2019        0.072    0.165    0.000   1.000
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q1 2020        0.235    0.285    0.000   1.000
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q2 2020        0.129    0.241    0.000   1.000
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q3 2020        0.079    0.182    0.000   1.000
Drawn CL / Assets - Q4 2019                         0.011    0.039    0.000   0.344
Drawn CL / Assets - Q1 2020                         0.030    0.053    0.000   0.400
Drawn CL / Assets - Q2 2020                         0.019    0.046    0.000   0.396
Drawn CL / Assets - Q3 2020                         0.010    0.026    0.000   0.240
Bonds / Assets - Q4 2019                            0.274    0.136    0.000   0.909
Bonds / Assets - Q1 2020                            0.279    0.138    0.000   0.923
Bonds / Assets - Q2 2020                            0.292    0.141    0.000   0.873
Bonds / Assets - Q3 2020                            0.290    0.146    0.000   0.855
Term Loans / Assets - Q4 2019                       0.017    0.035    0.000   0.203
Term Loans / Assets - Q1 2020                       0.022    0.042    0.000   0.286
Term Loans / Assets - Q2 2020                       0.021    0.038    0.000   0.221
Term Loans / Assets - Q3 2020                       0.018    0.036    0.000   0.232
Total Debt / Assets - Q4 2019                       0.356    0.145    0.048   1.001
Total Debt / Assets - Q1 2020                       0.381    0.148    0.075   1.034
Total Debt / Assets - Q2 2020                       0.382    0.148    0.064   1.040
Total Debt / Assets - Q3 2020                       0.372    0.145    0.054   1.017
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q4 2019                0.333    0.254    0.002   1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q1 2020                0.439    0.269    0.015   1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q2 2020                0.446    0.267    0.004   1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q3 2020                0.437    0.268    0.006   1.000

Panel D. NonIG rated firms
Variable                                            Mean    Std dev    Min    Max
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q4 2019        0.162    0.241    0.000   1.000
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q1 2020        0.443    0.353    0.000   1.000
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q2 2020        0.310    0.335    0.000   1.000
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q3 2020        0.215    0.301    0.000   1.000
Drawn CL / Assets - Q4 2019 n                       0.033    0.066    0.000   0.355
Drawn CL / Assets - Q1 2020                         0.067    0.078    0.000   0.400
Drawn CL / Assets - Q2 2020                         0.048    0.071    0.000   0.396
Drawn CL / Assets - Q3 2020                         0.036    0.068    0.000   0.340
Bonds / Assets - Q4 2019                            0.235    0.187    0.000   0.909
Bonds / Assets - Q1 2020                            0.236    0.190    0.000   0.923
Bonds / Assets - Q2 2020                            0.252    0.199    0.000   0.873
Bonds / Assets - Q3 2020                            0.246    0.199    0.000   0.855
Term Loans / Assets - Q4 2019                       0.142    0.157    0.000   0.645
Term Loans / Assets - Q1 2020                       0.141    0.157    0.000   0.617
Term Loans / Assets - Q2 2020                       0.141    0.156    0.000   0.598
Term Loans / Assets - Q3 2020                       0.132    0.150    0.000   0.565
Total Debt / Assets - Q4 2019                       0.482    0.198    0.051   1.134
Total Debt / Assets - Q1 2020                       0.518    0.205    0.059   1.180
Total Debt / Assets - Q2 2020                       0.518    0.215    0.058   1.242
Total Debt / Assets - Q3 2020                       0.499    0.217    0.053   1.228
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q4 2019                0.363    0.263    0.002   1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q1 2020                0.540    0.320    0.005   1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q2 2020                0.500    0.311    0.004   1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q3 2020                0.482    0.302    0.006   1.000




                                               69
Panel E. Unrated firms
Variable                                            Mean    Std dev    Min    Max
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q4 2019        0.259    0.300    0.000   1.000
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q1 2020        0.415    0.356    0.000   1.000
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q2 2020        0.329    0.345    0.000   1.000
Drawn CL / (Drawn CL + Undrawn CL) - Q3 2020        0.237    0.307    0.000   1.000
Drawn CL / Assets - Q4 2019                         0.046    0.083    0.000   0.355
Drawn CL / Assets - Q1 2020                         0.065    0.096    0.000   0.400
Drawn CL / Assets - Q2 2020                         0.055    0.091    0.000   0.396
Drawn CL / Assets - Q3 2020                         0.040    0.078    0.000   0.340
Bonds / Assets - Q4 2019                            0.080    0.171    0.000   0.909
Bonds / Assets - Q1 2020                            0.082    0.172    0.000   0.923
Bonds / Assets - Q2 2020                            0.087    0.175    0.000   0.873
Bonds / Assets - Q3 2020                            0.089    0.176    0.000   0.855
Term Loans / Assets - Q4 2019                       0.070    0.132    0.000   0.645
Term Loans / Assets - Q1 2020                       0.069    0.129    0.000   0.617
Term Loans / Assets - Q2 2020                       0.070    0.127    0.000   0.598
Term Loans / Assets - Q3 2020                       0.061    0.119    0.000   0.565
Total Debt / Assets - Q4 2019                       0.280    0.236    0.002   1.134
Total Debt / Assets - Q1 2020                       0.303    0.248    0.002   1.180
Total Debt / Assets - Q2 2020                       0.299    0.250    0.002   1.242
Total Debt / Assets - Q3 2020                       0.286    0.248    0.002   1.228
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q4 2019                0.592    0.362    0.002   1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q1 2020                0.677    0.334    0.005   1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q2 2020                0.670    0.331    0.004   1.000
Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) - Q3 2020                0.658    0.337    0.006   1.000




                                               70
Figure B.1. Preference for cash
This figure shows the median Cash / (Cash + Undrawn CL) ratio (panel B) of U.S. nonfinancial firms over the Q1
2018 to Q3 2020 period.




Preference for cash has increased / remained high during the 3 quarters in 2020, particularly
of lower rated and unrated firms.




                                                     71
Appendix C ­ SRISK-C using only unused C&I loans


In Online Appendix C, we calculate SRISK-C but use only unused C&I loans (and the

estimated coffients) . Everything else is as in Table 9 of the main paper.




                                               72
Table B.1 Incremental SRISKLRMES-C
Panel A reports the calculation of Incremental SRISKMES-C due to the sensitivity of bank stock returns to Unused C&I Credit Lines using the minimum (gmin) and maximum (gmax)
sensitivity from different model specifications shown in prior tables. MES-Cmin (%) is calculated as Liquidity Risk x gmin. MES-Cmin ($) is calculated as Liquidity Risk x gmin x MV.
Other variables are calculated accordingly. In Panel B, we show the Conditional SRISK (SRISK-C) which is the sum of Incremental SRISKCL and Incremental SRISKMES-C. All
variables are defined in Appendix I.

Panel A.
                                                                                                                                                       Incremental SRISK LRMES-C
                                                        MV          LRMES       Liquidity Risk    gmin          gmax       LRMES-Cmin     LRMES-Cmax    LRMES-Cmin      LRMES-Cmax
JPMORGAN CHASE & CO.                                  437,226       43.4%          20.3%         -1.012        -1.383        10.3%          14.1%          44,995         61,490
BANK OF AMERICA CORPORATION                           316,808       45.9%          25.7%         -1.012        -1.383        12.9%          17.7%          40,941         55,950
WELLS FARGO & COMPANY                                 227,540       44.9%          24.2%         -1.012        -1.383        10.4%          14.2%          23,691         32,377
CITIGROUP INC.                                        174,415       47.3%          37.1%         -1.012        -1.383        10.4%          14.2%          18,175         24,838
U.S. BANCORP                                           92,603       36.6%          46.3%         -1.012        -1.383        19.6%          26.8%          18,163         24,822
PNC FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP, INC., THE                69,945       40.1%          39.9%         -1.012        -1.383        20.8%          28.4%          14,530         19,857
M&T BANK CORPORATION                                   22,400       38.7%          22.6%         -1.012        -1.383         7.8%          10.7%           1,751          2,393
FIFTH THIRD BANCORP                                    21,815       51.1%          29.9%         -1.012        -1.383        23.5%          32.1%           5,126          7,006
KEYCORP                                                19,936       45.2%          41.7%         -1.012        -1.383        23.0%          31.4%           4,583          6,264
CITIZENS FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.                         17,654       48.3%          46.1%         -1.012        -1.383        20.5%          28.0%           3,623          4,951
 Total (Top 10 Banks)                                1,400,341                                                                                            175,579        239,946
 Total (Vlab Banks)                                  1,601,754                                                                                            197,984        270,565
 Total (All Sample Banks)                            1,756,619                                                                                            207,978        284,223




                                                                                          73
Panel B. SRISK-C
Name                                           SRISK (Q4 2019)        SRISK-Cmin   SRISK-Cmax
                                               w/o neg      w/ neg
                                               SRISK         SRISK
JPMORGAN CHASE & CO.                               0        -27,848     51,604       73,392
BANK OF AMERICA CORPORATION                     14,898       14,898     48,458       69,487
WELLS FARGO & COMPANY                           24,425       24,425     28,487       41,014
CITIGROUP INC.                                  60,887       60,887     23,034       33,588
U.S. BANCORP                                       0        -19,352     20,485       29,003
PNC FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP, INC., THE            0         -9,895     16,567       23,525
M&T BANK CORPORATION                               0         -3,862      1,975        2,796
FIFTH THIRD BANCORP                              2,067        2,067      6,077        8,718
KEYCORP                                           299          299       5,383        7,704
CITIZENS FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.                   3,005        3,005      4,438        6,418
Total (Top 10 Banks)                           105,581       44,623    206,508      295,646
Total (Vlab Banks)                             111,135       36,680    232,673      333,034
Total (All Sample Banks)                                               244,083      349,243




                                          74
Appendix D - Discussion

Finally, we discuss the robustness of our results and its extensions along several dimensions in

section 8 in the main body of the paper. (1) Alternative liquidity proxies used in the literature;

(2) pricing of contingent drawdown options through credit line fees; (3) the role of covenants

during the pandemic; and (4) repayment of credit lines after fiscal and monetary interventions.



D.1. Constructing our liquidity proxies

In Online Appendix D.1 , we discuss provide a more extensive discussion of the different

liquidity proxies used in the literature.

A. Berger and Bouwman (2009) liquidity creation measure

To replicate the Berger-Bouwman (2009) measure on liquidity creation using FR Y-9C data,

we apply the data mapping available in Berger et al. (2020).24 Individual on- and off-balance

sheet items are aggregated and weighted in line with the classification provided by Berger &

Bouwman (2009). Finally, the weighted positions are combined to the aggregate liquidity

creation measure for each bank holding company. Note that we only replicate Berger &

Bouwman's so-called "catfat" measure, which is constructed by classifying balance sheet items

by category (see Berger & Bouwman, 2009) and includes on- as well as off-balance sheet

positions.

B. Bai et al. (2018) liquidity risk measure (LMI)

To construct the Bai et al. (2018) liquidity mismatch index (LMI), we use information provided

in the paper's Online Appendix together with the FR Y-9C call report template for 2019Q4 to

map all balance sheet items, except deposits, to the variables in our dataset. The deposit data is

constructed in line with the approach outlined in Bai et al. (2018), using FFIEC 031 call report

data for commercial banks aggregated for the respective parent bank holding company.25


24
   Berger, A.N., C.H.S. Bouwman, B. Imbierowicz and C. Rauch (2020), How are banks special? ­ Let me count
the ways.
25
   We thank Jennie Bai for detailed guidance how to construct their measure.

                                                   75
Commercial banks and bank holding companies are matched with the help of the FSSD's

relationship table. We consider a bank holding company to be a commercial bank's parent, if

their relationship exists at least until 31 December 2019.

       In the next step, we calculate the asset and liability weights per category as indicated in

Bai et al. (2018) using the parameters and estimates provided by the authors. Accordingly,

haircut values as well as the magnitude of the Frist Principal Component used in constructing

our measure are averages taken from Bai et al. (2018). As described in the main text of the

paper, we use two different proxies for the liquidity premium t, which is defined as the OIS -

3m Treasury Bill spread. We create two LMIs, one using liquidity conditions as of Q4 2019

(LMI ­ 2019) and one using the worst liquidity condition in March 2020 (LMI ­ 2020). We

weigh the aggregate positions with the respective asset/liability weight to calculate the liquidity

risk measure per bank holding company.

       Both LMI measures are constructed as of Q4 2019. We also construct a time-series LMI

measure using a daily adjusting liquidity weight. We plot the time-series in Figure D.1. below.

Liquidity risk increases significantly in March 2020 within a few days and then returned almost

to a pre-COVID-19 level when monetary and fiscal policy measures have been implemented.




                                                76
Figure D.1. Dynamic LMI during COVID-19
Figure D.1. plots the times-series LMI measure using a daily adjusted OIS-3m Treasury spread measure as liquidity
weight.




                                                       77
Table D1. Liquidity risk measures and pricing of drawdown options
This tables shows descriptive statistics of different liquidity measures (Panel A) and the results of OLS regressions
of U.S. bank' beta adjusted stock returns over the 1/1/2020 ­ 3/23/2020 period using these liquidity measures and
control variables. These are the liquidity measures: Liquidity Risk (Unused Commitments plus Wholesale Funding
minus Liquidity (% Assets)); Unused C&I Loans / Assets are Unused C&I credit lines over total assets; BB is the
Berger and Bouwman (2009) "catfat" measure; LMI-2019 is Bai et al (2019) liquidity measure using liquidity
conditions as of Q4 2019; LMI ­ 2020 is the Bai et al. (2018) liquidity measure using the worst liquidity condition
in March 2020.

Panel A. Descriptive statistics
Variable                                 Obs             Mean           Std. Dev           Min       Max
Liquidity Risk                           127             0.209           0.128           -0.453            0.590
Unused C&I Loans / Assets                127             0.081           0.051            0.000            0.263
BB                                       127             0.536           0.138            0.071            0.852
LMI - 2019                               127             0.631           0.085            0.312            1.084
LMI - 2020                               127             0.302           0.138           -0.059            0.837



Panel B. Liquidity risk measures
                                          (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)
Liquidity Risk                         -0.472**
                                        (0.020)
Unused C&I Loans / Assets                              -1.278***
                                                         (0.002)
BB                                                                     -0.385**
                                                                        (0.022)
LMI - 2019                                                                               0.0782
                                                                                         (0.761)
LMI - 2020                                                                                               0.245*
                                                                                                         (0.076)
Controls                                 Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
R-squared                               0.359            0.386           0.356           0.322            0.343
Number obs.                              127              127             127             127              127




                                                        78
E. Pricing of drawdown options in credit line fees

Do banks consider the deep out-of-the-money put option associated with aggregate drawdown

risk when setting ex-ante price terms of credit lines? We follow earlier work on the pricing of

credit lines such as Acharya et al. (2013) and Berg et al. (2015) and build a panel data set of

U.S. non-financial firms that have obtained credit lines in the primary loan market over the

2010 to 2019 period. That is, using all originated loans from the Refinitiv Dealscan database,

we keep only credit lines issued over the sample period, keep the lead arranger (following the

procedures outlined in many previous papers) and collapse the All-In-Spread-Drawn (AISD)

and the All-In-Spread-Undrawn (AISU) at their respective means to construct a firm-year-lead-

arranger level panel.

       We then use the merged CRSP/Compustat database to add firm characteristics that

affect a firm's cost of credit, in particular a firm's equity volatility as a measure of idiosyncratic

risk and a firm's market beta for systematic risk. Other control variables include size,

profitability, tangibility, Tobin's Q and leverage. We source bank characteristics from call

report data including NPL/Loans, capital, non-interest income, bank size and bank profitability.

Importantly, we obtain data on banks' aggregate risk exposure from call reports, CRSP and

vlab including Bank Equity Beta (as a measure of systematic risk), LRMES (as a measure of

downside risk), SRISK/Assets (as a measure of equity shortfall in times of a severe crisis) and

Liquidity Risk (as a measure of aggregate drawdown risk). LIBOR is included as all contracts

are floating rate and prior literature has shown that spreads and fees are sensitive to the current

level of LIBOR.

       We estimate the following regression:

       !"#$!,#,$ = &% + && ())*+#,#,$ + &' -./0*$ + 1( 2),* + 1+ 2,,* + 3$ + 4- + 5!,#,$

Where ())*+#,#,$ are bank-specific aggregate risk proxies, 2),* (2,,* ) are bank (firm)

characteristics, 3$ are year and 4- industry fixed effects.



                                                 79
The results are reported in Table E.1. We first show that idiosyncratic drawdown risk (measured

using a firm's realized equity volatility over the past 12 months) and systematic drawdown risk

(measured using a firm's stock beta) are priced in both commitment fee (AISU) and spread

(AISD). This is consistent with, for example, Acharya et al. (2013) and Berg et al. (2015).

       However, while a higher Bank Beta and LRMES both somewhat increase the price of

credit lines, Liquidity Risk or Unused C&I / Assets, on average, do not. Also, SRISK / Assets,

which measures bank capital shortfall in times of aggregate market downturn, does not appear

to be priced either. In other words, banks do not appear to be considering the deep out-of-the-

money put option associated with aggregate drawdown risk when setting ex-ante price terms of

credit lines. This may partly explain their need to fund aggregate drawdown risk with equity

capital, as witnessed during the pandemic.




                                              80
Table E.1. Pricing of drawdown options in credit line fees
This table reports the results of OLS regressions of the All-In-Spread-Drawn (AISD) and the All-In-Spread-Undrawn (AISU) ratio
on banks' aggregate risk exposures including Bank Equity Beta (as a measure of systematic risk), LRMES (as a measure of
downside risk; LRMES is the Long Run Marginal Expected Shortfall, approximated in Acharya et al. (2012) as 1-e^((-18×MES)),
where MES is the one-day loss expected in bank i's return if market returns are less than -2%), SRISK/Assets (as a measure of equity
shortfall in times of a severe crisis) and Liquidity Risk (as a measure of aggregate drawdown risk and defined as Unused
Commitments plus Wholesale Funding minus Liquidity (% Assets)). We include them individually in regressions (2) to (5) and (7)
to (10). All regressions include bank characteristics: NPL/Loans (Non-performing loans (%Loans)), Capital (Equity/Assets), Non-
Interest Income (Non-interest-income (%Operating revenues)), Bank Size (Log of Total Assets), Bank Profitability (Return on
assets: Net Income / Assets). All regressions further include borrower characteristics: Equity Volatility (12-months firms equity
volatility), Firm Equity Beta (12-month daily beta with the S&P 500 return), Firm Size (Log of Total Assets; deflated using the U.S.
PPI), Firm Profitability (EBITDA / Assets), Tangibility (Net PP&E / Assets), Tobin's Q (Market Assets / Assets), Leverage ((LT
Debt + ST Debt) / Market Assets). All regressions include the LIBOR as well as year and industry (2-digit) fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level.

(continued on next page)




                                                                81
(continued from previous page)

                           (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)          (10)
                                                 AISD                                                           AISU

Bank Equity Beta                     0.0582                                                      0.0161**
                                     (0.147)                                                      (0.021)

LRMES                                           1.293**                                                        0.187*
                                                (0.039)                                                        (0.085)

SRISK / Assets                                                1.772                                                          0.255
                                                             (0.293)                                                        (0.382)

Liquidity Risk                                                           -0.330                                                          -0.0253
                                                                         (0.185)                                                         (0.581)

LIBOR                   -0.288***   -0.278***   -0.243***   -0.272***   -0.311***   -0.0516***   -0.0488***   -0.0451***   -0.0492***   -0.0534***
                          (0.000)     (0.001)     (0.006)     (0.002)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.000)

Bank Characteristics

NPL / Loans               1.864       2.298       2.120       2.474       1.832      0.565*       0.684**      0.602*       0.652*       0.562*
                         (0.342)     (0.261)     (0.281)     (0.242)     (0.339)     (0.072)      (0.032)      (0.054)      (0.053)      (0.072)

Capital                 -5.395**    -4.925**    -4.967**    -4.981**    -5.412***    -0.576       -0.446        -0.514      -0.516       -0.577
                         (0.013)     (0.018)     (0.013)     (0.020)      (0.009)    (0.153)      (0.246)      (0.173)      (0.198)      (0.146)

Non-Interest Income      -0.0560     -0.0490     -0.171      -0.0628     -0.163      0.0103       0.0122       -0.00638     0.00930      0.00208
                         (0.796)     (0.820)     (0.458)     (0.773)     (0.476)     (0.795)      (0.752)       (0.880)     (0.815)      (0.962)

Bank Size               -0.107***   -0.111***   -0.110***   -0.119***   -0.126***   -0.0117**    -0.0127**    -0.0122**    -0.0135**    -0.0132**
                          (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.034)      (0.019)      (0.022)      (0.025)      (0.040)

Bank Profitability      -10.20**     -8.032       0.132       -2.877    -10.47**     -1.486*      -0.887       0.0100       -0.430       -1.507*
                         (0.042)     (0.113)     (0.984)     (0.741)     (0.036)     (0.077)      (0.300)      (0.993)      (0.765)      (0.074)

Firm Characteristics

Equity Volatility       0.360**     0.366**     0.367**     0.364**     0.360**     0.0700***    0.0716***    0.0709***    0.0706***    0.0700***
                        (0.019)     (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.016)     (0.020)       (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)

Firm Equity Beta        0.175***    0.176***    0.173***    0.174***    0.176***    0.0482***    0.0485***    0.0480***    0.0480***    0.0482***
                         (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)

Firm Size               -0.170***   -0.169***   -0.167***   -0.169***   -0.170***   -0.0326***   -0.0324***   -0.0323***   -0.0325***   -0.0327***
                          (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)

Firm Profitability       -0.200      -0.201      -0.193       -0.203     -0.211      0.0113       0.0110       0.0123       0.0108       0.0105
                         (0.327)     (0.328)     (0.345)     (0.318)     (0.290)     (0.716)      (0.725)      (0.693)      (0.726)      (0.735)

Tangibility             -0.475***   -0.478***   -0.475***   -0.474***   -0.476***   -0.0904***   -0.0913***   -0.0905***   -0.0903***   -0.0905***
                          (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)

Tobin's Q               -0.0279**   -0.0281**   -0.0274**   -0.0275**   -0.0265**   -0.0103***   -0.0104***   -0.0103***   -0.0103***   -0.0102***
                          (0.040)     (0.038)     (0.042)     (0.042)     (0.049)     (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)

Leverage                1.756***    1.753***    1.764***    1.755***    1.757***    0.320***     0.319***     0.321***     0.320***     0.320***
                         (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)

Year Fixed Effect         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Industry Fixed Effect     Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

R-squared                 0.463       0.463       0.464       0.463       0.463       0.472        0.473        0.473        0.472        0.472
Number obs.               2657        2657        2657        2657        2657        2657         2657         2657         2657         2657




                                                                        82
