                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      MIGRATION AND REDISTRIBUTION:
            FEDERAL GOVERNANCE OF AN ECONOMIC UNION MATTERS

                                        Assaf Razin
                                        Efraim Sadka

                                     Working Paper 28558
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28558


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




No conflicting sources of research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28558.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Migration and Redistribution: Federal Governance of an Economic Union Matters
Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka
NBER Working Paper No. 28558
March 2021
JEL No. F02,H0,H77

                                         ABSTRACT

Both the U.S. and the EU are an economic union: There is a single market for goods, capital,
finance, and labor. That is, there is free mobility of goods and services, physical and financial
capital, and labor among the member countries of the union. Nevertheless, there is much higher
degree of economic policy coordination among the member states of the U.S than of the EU. We
argue, by using a model of a union exhibiting migration-based fiscal externality, that the degree
of coordination among the member states potentially contribute a great deal to our understanding
of observed policy differences between the EU and the US as economic unions: the generosity of
the welfare state and the skill composition of migration.


Assaf Razin
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and Cornell University and CEPR
and also NBER
razin@tauex.tau.ac.il

Efraim Sadka
Tel Aviv University
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
P.O.B. 39040
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 69978, ISRAEL
sadka@post.tau.ac.il
1. Introduction


In this paper we analyze the role the federal governance structure plays in the in-

come redistribution and migration policies. A central tension is faced by policy

makers in countries that receive migrants from lower wage countries. Typically,

the former countries are relatively highly productive and capital rich. The result-

ing high wages attract both high-skill and low-skill migrants. Reinforcing this

migration is the nature of the host country's welfare state: low-skill migrants find

a generous welfare state particularly attractive. Such a welfare state may turn

also to be a migration state.

Low-skill migration imposes a fiscal burden on the native-born. In addition, a

generous welfare state may deter high-skill migration because heavy redistribu-

tive taxes must accompany them. Indeed, over the last half-century, Europe's

generous social benefits have encouraged a massive surge of "welfare migra-

tion", that is, of low-skill migrants. In contrast, at the same period, the U.S. has

attracted a major world portion of high-skill migrants, boosting its innovative

edge. While Europe ended up in the last two decades with 85 percent of all low-

skill migrants to developed countries, the US retains its innovative edge by at-

tracting 55 percent of the world educated migrants. In other words, European

migration exhibits a bias towards low-skilled workers, whereas the US at-

tracts the majority of the world's skilled migrants. At the same time, the

welfare system in Europe is more generous than the one in the US.
                                          2
1.1 Differences of Federal Systems

Both the EU member states and the US states are organized as economic
unions.

An economic union is a single market for goods, capital, finance, and labor. That
is, there is free mobility of goods and services, physical and financial capital,
and labor among the member countries of the union. Both the EU and the US
are also of a similar economic size, income per capita, culture, technology, etc.

However, they differ fundamentally in their federal systems. The federal system
in the EU is loose, with predominant sovereignty residing at the hands of the
member states, whereas the federal system in the US is robust, with fiscal and
migration policies residing at the federal level.

At the time the European Union is born, all the major individual countries have
already well-established solid fiscal systems and none was at a risk of default.
As a result, the individual countries preserved their fiscal independence from
the outset There is no EU-wide income tax, no health care programs (such as,
for instance, Medicare, and Affordable Care), and no social security payroll
taxes in the EU. The EU budget amounts to no more than one percent of the
GDP in the EU.

Fiscal union in the US starts with Alexander Hamilton after the revolutionary
war, when state governments were insolvent. For the US treasury to be credit
worthy in the global market the nascent federal government (with its taxing
power), assumed state debts.
A later wave of state fiscal crises in the mid of the nineteenth century enhanced

the federal government to take a leading role in financing infrastructure projects,

allowing state governments to reduce their role. Following the debt crises, many


                                          3
states introduced some forms of balanced budget rules into their constitutions;

see Sargent (2012).

This enhanced the role of the federal government in the fiscal system. Nowa-

days, federal tax revenues constitute well over one-half of all tax revenues (fed-

eral, state and local) in the U.S.




1.2 Differences in the Income - Redistribution policies



The figure 1 below illustrates the US-EU differences in income redistribution.



The income inequality metric at play is a number between 0 and 1 known as

the Gini coefficient. In a hypothetical country with a coefficient of 0, everyone

has exactly the same income, while a nation with a coefficient of 1.0 is home to

one fat cat who takes everything while everyone else earns nothing. At 0.0.57,

before taxes and transfers, and 0.42, after taxes and transfers, America's redistri-

bution reduces GINI by 0.15; whereas the corresponding effects of redistribution

on the GINI in selected EU- countries are: Germany--0.60-0.36= 0.24, and

Denmark--0.56-0.33=0.24.

Figure 1: Income Inequality and Redistribution




                                         4
Source: Janet Gornick (2013)




An alternative measure of the effects of income redistribution is to consider the

magnitude of social expenditures. Figure 2 below below describes the trends of

the social expenditures per capita in the US and some selected countries in the

core EU.




                                        5
For example, total social expenditures per capita in 2000 amounted to 8,618

USD in Denmark, 7,583 USD in Germany, 8,040 USD in France, 8,668 USD in

Sweden, but only 5,838 USD in the U.S. (Data: OECD library).

The time path of the US social expenditures also lies uniformly below the corre-

sponding paths of EU member states.



Figure 2: Social Expenditures per capita: US vs. Core Europe: The Trends




Notes:

Constant PPP 2000 prices

Public and mandatory private social expenditures




                                       6
1.3 Differences in skill composition



Overall, and unlike the U.S. migration, the European migration exhibit signifi-

cant bias toward low-skill migrants; see Boeri, Hanson and McCormick (2002)

and Boeri (2008).Table 1 compares the stocks of migrants, by educational at-

tendance, between the EU-15 and the U.S. Indeed, we can see that more than

40% of the stock of migrants in the U.S. is with tertiary education, whereas the

corresponding figure for the EU-15 is less than 25%. Similarly, about 48-59% of

the stock of migrants in the EU-15 has only primary education, whereas the cor-

responding figures for the U.S. is only 22-26%.

Table 1: The Stocks of Migrants, by Education-Level, the U.S. and the EU-15,

1990 and 2000.



Education-Level                         EU-15                               U.S.

(By Percentage of Total)               1990 2000                           1990

2000



                                         7
Primary                                59       48                             26

22



Secondary                              24       28                            31

36



Tertiary                               18       24                             43

24

                                       100      100                           100

100



Source: International Organization for Migration (IOM) and OECD.



1.4 What's the Paper About?



This paper develops an analytical model to explain how the difference between

the EU and the US in the way member states are organized in a supranational

system lead to key policy differences between the two otherwise similar eco-

nomic unions: (i) The higher generosity of the welfare-migration system in the

EU, relative to the U.S., (ii) The skill and the wealth bias of the migration to the

U.S. relative to the migration to EU, with the former receiving a higher portion

of the high-skill and rich migrants.

                                            8
The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses policy competi-

tion. Section 3 illustrates the effect of migration on the various income groups.

Section 4 presents the model. Section 5 compares the policy competition regime

and the policy coordination regime. Section 6 concludes.



2. Policy Competition

The pioneering framework for competition among jurisdictions is due to Tiebout

(1956), who dealt with localities. Tiebout's model features many "utility-taking"

localities, analogous to the perfect competition setup of many "price-taking"

agents. His focus was on the allocation of a given population among competing

localities. 1 Adopting a similar approach, we model a stylized economy with a

group (union) of n small countries. There is free mobility of goods and capital

among them. They are also destination countries for migrants from the rest of

the world. These migrants are generally poorer than the native-born residents of

these countries. In this section we consider a competitive regime in which each

country in the union determines its own tax/ benefit and migration policies, in

competition with the other countries. The alternative of coordination among the

union's members with respect to the fiscal and migration policies (the coordina-

tion regime) is dealt with in the next section.




1
    A related issue, fiscal federalism, was first analyzed by Oates (1972).
                                                            9
We turn now to a description of the union countries. For the sake of simplicity,

we assume that all these countries are identical and we specify the characteris-

tics of a representative country.



3. Winners and losers from migration

Like trade in goods, migration also leads to winners and losers but to an overall

efficiency gains. Figure 3 below illustrates the effect of low-skill migrants on

the various income groups, in the absence of government redistribution policies.

Migration raises the supply of low-skill labor from OQ to OF, and lowers the

low-skill native-born wage from OH to OR. The low-skill, native-born loss is

equal to HAKR; the high-skill Labor and capital owners gain is equal to

HAKR+AKC ; and

the efficiency Gain is equal to AKC. The gain exceeds the loss, but this gain

typically cannot be exploited, so as to compensate the losers (without harming

the winners) because of political-economy constraints.




                                        10
Figure 3: Gains and Losses from Low-Skill Migration



4. The Fiscal-Externality Model

The model assumes free mobility of goods, people, and capital within an eco-

nomic union. There exists a continuum of states within an economic union com-

peting for people, capital, taxes and social benefits. The supply of migrants from

the rest of the world is upward slopping.




4.1. Representative Country

With a capital input (K), output (Y) is given by a constant-returns-to-scale,

Cobb-Douglas production function is

           (1- ) (1- )(1- )
 =                          ,      0 <  < 1, 0 <  < 1 .                  (4.1)

                                        11
The income shares of the high-skill and low-skill labor, respectively, are now

given by (1 - )

and (1 - )(1 -  ), as can be seen from equations (4.2) below. The symbol

 and  stands for high-skill and low-skill labor, respectively,  denotes

high-skill wage, and  denotes low-skill wage.

The competitive wages of high-skill and low-skill labor are equal to their mar-

ginal productivities:

                                                                                                  (4.2)

                                                       (1 -  )
                                                =
                                                           

                                         = (1 - )(1 -  )/



Note that the abundance of high-skill labor raises the wage of the low-skill la-

bor, whereas the abundance of low-skill labor raises the wage of the high-skill

labor.

Aggregate labor supply, for high-skill and low-skill workers, respectively, is

given by2:



                                                = ( + )




                           (1-+(1- ))
2
    We also assume that                 > 1, which ensures that the wage of the high-skill always exceeds the
                          (1-)(+)
wage of the low-skill ( >  ).
                                                         12
(4.3)

                            = (1 -  + (1 - )).



The size of the native-born population is normalized to one. Symbols , , .  ,

and . stand for number of migrants, share of high-skill migrants in total num-

ber of migrants, number of high-skill native-born, high-skill labor supply and

low-skill labor supply, respectively.

Also, the total number of workers, native-born and migrants is given by:

                                         = 1 +         .

                         (4.4)



Symbol N stands for the size of total population (native-born and migrants). For

the sake of simplicity, we assume that physical capital does not depreciate.

Firms rent capital from individuals. In a competitive equilibrium the pre-tax

rental price of capital (r) will be equal to the marginal productivity of capital,

that is

     
 =          .                             (4.5)
        

Native-born high-skill individuals, and low-skill individuals, and migrants differ

from one another in their ownership of capital (wealth). Migrants of both types

(high-skill and low-skill) own no capital. The native-born high-skill is endowed


                                         13
with more capital than the native-born low-skill. Denote by  the stock of capi-

tal owned by a native-born individual with skill level i= s,u , where  >  ,

where "s" stands for high-skill and "u" stands for low-skill Given that the high-

skill earn a higher wage rate than the low-skill (that is,  >  ), it follows that

the native-born high-skill are unambiguously richer than the native-born low-

skill and all the migrants. Also, the native-born low-skill is richer than the low-

skill migrant, but not necessarily than the high-skill migrant. Such heterogeneity

in income and wealth is crucial for the analysis below.



An individual can rent her capital either at home or at the other union countries.

Thus, the total stock of capital, owned by residents, S + (1-S)  does not

have to equal K, the total input of capital as would be the case in a closed econ-

omy. For the sake of completeness, capital taxation is levied according to the

source principle, according to which each country taxes only the capital em-

ployed in that country. Denoting the tax rate on capital income by  , the net-of-

tax rental price of capital is (1-  ) r 3.

We specify a simple welfare-state system in which there is a dual tax system: a

tax at the rate  on labor income and a tax at the rate  on capital income. We

allow for different rates of taxation of labor and capital in order to examine the

effects of migration and capital mobility separately on capital and labor taxation.



3
 Note that due to our constant-returns-to scale assumption, there are no pure profits at the firm's level that
can be taxed (as, for example, by a corporate tax).
                                                       14
The welfare state provides also a uniform social benefit (b). The latter may cap-

ture not only a cash transfer, but also outlays on public services such as educa-

tion, health, and other provisions. Thus, b is not necessarily a perfect substitute

to private consumption.

All individuals (irrespective of skill or national origin) have identical prefer-

ences over private consumption (c), work efforts (l), and the social benefit (b),

given by the following utility function:
                           1+
                     
       =  -                 
                                + ln()           ,                                  (4.6)
                   1+ 




where  > 0 is a preference coefficient that will turn out to be the individual la-

bor supply elasticity (see equation (4.8)). Recall that we interpret b not just as a

pure cash transfer, but rather as some social benefit that creates a utility of

ln(b).4

The budget constraint of a native-born individual with skill level i = s,u is given

by:

 = (1 - )  + [1 + (1 -  )r]                                  ,  = ,                                  (4.7)



We assume that migrants are fully entitled to the welfare system. That is, they

pay the tax rate  on their labor income (they own no capital) and receive the




4
 This quasi-linear utility function is quite common in the tax literature (e.g. Diamond (1998)). It implies that
there is no income effect on the labor supply; see equation (7.8) below.
                                                        15
social benefit b. Thus, the budget constraint of a migrant of a skill levels i = s, u

is given by:

 = (1 - )               ,                           (4.8)

In view of our quasi-linear utility function, capital income does not affect labor

supplies. Thus, all individuals (irrespective of skill or national origin) have the

same labor supply function:

 = ((1 - ) ) ,                = ,                              (4.9)

Note that the (fixed) coefficient  is indeed equal to the labor supply elasticity.

In general, the indirect utility function gives the maximum level of utility that an

individual can obtain, given her budget constraint and the social benefit pro-

vided by the government. In our case the indirect utility function is obtained by

substituting the labor supply equation (7.9) and the budget constraint (4.7) or

(4.8), as the case may be, into the utility function (4.6). Thus, for a native-born

individual, this indirect utility function ( ) is given by:
                                   1+
                            (1- ) 
 ( ,  , ) = ln() +                      + 1 + (1 -  )           ,  = , 
                              1+

(4.10)

The indirect utility of a migrant who owns no capital is given by
                                                              1+
                                                    (1- ) 
                               ( , ) = ln() +                      ,   i = s,u
                                                         1+

(4.11)




                                          16
In a static model, like the present one, it is common and natural to employ a bal-

anced-budget rule5. That is, the government employs all its revenues, from labor

and capital taxation, to finance the uniform social benefit.

The government budget constraint is thus given by:

                             =   +  (  +   )                                    .

(4.12)

Note that source taxation is employed, so that the government obtains capital tax

revenues from the entire input of capital employed in domestic production.




As we have already mentioned, migrants to the union member countries pay

their dues to the welfare system, but they also qualify for all the social benefits

that the system provides. Therefore, they are not merely driven by better wages,

but also by the social benefits. Put differently, migration is driven by the utility-

gap rather than by merely the wage-gap. Note that as all the countries of the un-

ion are assumed identical, there will be no intra-union migration. Therefore we

consider only migration from the rest of the world to union member countries6.

However, there is some cost to migration., This cost may depend on individual

characteristics such as age, family size, ethnicity, whether or not and to what ex-

tent pension benefits are portable to the new destination, etc. Thus, the migration

5
  This is the analogue of an inter-temporal balanced budget rule, in present value terms, in a multi-period
model.
6
  For an extension to a union with non-identical countries and, consequently, intra-union migration from poor
to rich member countries (in addition to migration from the rest of the world), see Razin and Sadka (2013).
                                                      17
cost may vary not only for different skill levels, but also within each skill level.

Consequently, the reservation utility - the threshold utility level in the destina-

tion country for migration to occur - varies accordingly. We assume that would-

be migrants are indifferent with respect to the identity of the would-be destina-

tion country. All they care about is the level of utility they will enjoy. Thus, the

number of migrants of each skill level who wish to emigrate to the union (as a

whole) rises with the level of utility (well-being) that they will enjoy in the un-

ion. (Note that utilities are identical across the union member countries.)

Put differently, the union faces an upward-slopping migrant supply function for

each skill level:

                                     =  ( )

                                                                         (4.13)
            
(1- )  =  ( )             ,

where  is the supply function of migrants of skill level i and  denotes the

reservation utility for the marginal migrant; that is, the utility level accorded to

migrants of skill level i in the union, i = s,u.

A representative union-member country determines its fiscal and migration pol-

icy by majority voting among the native-born. For concreteness, we describe in

details the case where the native-born, high-skill form the majority, that is S >

0.5 (the other case is specified similarly).




                                           18
Being small enough, each union-member country naturally takes union-wide

prices as given. In the presence of free capital mobility there will be only one

rental price of capital throughout the union. Because source taxation is em-

ployed, the relevant price is the net-of-tax rental price of capital7. Denote this

price (market rate of return) by  . Therefore:

(1 -  )  =                .                                    (4.14)

Prices in our case include also the utility levels of migrants and native-born, by

skill.

Because of intra-union free migration, there are therefore also equal utilities, by

skill and origin, throughout the union. Each union-member country takes union-

wide utility levels as given too; that is, each country is also a "utility-taker" (in

analogy to being a "price-taker"). Denote the (assumed given) union-wide utility

level of a migrant of skill i by  (i = s,u).

Then:

                                             ( , ) = 

 
 ( ,  ) = 
          

                                                                                                       (4.15)

.




7
 If instead residence taxation was employed, then the relevant price would be the pre-tax rental price of capi-
tal.
                                                      19
(Note that because Vi and  differ from one another only by the term

(1+ )  (i = s, u), which is uniform across the union, it follows that the utilities

of the native-born, by skill, are also uniform across the union.)

Taking as given  ,    , each union-member country chooses its fiscal

and migration policy variables ( ,  , , , and ), so as to maximize the utility

of the native-born majority, subject to its budget constraint (4.12), the free capi-

tal mobility constraint (4.14), and the intra-union free migration constraint

(4.15).

5. Market - Clearing conditions

Each union-member country seeks to admit    high-skill migrants and (1 -

  )  low-skill migrants from the rest of the world. The union demands for

high-skill and low-skill migrants from the rest of the world are thus     and

(1 -   )  , respectively. (We denote by an asterisk (*) the levels of the eco-

nomic variables that ensue under the fiscal and migration policy chosen by the

government.) Therefore, utility levels that clear the market for migrants from the

rest of the world are determined in equilibria by




                                     =  ( )



                                                                    (5.16)

(1 -   ) =  ( )               .
                                         20
These equations determine the utility levels of the migrants that each union

member assumed as given. Also, the world wide net-of-tax rental price of capi-

tal,  , is determined so as to equate the union demand for capital,   , to the un-

ion supply, ( + (1 - ) ), that is:



  = ( + (1 - ) )                                       (5.17)



Note that because all the countries in the union are identical, then in equilibrium

there is no movement of capital from one country to another; each country em-

ploys the entire capital endowment of its native-born. But, each member coun-

try`s policies are made in an intra-union competitive environments for people

and capital.



6. Intra-Union Coordination

In the previous section we assumed that the union-member countries compete

with each other in an attempt to provide as high as possible utility level for the

majority. They compete in the sense that each country determines its fiscal and

migration policy variables (i.e.  , ,  , , , ) independently of the other union-

member countries, taking their policies as given (a Nash-equilibrium).

Presumably, a low-skill majority voter opts to admit high-skill migrants, for two

reasons: first, such migrants are net contributors to the finances of the welfare

state; that is, the tax that each one pays (namely,    ) exceeds the benefit she
                                         21
receives (namely, b). Second, for a given stock of capital (and volume of migra-

tion), increasing the share of high-skill migrants raises the wage of the low-skill

(native-born and migrants alike), due to the factor-substitution built-in in the

Cobb-Douglas production function. Therefore, if the low-skill forms the major-

ity they will admit only high-skill migrants8.

On the other hand, the high-skill (who is assumed to form the majority) may opt

for both types of migrants. Low-skill migration raises the wage of the high-skill,

due to a factor substitution effect, but imposes a fiscal burden on the high-skill,

because low-skill migrants are net consumers of the welfare state. High-skill mi-

gration lowers the wage of the high-skill, but contributes positively to the fi-

nances of the welfare state. All of these reinforcing or conflicting forces are bal-

anced in a competitive equilibrium. The aforementioned setup may capture the

gist of the policy competition that takes place among the members of the EU.

An alternative institutional regime, discussed in this section, is for the union-

member states to coordinate their fiscal and migration policies to their mutual

benefit.

This institutional regime of coordination among union-member states may cap-

ture the gist of the federal system of the United States. In particular, the federal

government is the governing body that set migration policy and the bulk of the




8
 This result hinges crucially on the assumption that migrants are not entitled to vote. If they were, then a low-
skill majority may opt to limit the number of high-skill migrants in order to preserve its majority. For an analyti-
cal treatment of this case, see Razin, Sadka and Suwankiri (2011, 2015).
                                                        22
fiscal policy. Naturally, such coordination can come only at the expense of the

migrants from the rest of the world.

The very advantage of coordination over competition is that the former allows

the union-member countries (states) to take into account the effect of policy on

economic variables (prices) that each individual country takes as exogenous un-

der competition. The union-member countries are no longer price (utility) - tak-

ers in the coordination regime, as they were in the competitive regime. In our

case, there are three such variables: the utility level of the high-skill ( ), the

utility level of the low-skill ( ), and the net-of-tax rental price of capital ( ).

These variables govern the allocation of high-skill labor, low-skill labor and

capital in the union.

The coordinating states now jointly determine their fiscal and migration policy

variables ( , ,  , , , ), as opposed to independently choosing them. In addi-

tion and simultaneously, the coordinating states choose now also the "reserva-

tion utility prices" --  ,  , and  - -subject to the market-clearing conditions

(5.16) and (5.17). As in the competitive regime, they are also bound by the

budget constraints (4.12). Note that as all the union-member states are alike, the

issue of revenue-sharing among states does not arise. 9



7. Comparing the Competition Equilibrium to the Coordination Equilibrium



9
  Note that the "central planner" chose optimally to be on the supply of migrants, rather than ration migration
flows.
                                                      23
The focus of this paper is the coordination among countries (states) in an eco-

nomic union affects fiscal and migration policies, as compared to a competition

among them. This comparison may offer some explanation to the differences be-

tween the U.S. (coordination) and the EU (competition) with respect to the size

(generosity) of the welfare state and the share of high-skill migration in total mi-

gration.

We consider the social benefit variable (b) as a proxy to the size (generosity) of

the welfare state 10. As there are in our model economy only two types of work-

ers (high-skill and low-skill), we are interested only in the share of just one of

these two types of migrants in total migration.

Specifically, we look at the high-skill share . We carry out this comparison via

numerical simulations 11. Figure 3 depicts the social benefit (b) under the two in-

stitutional regimes (competition and coordination) for different levels of total

factor productivity (A). Figure 4 depicts the share of high-skill migration in total

migration () under the two institutional regimes for different levels of total fac-

tor productivity (A). As a side result, we note that the social benefit increases

under both regimes when total factor productivity rises. This is expected: a



10
   Recall that with a balanced-budget the social benefit b are equal to (per-capita) tax revenues. Therefore, the
social benefit is more appropriate proxy to the size of the welfare state than the two tax parameters  and  ,
which do not always move in the same direction.
11
   Note that if the low-skilled native born are in the majority, they will opt for high skilled migration only; under
both the competitive and the coordination regimes. Because, admitting low-skilled migrants, the low-skilled
native born is losing both in the labor-market and the welfare-state fronts.
 There is no attempt to calibrate the model to the EU and U.S. economies, as they are very stylized, abstracting
from many important features that are similar or different between them. Nevertheless, the simulations offer a
useful insight into the quantitative differences between the two unions with respect to fiscal and migration pol-
icies.
                                                         24
richer economy can afford to accord its residents a higher level of social bene-

fits.

.




Figure 3: Social Benefits, by Total Factor Productivity: Competition versus Co-

ordination.




                                        25
Figure 4: High-Skill Composition of Migration, by Total Factor Productivity:

Competition versus Coordination




                                      26
Figure 5: Tax rates and migration volumes, by Total Factor Productivity: Com-

petition versus Coordination



The competition regime, as well as the coordination regime, yield higher capi-

tal tax rate than coordination. Coordination yields higher labor tax rate than

competition. Competition yields more high skill migrants than low-skill mi-

grants. Interestingly, Competition yields more high skill migrants and low mi-

grants than coordination.



Our main interest is to compare b and  under the two regimes. Interestingly, co-

ordinating the fiscal and migration policies allows the union-member states to

offer less generous social benefits than when they compete with each other; see

Figure 23. The rationale for this result is rooted in a fiscal externality associated

with migration.


                                         27
There are gains and losses brought about by migration. A union-member high-

skilled native born has an infra-marginal gain from either high-skill or low-skill

migration stemming, from the diminishing productivity of either type of labor

for a fixed stock of capital (triggering the "business" lobby). The gain stems

from the fact that each migrant (whether skilled or low-skilled) is paid according

to the productivity of the marginal migrant, which is smaller than the average

productivity of the migrants (of the same type). On the other hand, the native-

born population shares with migrants the tax collected from capital income (re-

call that migrants have no capital), because the transfer  that the migrants re-

ceive is not financed fully by their labor income tax. That is, the capital tax reve-

nues paid by the native-born population `leak' also to the migrants 12.

The fiscal burden imposed by migration on the high-skilled native-born (both

high-skill and low-skill) is reinforced when this migration is composed of low-

skill migrants. This is because the low-skilled not only possess no capital; they

also have low wages and accordingly pay low labor income taxes 13.

Each union-member country in a competitive regime evidently balances at the

margin the gains and losses from migration. In doing so, each country (being a

"utility-taker") takes the well-being of the migrants,  and , as given (see

equation (5.15)) and the union wide rate of return on capital,  . It thus ignores




12
   Fiscal leakage effects in demographic contexts where first analyzed by Razin, Sadka and Swagel (2002a and
2002b).
13
   High-skill migrants, though bringing no capital still pay relatively high taxes on labor income.
                                                      28
the fact that when it adopts a fiscal-migration policy that admits an extra mi-

grant, it raises the well-being that must be accorded to migrants not only by it

but also by all other union member countries, in order to elicit the migrant to

come in. As a result, it offers migrants too high level of the social benefit (b),

and admits a too high share of low-skilled migrants- a "fiscal leakage" external-

ity. Indeed, Figure 23 demonstrates that the union member states admit a higher

share of low-skill migrants when they compete with each other than when they

cooperate. As expected, the cooperating states, facing an upward-slopping sup-

ply of migrants (of both types) exploit their market power by admitting smaller

numbers of high-skill and low-skill migrants, as compared to the case when they

compete with each other.14

Obviously coordination allows the union to exercise monopsony power over mi-

grants. Therefore the migration volumes under the policy- competition regime

exceed those under the policy-coordination regime. Specifically, competition

over low-skilled migrants, who come with no capital, induces the individual

member state to raise the social benefit, b, so as to attract more migrants when

starting from the coordination equilibrium. As a result, the social benefits in all

other member states must also be raised to keep these migrants at their own



14
  Further intuition is gained when one compares the first-order conditions under the coordination regime to
those under the competition equilibrium; these conditions are similar except for a subset associated with mi-
gration decisions and capital flow decisions. Thus, starting from the coordination equilibrium, these compari-
sons reveal that an individual member state would like to deviate towards bring in more low-skilled migrants.
To elicit the marginal low-skilled migrant and individual member inflict a larger fiscal burden on the rest of the
member countries, because they will have to compete for low-skilled migrants. The competitive equilibrium
therefore will have relatively more low-skilled migrants and higher social benefits relative to the coordination
equilibrium.
                                                        29
economy. This amounts to greater income redistribution from the high skilled

native-born who are in power to the unskilled immigrants­ a negative external-

ity.

In the following sections we elaborate on additional differences between the EU

and the US.

7. Differences in Demographics

Ageing of the population is another fundamental factor, inter-related with migra-

tion and the generosity of the welfare state. In developed countries, the destina-

tion of migration from around the world, populations are ageing dramatically: in

2017, the world population aged 60 years or older was more than twice as large

as in 1980, and two-thirds of the world's older persons lived in developed re-

gions (United Nations 2019).



In 2010, the proportion of people aged 65 and older constituted 13.1 percent in

the US, whereas in the core EU countries it was significantly larger: 20.8 per-

cent in Germany, 20.3 percent in Italy, 16.8 percent in France, and 16.6 percent

in the UK (United Nations, 2013). Although the population in the US is getting

older, and its numbers are growing more slowly, than in the past, the demo-

graphic future for the US is younger than that of the core EU countries. In par-

ticular, the US population is projected to grow faster and age more slowly than

the populations of its major economic partners in Europe. Figure 6 describes the



                                        30
ageing patterns of the US and Germany (the largest EU economy) in terms of

the age dependency ratio.



Figure 6: Age dependency ratio, old (% of working-age population): Germany

vs. United States




Source: The World Bank.



8. Differences in Labor mobility



There is also a significant difference degree of labor mobility between the EU

and the US. The average response of the population to a local demand shock in

Europe turns out to be much more limited and slower than in the US (Beyer and
                                       31
Smets (2015), Arpaia et al. (2016), and Dao et al. (2018)). Beyer and Smets

(2015) compare the labor market response to region-specific shocks in Europe

and the United States and to national shocks in Europe and investigate changes

over time. They employ a multilevel factor model to decompose regional labor

market variables and then estimate the dynamic response of the employment

level, the employment rate and the participation rate using the region-specific

variables and the country factors. They find that both in Europe and in the

United States labor mobility accounts for about 50% of the long-run adjustment

to region-specific labor demand shocks and only a little more in the United

States than in Europe, where adjustment takes twice as long. In Europe, labor

mobility is a less important adjustment mechanism in response to country-spe-

cific labor demand shocks that cause stronger and more persistent reactions of

the employment and the participation rate. However, they detect a convergence

of the adjustment processes in Europe and the United States, reflecting both a

fall in interstate migration in the United States and a rise in the role of migration

in Europe.




8. Conclusion

As we know, there are some significant gains from migration. First, high-skill

migration does not impose a fiscal burden on the welfare state. To the contrary,

the taxes paid by high-skill migrants generally exceed the benefits they receive.

                                         32
Second, high-skill migration enhances the technological edge of the destination

country. Furthermore, even low-skill migrants may still alleviate the finances of

a welfare state, which allocates a great deal of its resources to old-age secu-

rity. 15This led us to explore how migrating and fiscal (welfare) policies are

jointly determined in a political-economic setup.

However, in the era of the welfare state one can no longer envisage a world of

free migration. Indeed, for example, the U.S. has gradually ceased to freely ad-

mit migrants after World War I, when it also started to gradually develop the in-

stitutions of the welfare state (e.g., the federal income tax, the old-age security,

etc.), culminating with the great social institutions in the sixties of the last cen-

tury (e.g. Medicare) and more recently, in the affordable health care (known as

Obama Care). A welfare state is a magnet for migrants, especially the low-skill,

the poor, and the old. Therefore, there will arise a political backlash of the na-

tive-born against the "free-riders"- the migrants. This does not mean that migra-

tion will be altogether banned



Evidently, both the U.S. and the EU are an economic union: There is a single

market for goods, capital, finance, and labor. That is, there is free mobility of

goods and services, physical and financial capital, and labor among the member

countries of the union. Nevertheless, there is much higher degree of economic



15
  See Storesletten (2000) for a calibrated over-lapping generations model which analyzes this issue. See also a
political-economy dynamic analysis of coalition building in Razin, Sadka, and Suwankiri (2015).
                                                      33
policy coordination among the member states of the U.S than of the EU. For in-

stance, the U.S. has a common (federal) income tax system which constitutes the

major source of revenues in the union. Similarly, the social security system is

more or less uniform across the U.S. There is also a single migration policy set

up and enforced by the federal government. In contrast, there is very little coor-

dination on these issues among the member countries of the EU. In essence, they

compete with each other on these issues.

 We argue that the degree of coordination among the member states potentially

contribute a great deal to our understanding of observed policy differences be-

tween the EU and the US as economic unions: the generosity of the welfare

state and the skill composition of migration.

It is worth noting that the U.S. welfare system has undergone some reforms that

gave the states some more leeway in designing the structure and magnitude of

public assistance. In particular, the 1996 welfare reform is worth mentioning 16.

It substituted open-ended federal funds with block grants, leaving the states

some autonomy over individual eligibility criteria; see Blank (1997) for a review

of this reform. The reform somewhat weakened the degree of coordination

among the states of the U.S. with respect to public assistance programs, making

a small step towards the way the EU operates on these issues.

Further evidence of coordination failures in the EU is in the recent wave of mi-

grants and asylum seekers from the Middle East and the Balkans. This forced


16
     Specifically: the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (RRWORA)
                                                       34
the European Commission, the EU executive arm, and EU interior ministers to

propose a first-step plan to deal with the challenge. The EU`s 28 member states

have long been famed for squabbling among themselves when confronting refu-

gee crisis because they lack a federal institutions, as in the US, which can deal in

a coordinated fashion.

References

Birch Sørensen, P. (2001, 01). Tax coordination in the European union: What

are the issues? Swedish Economic Policy Review 8.

Blank, Rebecca M. (1997), "Policy Watch: The 1996 Welfare Reform," The

Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 11, No. 1 (winter, 1997), pp. 169-177.

Boeri, T. (2008, 01). Brain gain: A european approach, introduction by tito

boeri. CESifo Forum 9, 30­34.

Boeri, T. (2010). Immigration to the land of redistribution. Economica 77(308),

651­687.

Boeri, T., G. Hanson, and B. McCormick (Eds.) (2002). Immigration Policy and

the Welfare System: A Report for the Fondazione Rodolfo Debenedetti. Oxford

University Press.

Bovenberg, L., S. Cnossen, and R. de Mooij (2003, 11). Introduction: Tax coor-

dination in the european union. International Tax and Public Finance 10(6), 619.




                                         35
Goldin, C. (1994). The Political Economy of Immigration Restriction in the

United States, 1890 to 1921. In C. Goldin and G. D. Libecap (Eds.), The Regu-

lated Economy: A Historical Approach to Political Economy, NBER Chapters,

pp. 223­258. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Goldin, I., A. Pitt, B. Nabarro, and K. Boyle (2018). Migration and the econ-

omy: Economic realities, social impacts and political choices. Citi & Oxford

Martin report.

Gornick, Janet, editor, (2013) Income Inequality: Economic Disparities and the

Middle Class in Affluent Countries (Studies in Social Inequality), Stanford Uni-

versity press

Goldin, Ian, Geoffrey Camero, and Meera Balarajan (2011). Exceptional People

How Migration Shaped Our World and Will Define Our Future, Princeton Uni-

versity Press.



Oates, Wallace E. 1972. Fiscal Federalism, New York: Harcourt Brace.



Mendoza, E. G. and L. L. Tesar (2005). Why hasn't tax competition triggered a

race to the bottom? some quantitative lessons from the eu. Journal of Monetary

Economics 52(1), 163 ­ 204.

Messina, A. (2007, 01). The Logics and Politics of Post-WWII Migration to

Western Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.



                                       36
Oates, W. E. (1972). Fiscal Federalism. Number 14708 in Books. Edward Elgar

Publishing.

Razin, Assaf, (2021), Globalization, Migration, and Welfare state: Understand-

ing Macroeconomic Trifecta, Palgrave Macmillan.

Razin, Assaf, and E. Sadka (1991). International tax competition and gains from

tax harmonization. Economics Letters 37(1), 69 ­ 76.

Razin, A. and E. Sadka (2014). Migration and Welfare State: Why is America

Different from Europe? Palgrave Macmillan US.

Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Phillip Swagel. (2002a). "The Aging Popula-

tion and the Size of the Welfare State." Journal of Political Economy 66(6):467-

482.

-------.(2002b). "Tax Burden and Migration: A Political Economy Theory and

Evidence." Journal of Public Economics 85 (2): 167-190.

Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Benjarong Suwankiri (2015), Migration and the

Welfare State: Political-Economy Policy Formation, MIT Press.

Razin, A. and J. Wahba (2015). Welfare magnet hypothesis, fiscal burden, and

immigration skill selectivity. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 117(2),

369­402.

Romer, D. (1998). A new assessment of openness and inflation: Reply. The

Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(2), 649­652.

Rosefielde, S. and S. Hedlund (2008, 01). Russia since 1980: Wrestling with

westernization. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

                                       37
Rybczynski, T. M. (1955). Factor endowment and relative commodity prices.

Economica 22(88), 336­341.

Sachs, J. D. (2016, May). Toward an international migration regime. American

Economic Review 106(5), 451­55.

Sachs, J. D. (2017). Navigating the new abnormal: The populist backlash.

https://www.project-syndicate.org/onpoint/ navigating-the-new-abnormal-2017-

02?barrier=accesspaylog.

Sargent, T. J. (1999). The Conquest of American Inflation. Princeton University

Press.

Sargent, T. J. (2012). Nobel lecture: United states then, europe now. Journal of

Political Economy 120(1), 1­40.

Sørensen, P. B., P. Bacchetta, and B. Jullien (2000). The case for international

tax co-ordination reconsidered. Economic Policy 15(31), 431­472.

Storesletten, Kjetil (2000). "Sustaining Fiscal Policy through Immigration."

Journal of Political Economy, 108, 300­323.

Tiebout, Charles M. (1956),"A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures,"

Journal of Political Economy Vol. 64, No. 5 (Oct., 1956), pp. 416-424.



United Nations. 2013. World Population Prospect, June.




.
                                        38
