                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DISCOUNT RATES, MORTALITY PROJECTIONS, AND MONEY'S WORTH CALCULATIONS
                     FOR US INDIVIDUAL ANNUITIES

                                        James M. Poterba
                                         Adam Solomon

                                       Working Paper 28557
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28557


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




 The authors thank Victor Fuchs, Stephen Goss, Olivia Mitchell, Raimond Maurer, Matthew
 Poterba, and Mark Warshawsky for helpful comments. Poterba is a paid trustee of the College
 Retirement Equity Fund (CREF) and the TIAA-CREF mutual funds; TIAA sells annuity
 products. Solomon acknowledges support from the Daniel and Gail Rubinfeld Fellowship at
 MIT. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
 of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2021 by James M. Poterba and Adam Solomon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
 to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
 including © notice, is given to the source.
Discount Rates, Mortality Projections, and Money's Worth Calculations for US Individual
Annuities
James M. Poterba and Adam Solomon
NBER Working Paper No. 28557
March 2021
JEL No. G22,J14,J26

                                          ABSTRACT

Estimates the expected present discounted value (EPDV) of future payouts on both immediate
and deferred annuities are sensitive to the discount rate used to value future payment streams and
assumptions about future mortality rates. This paper illustrates this with respect to annuities that
were available in the US retail insurance market in 2020. The spread between the interest rates
on Treasury and corporate bonds was high by historical standards as a share of the riskless
Treasury yield during much of 2020, making the choice of discount rate more consequential than
in the past. The EPDV estimates also depend on whether the rapid but since-attenuated decline in
US old-age mortality rates during the 1990s and early 2000s is extrapolated to future decades.
The "money's worth" is the EPDV divided by the annuity's purchase price. Our central estimates,
using discount rates drawn from the corporate BBB yield curve and future mortality rates that
combine a Society of Actuaries individual annuitant mortality table with projections of future
mortality improvements from the Social Security Administration, suggest money's worth values
for annuities offered to 65-year-old men and women of about 92 cents per premium dollar.
Recent Department of Labor rulemaking requires defined contribution plan sponsors to provide
participants with estimates of the annuity income stream that their plan balance could purchase.
These estimates, like EPDVs, are also sensitive to both prospective rate of return and mortality
rate assumptions.


James M. Poterba
Department of Economics, E52-444
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
poterba@nber.org

Adam Solomon
Department of Economics
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
adamsol@mit.edu
       Annuity markets attract the attention of economists and financial planners because they
offer individuals a way of insuring against longevity risk, one of the most important late-life
threats to financial security. In the United States, Social Security provides most retirees with an
inflation-indexed annuity. Workers who are covered by defined benefit pension plans, which
were more common three decades ago than today, typically receive guaranteed nominal annuity
payments, in some cases with partial indexation for inflation.
       Relatively few individuals who accumulate assets in defined contribution plans, or who
accumulate substantial non-pension financial wealth, choose to annuitize. A large literature has
considered whether this is consistent with optimizing behaviour in a stochastic lifecycle model.
Explanations for the low rate of annuitization include the presence of a bequest motive for many
of those with significant retirement wealth, recently studied by Lockwood (2018), the risk of
late-life medical costs that are best addressed with a pool of non-annuitized wealth as in
Reichling and Smetters (2015), adverse selection in the annuity market that leads insurers to
price products in a way that is unattractive for many potential buyers as studied by Finkelstein
and Poterba (2004) and others, mortality pessimism as in O'Dea and Sturrock (2020) and
Solomon (2021), and the role of Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid in providing a
guaranteed consumption floor regardless of how long one lives. A number of empirical studies
have explored the potential role of adverse selection in annuity pricing, including Canon and
Tonks (2004), Mitchell, Poterba, Warshawsky, and Brown (1999), and Verani and Yu (2020).
These studies compare expected present discounted value of future payouts on annuity products
with their purchase price, typically finding that the "money's worth ratio," the ratio of the value
of future payouts to the premium, falls below one. Adverse selection is one explanation for this
finding, although Cannon and Tonks (2016) point out that it is difficult to distinguish selection
from other pricing-relevant considerations such as regulatory requirements for capital reserves.
        The 2019 Setting Every Community Up for Retirement Enhancement (SECURE) Act
increases the salience of annuities as a way drawing down the accumulated assets in defined
contribution plans. It requires retirement plan administrators to provide participants with two
illustrations each year of the lifetime income stream that their current account balance could
purchase. One must show the potential payouts associated with a single life annuity, and the
other the payouts from a joint and survivor annuity. In August 2020, the Department of Labor
(DOL) issued an Interim Final Rule directing plan administrators to calculate these potential


                                                 1
payouts using the interest rate on a 10-year Treasury bond and a gender-neutral mortality table
developed by the IRS. Rather than relying on the market prices of retail annuity products, this
calculation estimates the annuity payout that a hypothetical at-cost insurer could offer annuitants
if it could earn the return on a 10-year Treasury bond for the length of the annuity contract, and if
it did not incur any other costs of supplying annuities. Estimates of the money's worth of
existing retail annuities and of the potential annuity payouts to a DC plan participant both depend
on an assumed rate of return at which future payments are discounted, and an assumed mortality
table that describes the probability that an annuitant will be alive at various future dates.
       This paper illustrates the sensitivity of money's worth ratios for retail annuities to both
discount rate and mortality rate assumptions by focusing on policies that were offered in the U.S.
market in June 2020. It also explains how uncertainties that have been recognized in the annuity
valuation literature apply to the calculation of potential annuity payouts. One important
distinction between retail annuity products and the hypothetical product described by the DOL
guidance is that retail annuities are priced differently for men and women, while the annuities
offered in retirement plans must be gender-blind. In the retail annuity market, women of a given
age receive lower payouts per year per premium dollar than their male counterparts due to their
lower average mortality rates at all ages. Annuities offered in qualified retirement plans on a
unisex basis provide higher payouts to women, and lower payouts to men, than the payouts that
they would receive if gender was considered in pricing.
       Most previous empirical work on annuity markets, like the new DOL regulations,
focuses on annuities that begin paying policyholders shortly after the date of purchase. These are
known as single premium individual annuities (SPIAs) or their closely-related joint-and-survivor
counterparts. Recently, deferred annuities have begun to attract interest for their potential role in
providing longevity insurance. Deferred annuities are annuity contracts with a substantial period
of time between the purchase date and the date on which payouts commence. Horneff, Maurer,
and Mitchell (2020) estimate that a 65-year-old man can increase his expected lifetime utility by
allocating a small fraction of his wealth to the purchase of an actuarially fair annuity that would
begin payouts at age 85. The market for deferred annuities is currently small; we estimate that
the money's worth values for these products are lower than for immediate annuities.




                                                  2
       This paper is divided into eight sections. The first describes our framework for
calculating the expected present discounted value of the payouts associated with an annuity
product and its corresponding money's worth. The next three sections describe our data sources
for annuity prices, the discount rates that apply to future payouts, and the assumed mortality rates
for potential annuity buyers. Section five presents our estimates of the money's worth of
immediate annuities and compares the payouts on retail annuities that are available in the market
with the break-even calculations from the DOL algorithm. Section six reports on the share of the
expected value of an annuity contract that is life-contingent, relative to the share that is
guaranteed, for several annuity products with guarantee periods. The seventh section estimates
the money's worth of deferred annuities; in general these estimates are lower than the estimates
for immediate annuities. There is a brief conclusion.
1. Framework for Annuity Valuation
       For retail annuity products that are currently offered by US insurance companies, we
observe the initial premium as well as the monthly payout that the buyer will receive. We
estimate the expected present discounted value (EPDV) of the stream of future payments, and
define the money's worth of the policy as the ratio of the EPDV to the policy's premium. Past
estimates of money's worth ratios have typically fallen between 0.80 and 0.95, with variation
over time and as a function of the valuation assumptions. Koijen and Yogo (2015) report on a
short period of time during the global financial crisis of 2009 when some insurers offered
annuity policies with money's worth values greater than unity as a means of raising regulatory
capital. Even when the EPDV is less than the purchase price, risk-averse potential annuitants
may be prepared to purchase these products because they offer insurance against longevity risk.
       We simplify our valuation calculations by assuming that annuities make two payouts
each year, each equal to six promised monthly payments. We use  () to denote the EPDV of
a life annuity that makes two payments of A dollars each year and that is purchased by an
individual of age b. When purchased outside a retirement account, annuity payouts are taxable;
we consider that case, but begin with, and focus on, purchases in retirement accounts. If the
funds used to purchase the annuity were paid out of the account as a lump sum, they would be
taxed at the individual's ordinary income tax rate. When the individual receives annuity
payments from the retirement account, they are also taxed at this rate. As long as the annuitant's
marginal income tax rate remains constant for his remaining lifetime, and the relevant discount


                                                  3
rate is the pre-tax rate of return such as the interest rate on a bond held in a qualified plan
account, the money's worth ratio is independent of the tax rate:
                                                           ,
(1)                                  () = 240-2
                                          =0                       .
                                                           (1+ )

We assume that the annuitant will not live beyond the age of 120, which means that b-year-old
annuity buyer cannot receive more than 240 ­ 2*b payments. Our calculations are insensitive to
shortening the maximum assumed lifespan to 115, 110 or 105 years.
        Equation (1) shows that Vb(A), depends on three inputs: the payouts associated with the
annuity contract, the discount rates that are used to compute the present discounted value, and
the survival probabilities that determine the likelihood that an annuitant will receive a given
future payment. Pb,j denotes the probability that an individual who purchases on annuity at age b
will still be alive j half-years later, and ij denotes the nominal pre-tax discount rate for a cash
flow received j half-years after the date of the annuity purchase. We assume that the first annuity
payout takes place six months after purchase. Our valuation exercises focus on annuities with
constant nominal payout streams, but the same framework could be applied to annuities that
offer payouts with a fixed nominal escalation schedule or other time-varying payout streams. To
apply this framework to inflation-indexed annuities, estimates of future inflation rates, as well as
nominal interest rates, would also be needed.
        The ratio of  () to the policy premium is the money's worth ratio. When the estimate
of the EPDV is below the annuity's purchase price, the difference can be interpreted as the price
of longevity insurance as a share of the policy premium. Another way to summarize this
divergence is by calculating the internal rate of return, the discount rate at which the annuity's
estimated EPDV would equal its purchase price. For an annuity with a purchase price of
$100,000 and a semi-annual nominal payment of A, this discount rate is the value  that solves
the equation
                                                             ,
(2)                                100,000 = 240-2
                                             =0                        .
                                                             (1+)

While this is a high-order polynomial equation, it is monotone in  for non-negative values,
which typically yields a single real positive solution. When no positive solution exists, we report
the negative solution with the smallest absolute value.
      Equation (2) can be modified to estimate, instead of the discount rate , a return premium
or discount,  , relative to the term structure of discount rates for riskless cash flows, that will

                                                   4
equate the EPDV calculation with the annuity's purchase price. For example, with the yield
curve for U.S. Treasury bonds as the riskless discount rate series, we can write
                                                           ,
(3)                            100,000 = 240-2
                                         =0                             .
                                                       (1+   + )

Comparing the implicit rate of return or the implicit risk premium on annuities with other
investment opportunities is an alternative to the money's worth ratio for measuring the cost of
longevity insurance. Brown, Kling, Mullainathan, and Wrobel (2008) suggest that the demand
for annuities can be affected by whether these products are presented to potential buyers as
insurance products that offer income for life, or as investment products offering a particular rate
of return. The income-for-life framing leads most naturally to the money's worth as a summary
measure, while the rate of return formulation leads toward the implied rate of return approach.
           When an annuity is purchased outside a tax-qualified retirement account, using after-tax
funds in a taxable account, the EPDV-to-premium ratio is no longer independent of the
individual's tax rate. The discount rate must be measured after-tax, and the annuity payouts must
be valued on an after-tax basis. The tax code recognizes that part of the stream of annuity
payouts is a return of the annuitant's premium, which is not taxed, and that part reflects a return
on capital since the insurance company has the opportunity to invest the premium and returns
some of the resulting earnings to the policyholder. As explained in Brown, Mitchell, Poterba,
and Warshawsky (1999), the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) determines the fraction of each
annuity payment that represents taxable income by computing the expected number of years (T')
over which the annuitant can expect to receive benefits. This calculation uses the IRS Individual
Annuitant (Unisex) Mortality Table. Conditional on T', the IRS specifies an inclusion ratio (),
the fraction of each annuity payment that is deemed to result from the insurer's earnings. For
example, for an annuity with a $100,000 premium that makes payments twice each year,  =
      100000
1 - 2  . The annuitant must report 100% of each annuity payout as taxable income for the

first T' years of annuity ownership. After that, since all of the annuitant's capital is deemed to
have been returned, the full value of all future annuity payouts is considered taxable income.
Long-lived annuitants thus experience an increase in the tax burden on their annuity payouts late
in life.
           Assuming that the annuitant faces a combined federal and state marginal income tax rate
                                                    
of , the tax-adjusted expression for annuity value ( ) is:


                                                   5
                                           (1-),                           (1-),
(4)                   
                       () = 2
                            =0                             + 240-2
                                                             =2  +1                      .
                                           (1+(1-)     )                  (1+(1-) )

This expression assumes that the marginal income tax rate on the income from the asset
associated with the discount rate is the same as that on annuity income, as it would be if the asset
was a taxable bond.
       An increase in the marginal income tax rate in equation (4) has two offsetting effects on
the EPDV of an annuity contract. First, it decreases the after-tax net income from each annuity
payment, with a larger effect on payments after T' years than before. An increase in the tax rate
thus reduces the numerator of the EPDV. Second, holding constant the pre-tax discount rate, an
increase in the tax rate reduces the after-tax discount rate, which raises the EPDV. Whether the
result of a rate increase is a rise or a decline depends on the discount rate. At low discount rates,
the denominator effect is small, so a rise in the tax rate lowers the EPDV, but at higher discount
rates, since the tax rate applies to the full value of the discount rate but only to part of the payout
stream, it is possible for a tax rate increase to raise the EPDV.
2. Information on Annuity Prices and Payouts
       We illustrate the sensitivity of EPDV calculations by focusing on retail annuity policies
that were available for purchase in June 2020 and that were included in the Annuity Shopper,
which compiles information on the offerings of 17 large U.S. insurance companies. The policy
data were collected on June 19, 2020. We focus on single premium, immediate, non-
participating annuities with a fixed nominal payout, as well as otherwise similar policies in
which the income stream is deferred from the purchase date by 10 or 20 years. We consider
policies with an initial premium of $100,000. The policies are "non-participating:" the benefit
payment is fixed and guaranteed, and it does not reflect the insurance company's subsequent
unanticipated experience with mortality, investment returns, or expenses. The number of
companies in the sample varies across policies.
       For an immediate annuity purchased for $100,000 by a 65-year-old man, the average
monthly payout was $479 across the 16 companies offering that product. The payouts ranged
from a high of $498 to a low of $458 ­ a range of just over 8 percent of the average. Some of
this variation may be due to the different investment ratings of the various insurers. The firm
offering the highest payout, Pacific Life, is rated A+ by A.M. Best, A1 by Moody's and AA- by
Standard and Poor's. The firm with the lowest payout, Jackson National, receives the same


                                                   6
ratings, A+ and A1 respectively, from both Best and Moody's, but a higher A+ rating from S&P.
The firm's underwriting practices and firm-specific circumstances such as capital availability can
affect pricing decisions. We lack information on the volume of annuity sales by company, so we
summarize the prices for a given policy with a simple arithmetic average of the prices for the
firms offering that policy.
       Table 1 reports the average annual premia for three immediate annuity products: a single
premium immediate annuity (SPIA) that pays the same nominal benefit for as long as the buyer
is alive; the same product with a 20-year-certain provision that guarantees payments for 20 years,
either to the annuitant or a designated beneficiary; and a graduated annuity with payouts that
grow at a 3% nominal rate each year. In our valuation analysis, we focus exclusively on level-
payout annuities. For each product type, we report the price for an annuity purchased by a man,
a woman, and a married couple seeking to receive benefits for as long as either of the buyers is
alive ­ a "joint and survivor annuity." The first panel shows SPIA pricing. There is variation by
age, gender of the buyer, and across three product types. The average annual payment for a male
65-year-old annuitant is $5,748, about 6% greater than the $5,424 for a woman of the same age,
and 29% greater than the payout on a joint-and-survivor annuity purchased by a 65-year-old man
with a 60-year-old spouse.
       The prices in Table 1 display a number of expected patterns. The annual payout rises
with the age of the annuitant. The increase is 26% between ages 55 and 65, and 39% between 65
and 75, for a male annuitant, reflecting the greater annual mortality risk between 65 and 75 than
between 55 and 65. A graduated annuity offers a smaller initial payout, 29% less for a 65-year-
old man, than a level annuity. Opting for a 20-year guarantee period reduces the annual payout
for a 65-year-old man by 9.4% but by only 6.9% for a similar-aged woman. A 65-year-old
woman is more likely than a 65-year-old man to survive to age 85, so the guarantee provision is
less likely to affect the insurer's stream of payouts to a woman than to a man. The payout on a
20-year-certain joint and survivor policy for a 65-year-old man and his 60-year-old wife is only
0.5% less than a policy with no guarantee, since the chance that one of the two will live for at
least 20 years is very high. Annuity products that provide guaranteed payouts for a certain
number of years place less of the policy-holder's premium at risk of loss in the event of an
unexpectedly early death; they involve less longevity insurance than SPIAs without guarantees.




                                                 7
       Table 1 also shows that the male/female annuity payout differentials change with age. At
age 55, men receive annuity payouts that are about 4% higher than those for women. This
difference rises to 6% at 65 and to more than 9% at 75. These payment patterns largely reflect
differential mortality patterns, especially in the first decade after annuity purchase, for men and
women of different ages.
       Annuity payouts as a fraction of the policy premium decline when interest rates drop and
when mortality rates fall. The substantial decline in nominal interest rates over the last 15 years
has been associated with lower payouts. The average annual payout on an SPIA for a 65-year-
old man was $5,748 in June 2020, compared to $6,456 in June 2015, $7,344 in June 2010, and
$7,740 in June 2005. The yield on a 10-year Treasury bond, which averaged 0.73% in June
2020, was 2.36% in June 2015, 3.20% in June 2010, and 4.00% in June 2005.
       The unusual financial market developments during the second quarter of 2020, primarily
associated with the pandemic-induced disruption in financial markets and the Federal Reserve's
response, raise concerns about the representativeness of findings based on June 2020. As we
were completing this project, annuity payout data collected on January 8, 2021 became available.
Annuity payouts declined between June 2020 and January 2021. The average annual payout on
an SPIA for a 65-year old man dropped 3.3%, from $5,748 to $5,556. There was a similar drop,
from $5,424 to $5,244, for 65-year-old women. This may reflect gradual pricing adjustment to
low interest rates. Corporate BBB yields declined between June 2020 and January 2021, while
Treasury yields rose.
3. Discount Rates
       Estimating the value of the stream of future payouts associated with an annuity requires a
term structure of discount rates. A key consideration in the choice of discount rates is the
riskiness of the annuity payouts, which bears on how a consumer would discount them. Riskier
payouts should be discounted at a higher rate, reflecting a risk premium.
       Annuity payments are not riskless. Although companies participate in various state-level
reinsurance pools, it is possible, although rare, for an insurance company to default on its
promised payouts. A riskless interest rate, such as the yield on US Treasury bonds, understates
the appropriate discount rate. If the stream of annuity payments is about as risky as the assets
held in the general accounts of the insurance companies that offer these products, then the yield
curve for corporate bonds may be more appropriate.


                                                 8
       Most insurance companies invest their policy reserves in assets with greater risk, and
greater expected return, than Treasury bonds. S&P Global (2020) reports that at year-end 2019,
bonds accounted for 74% of the assets held in life insurance companies' portfolios. Mortgages
and other real estate investments represented another 14%, and 5% of the portfolios were held in
alternative investments such as venture capital and private equity. Stocks (1%), cash and short-
term notes (3%), and alternative investments and contract loans (8%) comprised the remainder of
the portfolios. Among the bond holdings, only 8.9% of the portfolios were held in government
bonds; the balance was in corporate bonds (46.6%) and other privately-issued credit instruments.
       To illustrate how assumptions about the risk premium used in discounting affects EPDV
estimates, we present calculations using two interest rate term structures: one for U.S. Treasury
bonds and the other for high-grade corporate bonds. For each case, we collect data on yields-to-
maturity (YTMs) at various maturities (6 months, 1 year, then 2, 3, 5, 7, 10, 20, and 30 years) in
mid-June 2020. For corporate bonds, we use the Bloomberg average yield on corporate bonds
rated BBB+, BBB and BBB-. S&P Global (2020) reports that, of the corporate bonds held in life
insurance company portfolios in 2020, 59% were rated between A and AAA, 35% were BBB,
and 6% were rated below BBB. The BBB yield curve thus reflects somewhat greater risk than
the median bond in the insurers' portfolios. By presenting results using both BBB corporate and
Treasury yield curves, we illustrate the range of values that can result from different discount
rate assumptions. . To provide some perspective on the risk premium associated with the
different yield curves, we note that on June 19, 2020, the date when annuity prices were
collected, the 10-year corporate BBB yield was 2.37%, and the 30-year BBB yield was 3.29%.
For AA-rated bonds, the values were respectively 1.60 and 2.67%; for Treasuries, 0.85 and
1.57%. These differences have an important impact on EPDV calculations.
       We interpolate between the maturities at which we observe yields using a cubic spline.
This generates a yield curve, in half-year intervals, for maturities of up to 30 years. Because
some annuity payouts may be more than 30 years after the policy purchase date, we need to
extrapolate the observed yield curves to longer maturities. We do this using the slope of the IRS
corporate bond yield curve (IRS (2020)) that is used for pension valuation purposes. This yield
curve assumes that the forward six-month interest rate for all six-month intervals more than 30
years in the future equals the average six-month interest rate for all maturities between 15 and 30
years. We compute the change in the IRS yield curve between the 30-year maturity and all


                                                 9
longer maturities, and add that value to the 30-year Treasury and 30-year BBB interest rate
values, respectively. The changes in the yields beyond the 30-year maturity in the IRS yield
curve are small, so in practice, this approach is very close to assuming that the 30-year yields for
Treasury and BBB corporate bonds apply to all longer maturities. In addition, the discount
factors for very long maturities do not have a substantial effect on EPDV calculations.
                            Figure 1 plots the June 2020 yield curves for Treasury bonds and the Bloomberg BBB
corporate bond index. It includes a horizontal line at 69 basis points, the value of the 10-year


Figure 1: US Treasury and Corporate BBB Yield Curves, June 2020.

                           4
                          3.5
  Yield to Maturity (%)




                           3
                          2.5
                           2
                          1.5
                           1
                          0.5
                           0
                                0   2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48
                                                                      Years to Maturity

                                Corporate Bond                  Corporate Bond (extrapolated)   Treasury
                                Treasury (extrapolated)         10 Year Treasury Yield


Notes: Solid green and blue circles are interpolated from the Treasury and Corporate BBB yield
curves. Open circles extrapolate the average forward rate from years 15 to 30 to all years beyond
30. The yellow horizontal line at 0.69% is the yield on a 10-year Treasury bond, which is the
rate that the DOL requires in the calculation of potential annuity income.

Treasury yield on June 19, 2020. This is the discount rate specified by the algorithm that DOL
requires defined contribution plan sponsors to use in calculating potential annuity payouts for
their participants. The Treasury yield curve is below the BBB yield curve at all maturities, with
a typical risk premium of more than 150 basis points. This risk premium is somewhat greater
than the average of the last two decades, reflecting the slow recovery from pandemic-related
bond market disruptions earlier in the year. The option-adjusted spread between high-grade
corporate bond yields and Treasury yields was 207 basis points in June 2020, compared to 139 in
January 2020 and 185 in July 2020. This suggests that the differences between the money's

                                                                           10
worth findings using Treasury and corporate yields may be somewhat larger for June 2020 than
in an average month over the last decade, although the direction of the differences will not be
affected by the narrowing of the risk premium on corporate bonds. Between June 2020 and
January 2021, the next date when annuity payout data were collected, the yield on the 10-year
Treasury bond rose 45 basis points, to 1.3% from 0.85%, while the yield on 10-year corporate
BBB bonds was nearly unchanged at 2.194 (January) and 2.184 (June).
       Discounting future annuity payouts using the Treasury yield curve is likely to overstate
the EPDV of an annuity, because annuity payments are likely to be riskier than the yield on
Treasury bonds. Similarly, the BBB yields probably overstate risk and apply too high a risk
premium. It follows that the DOL recommendation that pension plan administrators use the 10-
year Treasury rate when calculating potential annuity payouts may understate the payments that
could be available to future retirees, since it understates both the risk and the expected return
associated with the assets in insurance company portfolios. If insurance companies assume that
they can earn a return in excess of the Treasury return, then they could offer an annuity payout
greater than what the DOL calculation will suggest.
4. Mortality Rates
       Estimating the EPDV and the associated money's worth requires a cohort mortality table
that includes projections of future mortality rates for an individual of a given age at the time of
annuity purchase. These projections, which underlie the survival probabilities Pb,j in equation
(1), are an important source of uncertainty. Let , denote the probability that an individual of
age a at the beginning of half-year  will die during that half-year. We define  = 0 to be July
2020, so the first half year is the latter half of 2020. , is the probability that a /2 year old
annuity buyer (b is age in half-years) who buys at  = 0 survives for at least j half-years:

(5)                           , = 1 - ,0 1 - +1,1  ... 1 - +-1,-1 .
We set ,240-2 = 0, for all b.
       Different subgroups of the population exhibit different mortality rates. There is
substantial evidence that mortality among annuitants is lower than mortality in the general
population. This is likely due to two factors. First, Waldron (2007), Chetty et al. (2016), and
others show that age-specific mortality rates are a declining function of economic status.
Annuity buyers in both the retail and group annuity markets are drawn from an economically-
more-successful than average part of the population, so they would therefore be expected to

                                                 11
display lower-than-average mortality. Second, conditional on net worth, those who purchase
individual annuities in the retail market may know that they are healthier than average, or at least
know that they are not facing any current life-threatening health conditions. This would also lead
to observed mortality below the population average.
       Past research has reported the money's worth of annuities from two perspectives: that of
an individual in the general population, and that of a typical annuity buyer. The former involves
valuing the stream of future annuity payouts using the survival rates associated with the
population mortality table, while the latter involves using an annuitant mortality table. We
follow this tradition in presenting EPDV calculations using both a cohort mortality table
corresponding to annuitants, and a cohort mortality table corresponding to the population at
large. We compare the mortality rates in these tables with those in the unisex mortality table
compiled by the IRS, recommended by the DOL for use by pension plan administrators.
       When constructing EPDV measures that would apply to the U.S. population at large, we
use the cohort mortality table compiled by the Social Security Administration (SSA) Office of
the Actuary in 2019. For example, to value annuities offered to 65-year-olds in 2020, we use the
mortality rates for the 1955 birth cohort. We choose other birth cohorts for annuities purchased
by individuals at other ages. The SSA mortality tables embed projections of the future rate of
mortality improvement.
       When constructing EPDV measures from the perspective of annuitants, we use annuitant
mortality tables constructed by the Society of Actuaries (SOA). These mortality tables are based
on the historical experience of annuitants. SOA's most recent comprehensive annuitant
mortality table is the Individual Annuitant Mortality (IAM) 2012 table, which is described in
American Academy of Actuaries / Society of Actuaries (2011). It provides cohort mortality
tables for annuity buyers in 2012, along with a recommended set of mortality improvement
factors that can be used to project mortality rates for later years. The factors imply substantially
more rapid decline in post-2012 mortality rates than has been observed in recent years, or than
the SSA projects for future years. We construct an SOA cohort annuitant mortality table for
2020 by applying the SOA's recommended mortality improvement factors to the 2012 table.
       Table 2 shows the projected population and annuitant mortality rates for men and women
who were 65 years old in 2020. The mortality rate for a 65-year-old male annuitant, 0.0080
(eight tenths of one percent), is roughly half the mortality rate for the population at large


                                                 12
(0.0152). The absolute difference in the two sets of mortality rates grows at older ages, but the
proportional difference contracts. At age 85, for example, a current 65-year-old male annuitant
is projected to face a mortality rate of 0.061, while for a randomly-selected 65-year-old in the
population, the analogous value is 0.095. The general pattern of differences between the
population and the annuitant tables is similar, but smaller, for women.
       The disparity between the mortality rates in the 2020 SSA and SOA cohort tables arises
from different historical levels of mortality between the population at large and annuity buyers
as well as different assumed rate of mortality improvement. The SOA mortality rates in Table 2
are the result of projecting the 2012 table, which is based on observed mortality rates through
2004, forward for eight years using the SOA mortality improvement factors. The SSA cohort
mortality table is based on death rates observed through to 2017, along with projections for
subsequent years. To illustrate the role of mortality improvement factors, consider the mortality
rate for an age  individual in a given group, such as the group of annuitants in 2012. If we
denote this mortality rate as ,2012 and the constant mortality improvement factor for age  +
 is + , then the projected mortality in year 2012 +  is
(6)         +,2012+ = +,2012  (1 - + ) .
       The rate of mortality improvement has varied over time and across ages within the
elderly population. These varying patterns are reflected in the changes over time in age-specific
life expectancy at retirement age. We illustrate these by focusing on the white population,
because consistent mortality data are available for the longest time for this group. For white
men, life expectancy at age 65 was 13 years in both 1960 and 1970. It rose to 14.3 years in
1980, 15.2 in 1990, and 16.2 in 2000. The large gains during the 1970s had many sources.
Improved control of hypertension and an associated reduction in cardio-vascular mortality is
identified by Cutler, Glaeser, and Rosen (2009) as a leading factor. Between 2000 and 2010, life
expectancy rose 1.6 years, even faster than in the 1970s, rising 1.6 years to 17.8 years in 2010.
But in subsequent years, it rose more slowly. In 2017, the last year for which the Center for
Disease Control (CDC) reports complete statistics, it was 18.1 years. The life expectancy
increase of only 0.3 years over a span of seven years suggests that the increase for the 2010-20
decade will be the slowest since the 1960s. The pattern for white women also shows rapid life
expectancy gains in the 1970s, from 16.9 years to 18.6 years, but more modest gains in the 2000-



                                                13
2010 period, from 19.2 to 20.3 years. The gain from 2010-2017 was also just 0.3 years. For
women as for men, 2010-2019 was marked by slower mortality reduction than previous decades.
                                       The historical variation in the rate of mortality improvement implies that different
forecasts of the future rate of improvement are possible, depending on the weights placed on the
historical experience in different periods. Table 3 reports the mortality improvement factors
associated with both the SOA and the SSA cohort mortality tables, along with summary
information on past mortality improvement factors. Figure 2 displays the age-specific pattern of
SOA and SSA improvement factors.
                                       Mortality rates between the ages of 65 and 84 are a key determinant of the EPDV values
for annuities purchased at age 65. Figure 2 shows that in 2012, SOA projected annual mortality
improvement of 1.44% for this age range, which implies that after 20 years, the mortality rate at

Figure 2: Society of Actuaries and Social Security Administration Mortality Improvement
Factors, 2012-2020, by Age
                                     1.6
  Annual Mortality Improvement (%)




                                     1.4
                                     1.2
                                      1
                                     0.8
                                     0.6
                                     0.4
                                     0.2
                                      0
                                            55
                                            57
                                            59
                                            61
                                            63
                                            65
                                            67
                                            69
                                            71
                                            73
                                            75
                                            77
                                            79
                                            81
                                            83
                                            85
                                            87
                                            89
                                            91
                                            93
                                            95
                                            97
                                            99
                                           101
                                           103
                                           105
                                           107
                                           109
                                           111
                                           113
                                           115
                                           117
                                           119
                                                                                   Age (years)

                                           SOA 2012 Improvement Factor- Males/Females     SSA 2019 Improvement Factor- Males
                                           SSA 2019 Improvement Factor- Females


Source: SSA (2019), Table 2.2 "Intermediate Alternative', and SOA (2011) Exhibit III,
"Projection Scale G2"

a given age is 0.748 times the mortality rate in the base year. SSA, by contrast, assigns a 0.86%
per year improvement factor, which translates to an age-specific mortality rate in 20 years of
0.841 times the base year value. Beyond age 85, SSA assumes mortality improvement of 0.54%
per year, which is more rapid that the SOA assumption of 0.30% per year. The post-85 rate of
mortality improvement has relatively modest effects on the EPDV estimates.


                                                                                    14
       The SOA projections appear to place substantial weight on the rapid mortality decline
experience of the 2000-2009 period, while the SSA projections place greater weight on the
slower long-term rate of mortality improvement, especially post-2009. The rate of mortality
improvement since 2009 has not matched the rate in the previous two decades. As a result,
SOA's projected mortality rate improvement for a 65-year-old man in 2017 is lower than the
actual rate, and its projected rate for 2020 is lower than SSA's projected rate for 2020 (using
more recent actual mortality data and thus a slower rate of mortality rate decline). Neither the
SOA nor the SSA projections incorporate any information on the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on prospective mortality rates. Early estimates of the impact of the pandemic on life
expectancy, such as Andrasfay and Goldman (2021) and Arias, Tejada-Vera, and Ahmad
(2021), raise the possibility of substantial impacts.
       To recognize that annuitants have lower mortality rates than individuals drawn from the
population at large, as does the SOA mortality table, while also recognizing that the rate of
mortality improvement post-2009 has been substantially lower than that projected in the SOA
(2012) analysis, we create a "modified SOA mortality table" that begins with the 2012 IAM table
but then applies the SSA rates of projected age-specific mortality improvement for the years after
2012. This modified SOA table captures the level differences in annuitant and population
mortality while also projecting rates of mortality improvement that are close to those observed in
the last decade.
       The SOA and SSA mortality tables present separate information for men and women,
reflecting the higher mortality rate at all post-retirement ages for men. The IRS mortality table
that DOL directs retirement plan sponsors to use for making illustrative lifetime income
calculations is a unisex table that is used to value the liabilities of defined benefit (DB) pension
plans. It is based on the SOA (2014) mortality table for DB plan participants, which separates
men and women and also distinguishes those who are receiving benefits from those who are still
working and accumulating benefits. The IRS applies the mortality improvement factors for the
2014 tables in SOA (2018) to construct gender-specific mortality tables for DB plan participants
in 2020. It creates a weighted average of the participant and beneficiary tables for men, and a
separate weighted average table for women, based on the relative sizes of these groups, and then
combines the two gender-specific tables in an equally weighted average. The supporting
documentation associated with this table, reported at IRS (2020), indicates that it should be used


                                                 15
without any allowance for future mortality improvement. The absence of mortality improvement
factors in the IRS table means that it may lead to over-estimation of feasible annuity payouts.
Mortality improvements raise life expectancy, and longer lives translate into lower feasible
annuity payouts.
       The last column of Table 2 shows the unisex mortality rates from the DOL-recommended
mortality table. For women, the mortality rates in this column fall between the SOA (annuitant)
and SSA (population) mortality rates. At age 65, for example, the SOA annuitant table shows a
mortality rate of 0.0062, compared with 0.0079 in the IRS table ­ nearly 25% higher. The
population mortality rate for women at age 65 is 0.0093, higher than the IRS value. For men, the
mortality rate at age 65 in the IRS table (0.0079) falls just below the value in the SOA table
(0.0080) and well below the population mortality rate (0.0152). This is because the IRS table
averages the mortality rates for men and women, and the mortality rates for women at all ages in
Table 2 are lower than those for men. By age 70, however, the absence of any annual mortality
improvement in the IRS table leads the IRS mortality rate (0.0129) to exceed the mortality rate
for men in the SOA table (0.0118). This pattern continues for older ages. The values in the IRS
table are always lower than the population mortality rates for men.
5. Estimates of EPDV and Implicit Discount Rates for Immediate Annuities
       We now use the annuity prices, discount rates, and mortality tables described in the last
three sections to estimate the EPDVs and implicit discount rates for a subset of the annuity
products described in Table 1. Since the annuity policies that we consider have purchase prices
of $100,000, the money's worth ratio in each case is EPDV/$100,000. We also relate the
potential annuity payout calculation outlined in the DOL regulatory guidance to these measures.
5.1 Money's Worth for SPIAs
       The first panel of Table 4 presents EPDV estimates for the no-tax case, corresponding to
annuity purchase in a retirement account. We focus our discussion on the findings for 65-year-
olds; the pattern of results is similar for buyers of other ages. The calculations show the
difference in the EPDV calculated using a population and an annuitant mortality table. The
EPDV is substantially lower when the calculation is based on the population mortality table,
compared to either the SOA or the modified SOA annuitant mortality table. The EPDV is also
much higher when the Treasury yield curve is used to set the discount rate, than when the




                                                 16
discount rates correspond to the BBB corporate yield curve. If the corporate AA yield curve is
used instead of the BBB yield curve, the values would be between the BBB and Treasury values.
       The results for a 65-year-old male annuity buyer illustrate these patterns. The lowest
EPDV in the row, $80,694 (a money's worth of 0.81) corresponds to the population mortality
table and the corporate BBB yield curve. This value suggests that the expected cost of longevity
protection is nearly 20% of the policy premium. When the population mortality table is replaced
with the SOA annuitant mortality table, the estimated EPDV rises to $94,379, for money's worth
value of 0.94. When the SOA annuitant mortality table is updated using the SSA mortality
improvement factors rather than the SOA factors, a change that implies slower prospective
mortality rate decline, the estimated EPDV falls to $92,581 and the expected cost of longevity
protection is just over 7% of the premium. This is the combination of discount rates and
mortality rates that we consider our benchmark case.
       When the Treasury yield curve is used to construct the discount rates for future annuity
payouts, the EPDV estimates with the SOA mortality table and the modified SOA mortality table
are both greater than $100,000. The estimates using the population mortality table rise
substantially and result in money's worth values above unity in a few cases. For instance, for
65-year-old men, when the SOA mortality table is combined with the Treasury yield curve, the
estimated EPDV is $114,260. If an insurance company expected to earn the Treasury yield on its
investments and expected the mortality experience of its annuitants to follow the SOA mortality
table, it would expect to lose money on the policies offered to men and women at all of the ages
shown in Table 4. An alternative interpretation is that insurers expect to earn a rate of return that
exceeds the riskless Treasury rate, and therefore they will be able to earn enough to make future
annuity payments and earn a positive profit. The EPDV estimates using the corporate BBB yield
curve are consistent with this view. They yield money's worth values, with either the SOA or
modified SOA mortality table, of between 0.91 and 0.95. Replacing the corporate BBB yield
curve with the corporate AA yield curve, the resulting EPDVs are roughly midway between the
Treasury and BBB results: $100,763 for 65-year-old men, and $100,646 for 65-year-old women.
The choice between the AA and the BBB yield curve changes the estimated price of longevity
insurance by about eight percent.
       If we set the discount rate equal to the 10-year Treasury yield in June 2020, in the spirit
of the DOL guidance for plan administrators, the EPDV results are similar to those for the


                                                 17
Treasury yield curve. For example, for a 65-year-old man, the EPDV with the SOA mortality
table in this case is $118,875, and with the population mortality table, it is $99,599. The results
for women are similar, with EPDV estimates of $120,621 and $106,049 respectively. This
suggests that the use of the 10-year Treasury yield may understate the expected return that
insurers assume in setting their retail annuity prices, a point that is likely to apply to individual or
group annuities sold to DC plan participants as well.
        To address the concern raised earlier about the unusual bond market conditions in June
2020, we evaluated the robustness of our findings by applying our valuation algorithm to the
recently-released January 2021 annuity payout values. We combined that payout data with
Treasury and corporate BBB yield curves on January 8, 2021, and we used the same mortality
tables as for the June 2020 calculations. The increase in Treasury yields over this seven-month
period results in a lower EPDV estimate using the modified SOA mortality curve: $103,459 for
65-year-old men, and $103,888 for 65-year-old women. Using the BBB yield curve, the EPDV
values also decline, but this is because of the change in the monthly annuity payout rather than a
rise in the discount terms. Using the modified SOA mortality table, the January 2021 EPDV
with the BBB yield curve for 65-year-old men is $90,690 (compared with $92,579 in June 2020);
that for 65-year-old women is $90,289 (compared with $92,097 in June 2020).
        The results in Table 4 illustrate the quantitative importance of replacing the SOA
mortality improvement assumption with the SSA assumption to generate the "modified SOA"
table. The estimated EPDV for a 65-year-old man is between 1 and 3% lower, depending on the
discount rate chosen, with the modified SOA table instead of the SOA table. The effect of using
the modified table is similar for other age and gender categories as well. For a 65-year-old
woman, for example, with the corporate bond yield curve, the EPDV value with the SOA
mortality table and the SOA improvement factors is $93,179, compared to $92,097 with the
modified SOA mortality table.
        Our analysis has focused on the valuation of annuities in a pre-tax setting, but some retail
annuities are purchased in taxable accounts. The lower panel of Table 4 presents results for the
after-tax case, assuming that the annuitant's marginal tax rate is 25 percent. The pattern of
EPDV values is very similar to that for the no-tax case, with EPDVs in excess of $100,000 when
we combine the SOA mortality table or the modified SOA mortality table with the Treasury
yield curve, and money's worth values between 0.91 and 0.96 when we combine the BBB yield


                                                  18
curve with either of these mortality tables. A close comparison of the results in the upper and
lower panel of the table reveals some differences, related to the level of the discount rate and its
interaction with the tax rate. The EPDV estimates using the 25% marginal tax rate are higher
than those in the no-tax case for the BBB yield curve, but they are lower when the discount rates
are drawn from the Treasury yield curve. This is because, at low discount rates such as the
Treasury yields, the tax rate does not have much effect on the discount rate, but it does reduce
the payout stream. At higher discount rates such as the BBB yield curve, the effect of a 25% tax
on the discount rate is sufficient to increase the present value of the payout stream.
5.2 Implied Discount Rates for SPIAs
       The implied discount rates introduced in equations (3) and (4) ask what discount rate
would be needed on the part of an insurer offering this product if the level of monthly annuity
payouts, and the $100,000 policy premium, represented a zero-profit product offering. Table 5
presents estimates of both the constant nominal discount rate , and the risk premium above the
Treasury yield curve, , that would result in a money's worth value of unity for each policy. The
results corresponding to the SOA annuitant mortality table for a 65-year-old man show that, with
an annual discount rate of 2.35%, or a risk premium of 117 basis points above the Treasury yield
curve, the policy would "break even" and generate an EPDV of $100,000. The constant
nominal discount rate is somewhat lower, 2.16%, for the modified SOA mortality table, and
substantially lower, 0.65%, for the population mortality table. With the population table, the risk
premium relative to the Treasury yield curve is negative. If insurers believed the mortality
experience of their annuity buyers would reflect the population mortality curve, then they could
offer the current payouts for 65-year-old men, and break even, even if their portfolio returns
were lower than those currently associated with the Treasury yield curve.
       The implicit risk premium calculations provide a useful way of understanding the
money's worth values above unity in Table 4. For 65-year-old men, when we use the SOA
mortality table and the Treasury term structure, the estimate of the EPDV is $114,260. For 65-
year-old women, the value is $113,934. When we use the BBB corporate term structure, these
EPDV values drop to $94,379 and $93,179 respectively. The implied risk premium calculations
indicate how much the Treasury yield curve would need to be increased to bring the EPDV
values to $100,000: 117 basis points for men, and 109 basis points for women. Thus, the
Treasury yield curve appears to understate by more than one percentage point the rate of return


                                                 19
that insurers are implicitly using in pricing their retail annuity offerings. This understatement
would be smaller if the calculation was based on the January 2021 data, when the Treasury yield
is substantially higher.
5.3 Potential Annuity Payouts and the DOL Algorithm
       The implied discount rate calculation is related to the DOL guidance for plan
administrators, which specifies computing the potential annuity payout DC plan participants can
expect using the 10-year Treasury interest rate and the IRS unisex mortality table. In our
formulation, the potential payout is the value ADOL that solves the equation
                                                          
                                                          
                           100,000 = 240-2
                                                          ,
(6)                                  =0                                  .
                                                   (1+ ,10  )

The survival probabilities are drawn from the IRS mortality table and are the same for men and
women in DC pension plans. For a 65-year-old plan participant, the resulting value for June
2020 is an annual payout of $5,136. By comparison, the average value of the SPIA offerings in
Table 1 was $5,748 for men, and $5,424 for women. The DOL calculation is thus about 5%
below the average annuity premium available in the individual annuity market for women, and
nearly 12% below for men. Applying the same algorithm at age 75, the potential annuity payout
is $7,968 per year; the average values in Table 1 are $8,016 for men and $7,344 for women.
       The calculations in the last subsection suggest that the Treasury yield curve may
understate the rate of return insurers assume in pricing annuities by about one percentage point.
If we repeat the calculation for the potential payout using the DOL guidance, but assume that the
discount rate equals the 10-year Treasury yield plus 1 percent, the potential payout for a 65-year-
old plan participant would rise from $5,136 to $5,762, a 12% increase, and the potential payout
for a 75-year-old would rise from $7,968 to $8,616, an 8% increase. These calculations illustrate
the impact of using a riskless rate of return as the discount rate in the DOL guidance. An open
question is whether plan participants, who might anticipate payouts similar to those computed
using the DOL-determined approach, would be able to purchase annuities that offer higher
payouts when they reach retirement age.
6. Guarantee Provisions and Exposure to Life-Contingent Income Streams
       Although the foregoing analysis emphasized single-premium immediate annuities
without any guarantee period, in practice, annuities with guarantees are more popular than those
without. Brown, Poterba, and Richardson (2021) report that at TIAA, a large provider of


                                                 20
retirement income for workers in the non-profit sector, more than three quarters of annuitants
select an annuity with a guarantee period.
       The EPDV framework can be used to illustrate the extent to which guarantee provisions
in annuity contracts alter the balance between a life-contingent payment stream and a certain
payout stream such as that associated with a bond. An annuity with a 50-year guarantee period,
purchased by a 65-year-old man, is effectively a bond, and not a life-contingent contract. But
what if the annuity provides a 20-year guarantee period? Using the SOA mortality table and the
BBB corporate yield curve for discounting, we value the payouts of an SPIA-with-20-year-
guarantee purchased by a 65-year-old man. Table 1 reports that the annual payout on this
contract is $5,208 per year, compared with $5,748 for an SPIA with no guarantee. The present
discounted value of the payouts in the first 20 years ­ the guaranteed period ­ is $81,550. The
EPDV of the contract, including the life-contingent payouts beyond the 20-year window, is
$93,291. Thus 87% of the value of this "annuity contract" is associated with its bond-like
component. For a 65-year-old woman purchasing an SPIA with a 20-year-guarantee period,
85% of the value comes from the bond-like component because the woman is more likely than
her male counterpart to outlive the guarantee period.
       A key attraction of the guarantee period is that it reduces the likelihood that the annuitant
and his or her heirs will receive very limited payouts from the annuity contract. Using the
modified SOA mortality table and the corporate BBB yield curve, we calculate that a 65-year-old
man purchasing a $100,000 SPIA with no guarantee period has a 4% chance of dying before he
receives payouts with a present discounted value of $25,000, and 11% chance of dying before
receiving $50,000. The annuitant must live to age 69.5 to pass the first milestone, and 74.5 to
pass the second. If a 65-year-old man with a 60-year-old spouse purchases a joint-and-survivor
annuity, by comparison, the chance that payouts cease before they cumulate to a present
discounted value of $25,000 ($50,000) is only 0.2% (1%). This reflects the insurance value
provided by payouts contingent on either of two individuals being alive. The required longevity
is reduced somewhat if we ask "how long must the annuitant survive to receive payouts equal to
one-quarter, or one-half, of the EPDV of his or her policy?" For the individual annuity
purchased by a 65-year-old male, the estimate of the EPDV using the modified SOA mortality
table is $92,581. A male annuitant who lives to 69 will have received 25% of the EPDV, and
one who lives to 73.5 will have received 50%.


                                                21
       With a 20-year guarantee period, the annuitant is protected from the risk of receiving
payouts worth only a small fraction of the annuity premium. This protection comes at the cost of
a lower annual annuity payout, namely, 9.4% less in the case of a 65-year-old male annuitant. By
electing to purchase an annuity with a guarantee period, the buyer not only alters the level of the
payout but also changes the nature of the product being purchased; it replaces a completely life-
contingent contract with one that is largely a fixed-income bond.
7. Deferred Annuities
       Our analysis so far has focused on immediate annuities, but there is growing interest in
deferred annuities ­ products that do not pay annuitants anything for a period that may span
several decades, and then provide income only in late life. Table 6 presents information on the
average payouts associated with deferred annuities, purchased either at age 55 or age 65, and
starting payouts at either age 75 or age 85. The average policy with a premium of $100,000
promises a 65-year-old man a $31,856 annual payout if the payout stream begins at 85, but just
over one third as much -- $11,175 ­ if the payouts start at age 75. The much larger payout on the
longer-deferred annuity reflects the time value of money ­ the insurance company can invest the
proceeds in the first case for two decades without making payouts, while for only one decade in
the second case ­ and the smaller likelihood that the a 65-year-old man will still be alive at 85
than that he will be alive at 75. The modified SOA annuitant mortality table indicates that a 65-
year-old man has a 90% chance of living to 75 and a 69% chance to 85. The corresponding
survival probabilities in the population mortality table are 81% and 49%, respectively; in the
SOA annuitant mortality table, they are 89% and 66%. These probabilities are particularly
sensitive to the assumed rate of mortality improvement, so the relatively rapid rate assumed in
the SOA table has an important impact on these values.
       The payouts from deferred annuities that start at a given age are larger when they are
purchased at a younger age. For men, the payout at 85 is $41,617 when the deferred annuity is
bought at 55, compared with $31,856 when the policy is purchased at 65. For any purchase
age/payout age combination, the deferred annuity payout for women is lower than that for men,
reflecting the greater likelihood of the annuitant surviving to advanced ages.
       We estimate the EPDV of deferred annuities using the same approach that we applied for
immediate annuities. We only consider the case of deferred annuities purchased in retirement
accounts. To frame the results, we estimate the component of the EPDV of an immediate


                                                 22
annuity, purchased by a 65-year-old man that is associated with payouts at age 85 and later. The
EPDV of the annuity, valued using the corporate BBB term structure and the modified SOA
mortality table, is $92,581. The EPDV of the post-85 stream is $12,958, or 14% of the policy's
value. The analogous calculation for a 65-year-old woman indicates that the post-85 payouts
account for 16% of the immediate annuity's EPDV. Using the Treasury yield curve in place of
the corporate, all EPDV values increase, and the share of the value associated with post-85
payouts also rises. It is 18% for men and 21% for women. These summary measures underscore
the earlier point that most of the value in an immediate annuity contract purchased at age 65 is
attributable to payouts made before the annuitant reaches age 85, even if the Treasury yield curve
is used for discounting.
       Table 7 presents estimates of the EPDV for the various deferred annuity products shown
in Table 6. The table suggests three conclusions. First, the money's worth of a deferred annuity
is more sensitive to discount rate assumptions than the money's worth of an immediate annuity.
This can be seen from the greater disparity in the EPDV values in Table 7 in the columns
corresponding to the Treasury and the BBB corporate yield curves, compared to the analogous
columns in Table 4. For a 65-year-old man, a deferred annuity beginning at age 85 has money's
worth of 0.77 when valued using the BBB yield curve, and of 1.21 when valued using the
Treasury curve. The disparities are even larger for women and for men who purchase deferred
annuities at earlier ages. By comparison, in Table 4, the money's worth for an immediate
annuity for a 65-year-old man was 0.94 (BBB curve) and 1.14 (Treasury curve).
       A second conclusion is that the money's worth values for the deferred annuities are lower
than the corresponding values for immediate annuities, when valued using the corporate BBB
yield curve. The money's worth values associated with the entries in the last column of Table 7,
with the BBB yield curve and the modified SOA mortality curve, are all between 0.69 and 0.82.
By comparison, the corresponding values in Table 4 are between 0.90 and 0.92.
       The lower EPDV for the deferred annuities may reflect insurers' reluctance to offer long-
duration policies with substantial risk of medical progress or other unexpected developments
before payouts begin. It is also consistent with more pronounced selection in the market for
deferred annuities, with only the healthiest individuals at age 65 choosing to purchase deferred
annuities. The risk of such selection for the insurer depends on whether potential buyers have
meaningful information about their likelihood of living for several decades. Deferred annuities


                                                23
may also expose insurers to greater risk of asset-liability mis-match risk, because they have
much longer duration than immediate annuities. For a 65-year-old man (woman), we estimate
the duration of the payouts associated with an immediate annuity, using the BBB yield curve and
the modified SOA mortality table, to be 10.4 (11.0) years. By comparison, the duration of a
deferred annuity for a 65-year old buyer is 24.9 years (mane) and 25.4 years (woman). Verani
and Yu (2020) note that about 90% of all corporate bonds are issued with maturities of ten years
or less. This may make it difficult for portfolio managers at insurance companies to identify
bonds with attractive risk and return attributes and long enough duration to match the liability
stream of a deferred annuity.
       Third, when deferred annuities are valued using the population mortality table and the
BBB yield curve, the money's worth values are no greater than 0.51 and are sometimes as low as
0.41. The comparatively low money's worth values for these products raises the same question
that has been asked when immediate annuities appear to have money's worth values below unity:
are they unattractive for typical retires? Horneff, Maurer, and Mitchell (2020) assume that
deferred annuities are priced to be actuarially fair (money's worth of unity) using the annuitant
mortality table and a riskless interest rate of 1%. When they calculate the consumer's expected
utility, however, they use the population mortality table.
       The finding that the EPDV of a deferred annuity is well below its purchase price does not
preclude the conclusion that buying such annuity can raise consumer welfare. Mitchell, Poterba,
Warshawsky, and Brown (1999) found that, even when the money's worth of immediate
annuities was on the order of 0.80, buying such annuities could improve lifetime expected utility
when retirees lack other sources of annuity-like income. Those findings were sensitive,
however, to the presence or absence of an income stream like Social Security. The money's
worth estimates in Table 7 suggest the value of further exploration of pricing and valuation of
deferred annuity contracts.
8. Conclusion
       This paper presents new evidence on the relationship between the purchase price and the
expected present discounted values of payouts on immediate annuities. We illustrate this by
calculating EPDV for products that were available in the U.S. in June 2020. Our preferred
specification, combining s discount rates drawn from the term structure of BBB corporate bond
yields with a modified version of the individual annuitant mortality table developed by the


                                                24
Society of Actuaries, yields an immediate annuity money's worth ratio for 65-year-old buyers is
between 0.90 and 0.95. The June 2020 estimates are between 0.92 and 0.93; when we update the
calculations to January 2021, the values are slightly lower, between 0.90 and 0.91. The money's
worth ratios are substantially lower, between 0.79 and 0.85, if we use the population mortality
table rather than the annuitant mortality table to assess survival probabilities.
        When we apply discount factors based on the Treasury yield curve, we find to construct
discount factors, money's worth values are greater than unity ­ suggesting that that the present
value of expected future payouts is greater than the premium cost. We do not interpret this as
suggesting that insurance companies expect to lose money on their annuity offerings, but rather,
view it as evidence that these companies assume a portfolio return greater than the Treasury
yield in valuing their future payout liabilities. The substantial excess of the EPDV over the
policy premium may in part reflect pandemic-related dislocations in the Treasury bond market in
June 2020. Repeating the same calculations in January 2021, using annuity payout data for that
month and corresponding Treasury yield curve data, still generates money's worth values greater
than unity, but they are closer to that value.
        We also compute the EPDV for deferred annuities, policies purchased by individuals in
their 50s or 60s which pay benefits from age 85. The money's worth ratios for these annuities
are lower than those for immediate annuities, ranging between 0.69 and 0.82. The disparities
between these values and the comparable measures for immediate annuities are unlikely to be
explained by adverse selection, since the degree of private information for prospective annuitants
with regard to their long-term survival prospects is likely to be more limited than their private
information about near-term mortality risks.
        Finally, we consider the recent regulatory directive from the Department of Labor that
instructs sponsors of defined contribution pension plans to calculate the potential lifetime income
stream that plan participants can purchase with their accumulated balances. The regulations
outline a procedure for calculating the potential annuity payout assuming that future benefits are
discounted at the 10-year Treasury yield, and participant mortality can be described by a unisex
mortality table for defined benefit pension plan participants. Our findings suggest that the use of
the Treasury yield in this calculation may understate the income stream that will be available to
future retirees.




                                                  25
References

American Academy of Actuaries / Society of Actuaries. 2011. 2012 Individual Annuity
        Reserving Table. Report from the Joint American Academy of Actuaries/Society of
        Actuaries Payout Annuity Table Team, Exhibit I. Accessed: December 2020 from
        http://www.actuary.org/files/publications/Payout_Annuity_Report_09-28-11.pdf.
Andrasfay, Theresa and Noreen Goldman. 2021. "Reductions in 2020 US Life Expectancy Due
        to Covid-19 and the Disproportionate impact on the Black and Latin populations." PNAS
        118 (5).
Arias, Elizabeth, Betzaida Tejada-Vera, and Farida Ahmad. 2021. "Provisional Life Expectancy
        Estimates for January through June 2020." Vital Statistics Rapid Release #10. US
        Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey R. Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Marian V. Wrobel. 2008. "Why
        Don't People Insure Late Life Consumption? A Framing Explanation of the Under-
        Annuitization Puzzle." American Economic Review 98 (2): 304-309.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Olivia Mitchell, James Poterba, and Mark Warshawsky. (1999). "Taxing
        Retirement Income: Nonqualified Annuities and Distributions from Qualified Accounts."
        National Tax Journal. 53(3): 563-592.
Brown, Jeffrey R., James Poterba, and David Richardson. 2021. "Trends in Retirement Income
        Choices by TIAA Participants: 2000 ­ 2018." TIAA Institute.
Cannon, Edmund and Ian Tonks. 2004. "U.K. Annuity Rates, Money's Worth and Pension
        Replacement Ratios, 1957-2002," Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance: Issues and
        Practice 29 (3), 371-393.
Cannon, Edmund and Ian Tonks. 2008. Annuity Markets. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cannon, Edmund and Ian Tonks. 2016. "Cohort mortality risk or adverse selection in annuity
        markets?" Journal of Public Economics 141: 68-81.
Chetty, Raj, Michael Stepner, Sara Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi, Nicholas Turner,
        Augustin Bergeron, and David M. Cutler. 2016. "The Association Between Income and
        Life Expectancy in the United States, 2001-2014." Journal of the American Medical
        Association 315 (16): 1750-1766. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.4226
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Allison B. Rosen. 2009. "Is the U.S. Population
        Behaving Healthier?" In Jeffrey Brown, Jeffrey Liebman, and David A. Wise, eds.,
        Social Security in a Changing Policy Environment. Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press, 423-442.
Finkelstein, Amy and James Poterba. 2004. "Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets:
        Policyholder Evidence from the UK Annuity Market." Journal of Political Economy 112
        (1): 183-208.
Horneff, Vanya, Olivia Mitchell, and Raimond Maurer. 2020. "Putting the Pension Back in
        401(k) Retirement Plans: Optimal versus Default Deferred Longevity Income Annuities."
        Journal of Banking and Finance. 114.
Koijen, Ralph S. and Motohiro Yogo. 2015. "The Cost of Financial Frictions for Life Insurers."
        American Economic Review 105 (1): 445-475.
Lockwood, Lee. 2018. "Incidental Bequests and the Choice to Self-Insure Late-Life Risks."
        American Economic Review 108 (9): 2513-2550.




                                             26
Mitchell, Olivia, James Poterba, Mark Warshawsky, and Jeffrey Brown. 1999. "New Evidence
        on the Money's Worth of Individual Annuities." American Economic Review 89 (5):
        1299-1318.
O'Dea, C. and D. Sturrock. 2020. "Survival Pessimism and the Demand for Annuities."
        NBER Working Paper 27677, Cambridge, MA.
Reichling, Felix and Kent Smetters. 2015. "Optimal Annuitization with Stochastic Mortality
        and Correlated Medical Costs." American Economic Review 105 (11), 3273-3320.
S&P Global. 2020. A Look at U.S. Life Insurers' $4.5 Trillion Investment Portfolios Amid
        COVID-19. September 16, 2020.
        https://www.spglobal.com/ratings/en/research/articles/200916-a-look-at-u-s-life-insurers-
        4-5-trillion-investment-portfolios-amid-covid-19-11640241
Society of Actuaries (SOA). 2014. Mortality Improvement Scale MP-2014 Report.
        https://www.soa.org/globalassets/assets/files/research/exp-study/research-2014-mp-
        report.pdf
Society of Actuaries (SOA). 2018. Mortality Improvement Scale MP-2018 Report.
        https://www.soa.org/globalassets/assets/files/resources/experience-
        studies/2018/mortality-improvement-scale-mp-2018.pdf
Solomon, Adam. 2021. "Misperceptions and Contract Distortions in Insurance Markets."
        Working paper, MIT. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3787556
U.S. Internal Revenue Service. 2020. Updated Mortality Improvement Rates and Static
        Mortality Tables for Defined Benefit Pension Plans for 2021. Washington: US Treasury
        Department. https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/n-19-67.pdf
U.S. Social Security Administration, Office of the Actuary. 2019. The Long-range Demographic
        Assumptions for the 2019 Trustees Report. Washington: Social Security Administration.
Verani, Stephane and Pei Cheng Yu. 2020. "What's Wrong with Annuity Markets?" Mimeo,
        Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.
Waldron, Hilary. 2007. "Trends in Mortality Differentials and Life Expectancy for Male Social
        Security-Covered Workers, by Socio-Economic Status." Social Security Bulletin 67 (3):
        1-28.




                                               27
Table 1: Cross-Company Average Annual Annuity Payouts, Per $100,000 Premium, June 2020
                                           Age 55              Age 65            Age 75
 Single Premium Immediate Annuity (SPIA)
 Men                                       $4,572 (16)         $5,748 (16)       $8,016 (16)
 Women                                     $4,404 (16)         $5,424 (16)       $7,344 (16)
 Joint and Survivor (Male of Column        n/a                 $4,440 (16)       $5,568 (16)
 Age, Female Spouse 5 Years Younger)
 SPIA, 3% COLA
 Men                                       $2,892 (10)         $4,068 (13)       $6,312 (13)
 Women                                     $2,688 (9)          $3,756 (13)       $5,652 (13)
 Joint and Survivor                        n/a                 $2,844 (11)       $4,008 (11)
 SPIA, 20 Year Guarantee
 Men                                       $4,428 (17)         $5,208 (17)       $5,856 (17)
 Women                                     $4,296 (17)         $5,052 (17)       $5,772 (17)
 Joint and Survivor                        n/a                 $4,416 (17)       $5,292 (17)
Source: Annuity Shopper, July 2020. Each entry reports the average value of 12 times the
monthly payout amount for the set of annuities included in the sample. Numbers in parentheses
denote the sample size for each product class. Note that the average annual payout on a 20-year
term annuity (no life contingency) from the 17 firms in the sample was $5,964, and for a 30-year
term annuity was $4,500.




                                               28
Table 2: Population and Annuitant Mortality Rates for 65-Year-Old Men and Women in 2020
                 SSA 2019         SOA Annuity 2012 SOA Annuity 2012 IRS Unisex
                 Cohort           Table updated to       Table updated to      Pension
                 Table, Birth     2020 with SOA          2020 with SSA         Liability
                 Year 1955        mortality              mortality             Valuation
                                  improvements           improvements          Table, 2020
 Men
 65              0.0152           0.0080                 0.0084                0.0079
 70              0.0220           0.0112                 0.0118                0.0129
 75              0.0341           0.0185                 0.0195                0.0217
 80              0.0557           0.0327                 0.0345                0.0385
 85              0.0947           0.0609                 0.0637                0.0694
 90              0.1613           0.1155                 0.1170                0.1259
 95              0.2581           0.1993                 0.1971                0.2043
 Women
 65              0.0093           0.0062                 0.0064                0.0079
 70              0.0147           0.0091                 0.0095                0.0129
 75              0.0240           0.0143                 0.0149                0.0217
 80              0.0416           0.0248                 0.0259                0.0385
 85              0.0727           0.0502                 0.0523                0.0694
 90              0.1287           0.0936                 0.0943                0.1259
 95              0.2137           0.1576                 0.1562                0.2043
Source: Authors' calculations as described in equation (6) with SOA mortality improvements
drawn from SOA (2011) Exhibit III, "Projection Scale G2," and SSA mortality improvements
from SSA (2019), Table 2.2 "Intermediate Alternative.' The entries in each column reflect the
mortality rates at future ages for individuals who are 65 years old in 2020. The entries for 75-
year-olds, for example, correspond to mortality rates expected to prevail in 2030.


Table 3: Selected Comparisons between SOA and SSA Older-Age Mortality Improvement
Projection Factors and Historical Population Experience
           Age Group                  Historical Data        SOA           SSA
                                                             Projection    Projection
                         1968-      1982-      1999-       2009-       2002         2016
                         1982       1999       2009        2016        onwards      onwards
 Male     50-64          2.28       1.92       1.15        -0.29       1.33         1.07
          65-84          1.46       1.23       2.42        0.86        1.44         0.86
          85+            1.56       -0.32      1.49        0.37        0.3          0.54
 Female 50-64            1.72       1.09       1.46        -0.46       1.19         1.06
          65-84          2.03       0.43       1.71        0.72        1.29         0.79
          85+            2.06       -0.43      1.16        0.16        0.4          0.51
Source: Historical data on mortality improvement rates are drawn from SSA (2019). SOA
(2011) reports the assumed rates for the annuitant mortality table, and SSA (2019) the values for
the SSA mortality table.

                                                29
Table 4: Estimates of the EPDV of Immediate Annuity Payouts, Per $100,000 Premium
                     SSA (2019)     SOA (2011) Annuitant      SOA (2011) Annuitant
            Population Mortality Mortality Table updated Mortality Table updated
             Table Updated with with SOA Improvement with SSA Improvement
              SSA Improvement                     Factors                  Factors
                         Factors
           Treasury Corporate Treasury          Corporate Treasury       Corporate
             Yields        BBB       Yields BBB Yields         Yields BBB Yields
                          Yields
                      Panel A: Estimates Assuming Tax Rate = 0
  Men     $101,451      $81,326 $118,950         $92,566 $116,417         $91,010
Age 55
  Men        95,030       80,649    114,260          94,379    111,717          92,581
Age 65
  Men        85,938       77,494    106,901          94,254    104,837          92,559
Age 75
Women      107,496        84,736    119,479          92,150    117,977          91,213
Age 55
Women      100,209        83,738    113,934          93,179    112,438          92,097
Age 65
Women        89,724       79,811    106,538          92,911    105,457          91,984
Age 75
                       Panel B: Estimates Assuming Tax Rate = 0.25
   Men       97,797        82,491     114,303        94,346     111,953         93,601
 Age 55
   Men       91,972        81,321     109,705        95,151     107,390         93,358
 Age 65
   Men       83,715        77,725     102,632        93,834     100,769         92,216
 Age 75
Women       104,200        86,831     115,416        94,669     114,023         93,687
 Age 55
Women        97,697        85,464     110,238        94,980     108,867         93,899
 Age 65
Women        86,683        79,736     101,616        92,210     100,632         91,327
 Age 75
Source: Authors' calculations using equation (1) and mortality rates and yield curves as
described in the text, along with payouts on immediate annuity contracts in June 2020 as
reported in Table 1.




                                               30
Table 5: Implied Discount Rates () and Risk Premium Relative to Treasury Yield Curve ()
that Result in Money's Worth Values of 1.0 (EPDV = Purchase Premium)
                    SSA (2019) Population SOA (2011) Annuitant        SOA (2011) Annuitant
                    Mortality Table           Mortality Table updated Mortality Table
                    Updated with SSA          with SOA Improvement updated with SSA
                    Improvement Factors       Factors                 Improvement Factors
                                                                                
 Men Age 55         1.398 0.106               2.49 1.17               2.35     1.04
 Men Age 65         0.65 -0.49                2.35 1.17               2.16     0.98
 Men Age 75         -1.15 -2.07               1.79 0.84               1.55     0.59
 Women Age 55 1.82 0.50                       2.49 1.16               2.42     1.08
 Women Age 65 1.19 0.02                       2.30 1.09               2.18     0.98
 Women Age 75 -0.39 -1.36                     1.74 0.74               1.62     0.62
Source: Authors' calculations based on equations (2) and (3) in text.




Table 6: Cross-Company Average Annual Deferred Annuity Payouts, Per $100,000 Premium,
June 2020
                              Purchased at Age 55          Purchased at Age 65
                              Male         Female          Male                Female
 Deferred Annuity Payouts     $14,981      $13,544         $11,175             $10,074
 Beginning at Age 75
 Deferred Annuity Payouts     $41,617      $34,786         $31,856             $26,351
 Beginning at Age 85
Source: Annuity Shopper, July 2020. There are ten firms in the sample for all product classes.




                                               31
Table 7: Estimates of the EPDV of Deferred Annuity Payouts, Per $100,000 Premium
                Population Mortality    SOA (2012) Annuitant            Modified SOA (2012)
                               Table           Mortality Table      Annuitant Mortality Table
             Treasury     Corporate Treasury        Corporate        Treasury      Corporate
               Yields BBB Yields          Yields BBB Yields            Yields    BBB Yields
                         Panel A: Deferred Annuity Beginning at Age 75
  Men        $89,433        $55,218 $130,931          $79,444       $123,743         $75,190
Age 55
  Men         86,014         63,493     118,490          85,684        113,923            82,531
Age 65
Women        101,155         61,833     130,245          78,435        126,183            75,972
Age 55
Women         93,972         68,536     117,259          84,055        114,698            82,243
Age 65
                         Panel B: Deferred Annuity Beginning at Age 85
    Men        74,314        41,230     138,883        76,105         127,031              69,455
  Age 55
    Men        68,048          43,667     120,940        76,911          113,120           71,815
  Age 65
 Women         89,483          49,193     137,120        74,555          131,106           71,043
  Age 55
 Women         79,535          50,694     119,249        75,351          115,370           72,719
  Age 65
Source: Authors' calculations using equation (1) and mortality rates and yield curves as
described in the text, along with payouts on deferred annuity contracts in June 2020 as reported
in Table 6.




                                               32
