                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EFFECTS OF RECENT MINIMUM WAGE POLICIES IN CALIFORNIA AND NATIONWIDE:
              RESULTS FROM A PRE-SPECIFIED ANALYSIS PLAN

                                         David Neumark
                                          Maysen Yen

                                       Working Paper 28555
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28555


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




We received support for this research from the Employment Policies Institute (EPI). EPI had the
right to make comments on a draft of this paper, but had no control over the final content. (The
contract language states: "EPI and their reviewers may make suggestions about analysis and
conclusions, but final decisions about the content of the paper are up to the Principal
Investigator.") All of the analysis is based on a pre-specified analysis plan registered before the
last two years of data on minimum wage effects we analyze, which includes some new minimum
wages, were released. The pre-analysis plan (PAP) for this project ­ which includes computer
code ­ was registered on September 24, 2019, on the Open Science Framework, under the name
"City Minimum Wages in the United States." The PAP will be made public with the release of the
working paper including 2019 data ­ the final analysis committed to in the pre-analysis plan. We
thank Sylvia Allegretto, Anna Godøy, Carl Nadler, and Michael Reich for sharing the code from
Allegretto et al. (2018). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by David Neumark and Maysen Yen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Recent Minimum Wage Policies in California and Nationwide:¸Results from a
Pre-specified Analysis Plan
David Neumark and Maysen Yen
NBER Working Paper No. 28555
March 2021
JEL No. J23,J38

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyze the impacts of recent city minimum wage increases in California and nationwide,
following a pre-analysis plan (PAP) registered prior to the release of data covering two years of
minimum wage increases. For California cities we find a hint of negative employment effects.
Nationally, we find some evidence of disemployment effects for teens, but not young adults or
high school dropouts. City-specific analyses provide limited evidence of adverse effects on the
share low-income, but the pooled city analysis does not; the national analysis generally finds no
impact on the share low-income, with one exception that may reflect prior trends.


David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

Maysen Yen
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, Unit 92697
mayseny@uci.edu
Introduction

         Many U.S. cities have recently increased their minimum wages, especially in California. This

paper reports results from carrying out analyses of the impacts of these city minimum wages, as specified

in a pre-analysis plan (PAP) that was registered on Open Science Framework prior to the release of data

covering two years of minimum wage increases.

         Our PAP describes an empirical investigation of the effects of city (and state and county)

minimum wages on employment and poverty (and, secondarily, wages and earnings), using data from the

American Community Survey (ACS). As of the date of registering this PAP, on September 24, 2019,

work had been done using ACS data through 2017. Because we use a lagged minimum wage variable,

these data covered the minimum wage variation we study through 2016. 1 This PAP was filed prior to the

release of ACS data for 2018, with ACS 1-year summary files for 2018 released on September 26, 2019

and ACS public-use microdata for 2018 released on November 14, 2019. The data for 2019 were released

approximately one year later. Our PAP committed to carry out our analyses after the release of the 2018

data (in 2019) and then again after the release of the 2019 data (in 2020). We committed to releasing an

initial working paper (Neumark and Yen, 2020) using the 2018 data, 2 and a new revised paper (this one),

to be submitted for publication, using the 2019 data as well. These additional two years of data

substantially expanded the amount of data available on city minimum wage increases.3,4



1
  Throughout, therefore, when we refer to data on minimum wage increases before or after registration of our PAP,
we are referring to lagged increases. The reason is explained fully below, and has more to do with the timing of
measurement in the ACS data we use than with lagged adjustments to minimum wages.
2
  This was a provisional paper only, not to be submitted for publication.
3
  Moreover, we committed to do the analysis with the 2019 data in two ways ­ using all of the data (i.e., extending
the data used in the analysis through 2017 reported in our PAP), and then isolating the identifying information on
the effects of minimum wages to include only the two years of variation that were not available when the PAP was
written. The latter avoids any issues of specification search driven by finding particular minimum wage effects in
the data available prior to filing the PAP, at the cost of using less data. The tables and figures in the main text use
the first approach; the estimates isolating the effects estimated from the post-registration data are reported in Online
Appendix A.
4
  All of the code used in this PAP is also registered as part of the PAP. With each update, the code was simply
updated to accommodate the additional data, barring any unforeseen complications or errors that we discovered
subsequently. In fact, as Neumark and Yen (2020) noted, we discovered a couple of coding errors at the first update.
Our resolution was always to change the code to conform with what we said we were going to do, rather than ever
modifying the planned analysis.


                                                           1
        Most of our analysis focuses on California, where there have been numerous city minimum

wages passed in recent years. California is potentially a good setting for a credible research design,

because the within-state comparisons account for many other changes, including in-state minimum wages.

It is also very important from a policy perspective, because California is, in a sense, ground zero for city

minimum wages, with many cities having adopted minimum wages ­ and high minimum wages ­ in

recent years. Nonetheless, part of the analysis focuses on city minimum wages nationally.

        While the effects of minimum wages on employment are the subject of most research and policy

debate, the effects on poverty (or low-income families more generally) are of greater interest since the

goal of most minimum wage advocates is to reduce poverty and help low-income families. We cover both

outcomes. Finally, we also explore the effects on wages and earnings; these analyses are not primary, but

help to assess whether minimum wages in fact push up wages.

Related Prior and Current Work

        There are some precedents to using pre-specified analysis plans (PAPs) to estimate the effects of

minimum wages, with the goal of reducing or eliminating specification searches or data mining that could

influence the reported estimates, and there is also some concurrent related work. As David Levine ­ then

editor of Industrial Relations ­ wrote in an introduction to what was supposed to be a mini-symposium on

using this approach, "Published results in the social sciences are potentially biased due to researchers'

specifications searches. That is, unconscious and conscious biases in specification searches can lead to

"author effects," where one team of researchers consistently finds results larger or smaller than another

team" (p. 161). 5

        In the one paper resulting from the Industrial Relations project, Neumark (2001) pre-committed

to a research design to study the effects of the U.S. federal minimum wage increases in October 1996 and

September 1997. 6 The project used the October, November, and December CPS files. The earliest


5
  Another component of this mini-symposium was a pre-commitment by the journal to publish the paper based on an
evaluation of the research design, to avoid biases introduced by editors' or referees' views of the findings.
6
  The issue of Industrial Relations in which this introduction appeared was supposed to be a symposium, but no
other invited researchers chose to participate.


                                                      2
relevant file (October 1996) was released to the public at the end of May 1997, and the research design

(what we now call a pre-analysis plan) was submitted to the journal before this date. (Data from 1995 are

used as the baseline.) The paper concluded that some of the inferences are fragile ­ perhaps attributable to

discarding data except on the minimum wage increases following the pre-specification of the research

design. Overall, though, there was evidence of disemployment effects of minimum wages where they

would be most expected ­ for some younger workers (16-24 year-olds but not teens), and for less-

educated workers ­ with the negative effects occurring with a lag.

          Campolieti et al. (2006) conducted an analysis of minimum wage increases in Canada which they

described as "in the spirit" of Neumark (2001). The authors readily acknowledged that their paper was not

a "pure" pre-specified research design, as the paper included earlier data. The sense in which they argued

that it was a pre-specified research design was that it committed to following the specifications in

Neumark (2001), although it also included a few other specifications that the authors are clear to delineate

from the original specifications. Campolieti et al. reported employment elasticities with respect to the

minimum wage ranging from -0.17 to -0.44 for youths (aged 20-24 or 16-24), but no statistically

significant evidence of disemployment effects for teenagers, and mixed evidence for those with at most a

high school education. They indicated the results were quite robust, and that the larger negative estimates

resulted from accounting for lagged adjustments.

          Wang and Gunderson (2011) did a similar analysis for the effects of minimum wages in China,

studying data from 2000-2007, but basing their analysis on an earlier research design. They found

negative employment effects in slower-growing regions, larger negative effects in non-state-owned

enterprises, and larger negative effects with lags. They found no adverse employment effects in faster-

growing regions, and positive effects in state-owned enterprises in these regions. Given that their analysis

focused to some extent on regional differences and state- vs. non-state-owned enterprises ­ issues that

were absent from the earlier research design on which their study is based ­ calling this paper a pre-

specified research design (as the title does) might be viewed as more of a stretch than Campolieti et al.

(2006).


                                                     3
         There is a tradeoff between a pure pre-specified design using post-treatment data from after the

research design is specified, and the kinds of analyses in the Campolieti et al. and Wang and Gunderson

studies. When researchers commit to a pure pre-specified research design, they are generally throwing out

a lot of earlier data, which comes at the cost of precision (and the ability to assess robustness). 7 In

contrast, when researchers use earlier data they always have the ability to learn something about how

specification choices affect the results ­ either from their own work or the work of other researchers ­ at

least in earlier data. The idea of Campolieti et al. to use more data but to commit to someone else's pre-

specified research design is a creative way to try to balance these costs and benefits ­ not as compelling

as a pure pre-specified design, but still potentially more reliable than a paper that presents specifications

not drawn directly from pre-specified research designs. Of course, the benefits can be overstated, as

subsequent researchers may come up with alternative and potentially more convincing ways to identify

minimum wage effects. 8

         Finally, in a recent pair of papers Clemens and Strain (2017, 2019) presented analyses of the

employment effects of state minimum wages based on CPS data through 2015 and committed to apply the

same analysis to the effects of state minimum wage increases in 2016 (and some in late 2015) through

2019 (in their 2017 paper), and then present evidence through 2017 (in their 2019 paper). 9 The results in

the latter paper (the only one that analyzes data subsequent to the pre-specification) indicated that large

minimum wage increases reduced employment of low-skilled individuals by just over two percentage

points, while the estimated effects of smaller minimum wage increases are more variable, and the

evidence for inflation-indexed increases (a recent development in some U.S. states) pointed more to

positive effects. They suggested that the differences between larger and smaller increases may also have

to do with the timing of effects, as the larger increases occurred earlier and hence the negative


7
  This is not always the case, as there are sometimes new minimum wages implemented, such as in Germany in
2015 and the United Kingdom in 1999.
8
  See, e.g., the arguments in Allegretto et al. (2011) and Dube et al. (2010).
9
  They also noted that their analyses of future data for 2017-2019 might include adaptation to account for other local
labor market developments regarding immigration, trade, and technology, while also presenting straightforward
extensions of their original pre-specified analyses.


                                                          4
employment effects could reflect lagged effects ­ something they can only sort out with more data.

         Overall, then, all four of these papers (counting the second Clemens and Strain paper only) found

some evidence of disemployment effects of minimum wages. The papers differed in the extent to which

they used pure pre-specified research designs, however, so one may not want to draw strong conclusions

from them about the evidence from such designs.

         Our present paper includes key features of some of these prior pre-specified analyses, with some

differences. Similar to Clemens and Strain's work and Neumark (2011), our study is a "pure" pre-

specified design in the sense that we break out and report results for the "post-registration" minimum

wage increases. 10 There are some key differences relative to both their work and the other papers. First,

we followed what is becoming standard practice in the experimental literature, and registered our pre-

analysis plan (PAP) prior to the availability of data on the effects of a set of minimum wage increases.

Second, our focus is different, with a particular emphasis on local minimum wages in the many cities in

California that adopted them in the late 2010s. And third, our paper is the first that incorporates analysis

of the distributional effects of minimum wages into a pre-specified research design.

City Minimum Wages

         Table 1 lists California cities with minimum wages. In all cases, the cities included in Table 1 are

large enough to have data in the ACS 1-year files, for which the criterion is a Census place with a

population greater than 65,000. The state minimum wage is shown in the top row, followed by

information on city minimum wages. We first show the date of the increase or new implementation in a

year, if any, followed by the minimum wage level. The table ends in 2018, which will be the last year of

minimum wage data used in our analysis. (The same is true for the tables and figures that follow.)

         Figure 1 makes clear the rising number of city minimum wages in California. The figure plots the

state minimum wage (line) and the value of each city minimum wage. The first city minimum wage was



10
  However, also like their work, we had data on increases just prior to the registration date prior to committing to
our research design ­ a deviation from the kind of pure pre-specified design one increasingly sees in experimental
research.


                                                          5
in San Francisco, but beginning in 2015 many more cities jump into the fray ­ with 14 cities with

minimum wages as of the end of 2017, 13 of which increased their minimum wages in 2018. As this

figure shows, the additional two years of data we study since filing our PAP provide potentially useful

policy variation, since many of the California city minimum wages are very recent.

           To give a sense of the share of population covered by minimum wages in different cities, Figure 2

weights each city's minimum wage by the log of the population aged 16 and over, based on an average of

ACS data from 2005 to 2018.

           Table 2 shows all city and county minimum wages nationally that have been enacted since 2012.

The table shows that 2016 saw a large increase in the number of cities with minimum wages, and a

number of cities also implemented minimum wages in 2017 or increased their minimum wages. Table 3

shows the longer histories for Santa Fe and San Francisco, which passed minimum wages earlier.

Data Issues

           For our analysis of employment and poverty, we use ACS 1-year summary files at the Census-

place level, allowing an easy mapping to cities ­ the level at which most local minimum wages are set. In

these 1-year files, we obtain measures of employment, poverty status (the share of the population that is

poor or below other thresholds we use, based on the family), earnings of full-time year-round workers,

citizenship status, race, age, sex, education, and population at the Census place level. The ACS restricts

the 1-year data to Census places with populations of greater than 65,000. On a similar basis, ACS data for

our subgroups may be suppressed in certain Census places with low populations of those subgroups for

confidentiality concerns and statistical reliability. Census places are either incorporated places (legally

bounded entities), such as cities, boroughs, towns, or villages, or Census designated places (CDPs), which

are statistical entities that can include unincorporated communities, concentrations of population, housing,

and commercial structures, identifiable by name, but not within an incorporated place. 11 For simplicity we

always refer to these as cities, except in some cases where we are referring explicitly to how Census



11
     See https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/data/developers/understandingplace.pdf.


                                                         6
labels these entities.

         There are several considerations for classifying the minimum wage variable. Because the ACS

reports in one-year intervals, without month identifiers, the minimum wage must be assigned a value for

the year. For continuous measures of the minimum wage, we simply average the minimum wage for the

year. Additionally, because of the structure of the ACS data and the timing of minimum wage increases,

we use a one-year lag of the minimum wage when estimating effects in the ACS data. Table 1 lists the

dates of enactment of California cities' minimum wages. Many cities have changes that take place on July

1, more on January first, and a couple cities on other dates. Thus, if we assign the average minimum wage

for the current year (or assign an increase in the current year, when we use a dummy variable), it is

possible that a good deal of the data actually come from the period prior to the minimum wage increase.

         Similarly, ACS income-related questions refer to the past twelve months. (See Table 4.) For

example, when using the ACS 1-year summary files, poverty status is based on the past twelve months.

For these types of variables, it is even more likely that the data were generated prior to the current year's

minimum wage increase. In one analysis, we study the effects of minimum wages on wages using

converted microdata. For this analysis, we attempt to construct a more accurate hourly wage measure as

our outcome of interest, but this relies on even more variables that are reported in the past twelve months.

         Thus, in our analyses we always one-year lags of the minimum wage variables. Using a one-year

lag will reduce the incorrect classification of untreated observations as treated ­ a classification error that

would generate bias towards finding no effect. Of course, if the policy effect occurs precisely in the

month of treatment, then misclassification in either direction (temporally) will generate bias towards zero.

However, there is in fact some reason ­ and some past evidence ­ suggesting that minimum wage effects

could occur with a lag. 12 Thus, there is much less likely to be a bias towards finding no effect generated

from lagging the minimum wage variable. We believe that, especially due to the nature of the ACS data,



12
  See, e.g., Neumark and Wascher (1992), Neumark et al. (2004), and Cengiz et al. (2019) on employment effects.
In an analysis of distributional effects, in standard two-way fixed effects specifications, Dube (2019) finds effects
that occur with a three-year lag, although that may be an outlier.


                                                          7
lagging the minimum wage variable is essential. 13

         Finally, we define a relative minimum wage variable based on an average wage in the

denominator that is lagged by two years, since average wages are computed using data over the past

twelve months. This ensures that the average wage we are using is not directly influenced by the lagged

minimum wage, and hence provides a better measure of wage levels and the "bite" of the minimum wage,

uninfluenced by minimum wage increases.

California Analysis

         City-specific analyses

         For the analysis of city minimum wages in California, we first report synthetic control analyses

for each city. The analyses cover employment rates for teens (ages 16-19), youths (ages 16-24), and high

school dropouts (ages 25-64). We also report the same types of analyses for the share of individuals

below 50% of the poverty line, the poverty line, and 150% of the poverty line. 14

         We match on the outcome variable for each analysis in the pre-treatment period for each pre-

treatment year. We do not add in matching for additional covariates, as any covariates become irrelevant

when using the entire pre-treatment path of the outcome variable (Kaul et., al 2015). Additionally, to take

into account the lagged minimum wage effect, we simply lag our treatment year by one in each synthetic

control analysis. We report the results for each city in Tables 5A-5M; we report results for each post-

treatment year, and the pooled estimate. 15 Pooled estimates are obtained by averaging each post-treatment

yearly estimate across the post-treatment years. "Group population" in Tables 5A-5M represents the

average sample sizes of the specified group between 2006-2019, in the treated city. 16 Note that Tables 5J-

5M cover cities or which there were no minimum wage increases in the data at the time we registered our



13
   This has not, however, been done in recent analyses of local minimum wages using the ACS data (Godøy and
Reich, 2019; Clemens and Strain, 2015).
14
   In the ACS, poverty is not calculated for those in group or institutional quarters (such as prisons or dormitories).
15
   Note that there are some blank cells when data were suppressed. Also, San Francisco is omitted from this analysis
(as well as that in Tables 6A-7C) because these analyses require pre-treatment observations, which are not available
in the data given how early San Francisco implemented its minimum wage.
16
   The only exception is for two cities (Palo Alto and Milpitas) where there is missing data. For these cities, the
years are 2011-2019 and 2007-2019, respectively.


                                                           8
PAP.

        The inference procedure follows the placebo analysis outlined in Abadie et al. (2010), where we

run the synthetic control analysis on each city in the donor pool. (The control cities are listed in the notes

to Table 1.) Two examples ­ for a very large unit (LA County), and a very small unit (Santa Clara) ­ are

shown in Figures 3 and 4.

        The results suggest a few conclusions, which we discuss here on a city-by-city basis, and then

summarize graphically below.

        Turning first to the employment effects, there is sometimes evidence of a negative effect that is

sizable (larger than 0.05 in absolute value) but not very precisely estimated and hence rarely statistically

significant, especially for the post-registration 2018 data (and less so for 2019): in Berkeley (5A) for

teens, youths, and high school dropouts in 2018 and youths in 2019; in Palo Alto (5D) for teens in 2018;

in San Diego (5F) for teens in 2018; in Santa Clara (5K) for teens in both years; in Sunnyvale (5H) for

teens and youths in 2018 (significant for teens); in Milpitas (5J) for teens and high school dropouts in

2018; and in San Mateo (5M) for teens in 2018.

        Second, there are some post-registration estimates that are positive and sizable, mostly

statistically insignificant: in Berkeley (5A) for high school dropouts in 2019; for Mountain View (5B) for

high school dropouts in 2019 (significant); in Oakland (5C) for high school dropouts in 2018; in

Richmond (5E) for teens and youths in both years (significant for youths in 2019) and high school

dropouts in 2019; in San Diego (5F) for high school dropouts in 2019; in Sunnyvale (5H) for high school

dropouts in 2018 and all three groups in 2019 (significant for youths); in Milpitas (5J) for teens and

youths in 2019; in San Jose (5L) for high school dropouts in 2019; and for San Mateo (5M) for teens in

2019.

        Third, there are only three pooled estimates (combining minimum wage increase pre- and post-

registration) that are statistically significant at the 10% level. All three are positive ­ for Mountain View




                                                       9
(5B) for youths and high school dropouts, and for Richmond (5E) for youths. 17

         For the effects on being below the poverty line (or 50% or 150% of the poverty line), the

estimates are similarly variable and often imprecise, and also vary in sign. However, for the pooled pre-

and post-registration data, there are multiple (six) statistically significant estimates consistent with

increasing the share low-income: for the 50% threshold in Berkeley (5A) in 2019; for the 150% threshold

in Richmond (5E) in 2019; for the 50%, 100%, and 150% thresholds in Santa Clara (5G) in 2018; for the

50% threshold in San Leandro (5K) in 2019. There is only one statistically significant estimate in the

direction of reducing the share poor or low income: for the 150% threshold in San Leandro (5K) in 2018.

         Thus, there is no clear evidence on the sign of the employment effects in the city-by-city analyses

for California. There is a somewhat clearer message on the distributional effects; while there is virtually

no evidence of poverty (low-income) reductions, there is some evidence of adverse effects, although it

arises in a relatively small number of cases. Overall, the imprecision in the estimates suggests that

analysis from data pooled across California cities may be more valuable. We turn to this type of evidence

below.

         Prior to doing so, however, we report some other summary measures of the results in Tables 5A-

5M. Because we have reported results for individual cities, and because minimum wage increases vary in

size, it is difficult to interpret the overall evidence. To help interpret the estimates, we also graph the

estimated employment effects and poverty effects against the size of the minimum wage increase ­

computed over the entire post-treatment period. These graphs appear in Figure 5. For employment, if

larger minimum wage increases were associated with larger employment declines, the lines would be

downward sloping. The lines for teenagers and youths are nearly flat, and the line for high school

dropouts is upward sloping. For the poverty thresholds, if a higher minimum wage reduces the share poor



17
   The synthetic control analyses that isolate the post-registration variation (presenting a pooled estimate over the
post-registration years) are reported in Online Appendix A. Note there are not alternative tables for the small
number of cities for which all of the variation was post registration. In these alternative tables, we report the
estimates for each year separately, and also add the estimate of the average effect over only the "post-registration"
years (2018-2019), based on 2017 and 2018 minimum wage increases.


                                                          10
or low-income, the lines should be downward sloping. Only the line for the 150% threshold has a

noticeable downward slope ­ and then not by much. The slopes are generally near zero.

        Finally, we also graph the estimated employment effects against the poverty effects, to see if

larger estimated employment declines are associated with larger increase (or smaller decreases) in

poverty. These estimates are also computed over the entire post-treatment period. We show these for all

three groups for which we estimate employment effects, but we expect a stronger relationship for the high

school dropout employment rates, since the employment effect for this group is more strongly linked to

family income. 18 Figure 6A shows these graphs for the poverty threshold, while Figures 6B and 6C show

them for the 50% and 150% thresholds as well.

        Note that these figures also provide a nice summary of the previous estimates, which span many

tables, by showing the employment and poverty estimates by quadrant. Thus we see, for example, that

most of the employment estimates for teens are negative or very close to zero. This is less true for young

adults and high school dropouts; indeed for the latter, the estimates tend to be more positive. And we see

that the estimated effects on the share in poverty and below 50% of the poverty line tend to be positive,

while there is no clear direction of the evidence for the share below 150% of the poverty line.

        Looking at the relationships between the estimated employment effects and the estimated poverty

effects by city, in all cases but one we find a negative relationship between the two estimates; we plot the

regression lines. That is, when the estimated employment effect is less positive or more negative, the

estimated effect on the share poor (or below the other thresholds) is less negative or more positive (i.e.,

adverse). Moreover, most of the regressions lines fit to these scatterplots go through a point fairly close to

(0,0), implying, for example, that evidence that the minimum wage decreased employment is associated

with an increase in the share poor or low-income, and vice versa. Thus, these findings suggest that,

although the estimated employment and poverty effects are generally imprecise, we are not just getting



18
  Our PAP inadvertently referred to employment effects for those defined as poor as well. However, we made an
earlier decision to omit these results, since poverty and employment cannot be independently defined; this decision
was reflected in our pre-registered code.


                                                         11
noise, as we would expect larger employment declines to be more harmful to low-income families.

Finally, Figures 6A-6C indicate (and the preceding discussion implies) that there are a number of cities

with negative estimated employment effects and estimated increases in the share poor or low-income (the

lower-right quadrant).

         Pooled analyses

         We next conduct empirical analyses that continue to estimate the effects of discrete minimum

wage increase events, but in a pooled analysis weighted by city population. This analysis closely follows

the specification and approach in Allegretto et al. (2018) (who focused on a small set of cities), except for

a few modifications. First, we use a one-year lag modification of the treatment year and corresponding

pre- and post-treatment years, for reasons described above. Additionally, we modify the "Jump estimate"

to account for partial year implementations, as described below. Finally, we also weight the regression by

the population of the group studied. For each outcome, we also show estimates on the subset of

observations with one or two additional post-treatment years. 19

         In the tables for this analysis (beginning with Table 6A), the key estimates are highlighted. The

"Jump estimate" is the shift in the intercept following the minimum wage increase. (For the year of

implementation, if the minimum wage was not implemented on January 1, we set the "dummy" equal to

the proportion of the year for which the minimum wage prevailed, instead of 1.) The "Post-treatment

trend" estimate is the estimated linear trend in the employment rate subsequent to the initial increase,

relative to the initial trend. Tables 6A-6C show the estimates for employment effects. Tables 7A-7C have

the same structure, but the outcome is the poverty rate or other low-income thresholds. 20

         For employment, Table 6A shows that the jump estimate is negative for teens for the maximal

number of minimum wage increases looking out two or four years, but not three. (These columns have

shaded headings; the other columns give the comparable estimates for the shorter-term treatment effects


19
   When we do this, we also show the estimates for the same subsample of observations, without the post-trend term
or corresponding observation added, so that one can compare results for the same treatment cities using the different
specifications.
20
   See Online Appendix A for parallel analyses that isolate the post-registration variation.


                                                         12
for the observations for which the longer-term treatment effects are defined.) The estimates in column (3),

(5), and (6) are significant at the 5% or 10% level based on clustered standard errors but not the

bootstrapped p-values. (See the table notes for explanation.) 21 The Post-treatment trend is always negative

for teens. It is not statistically significant, except in column (5).

        For youths (Table 6B), the corresponding two jump estimates (in columns (1) and (6)) are also

negative but not statistically significant. The post-treatment trend is negative for the cities with three or

four post-treatment years; one of these estimates is significant at the 10% level based on the clustered

standard error, but not the bootstrapped p-value. For both teens and young adults there is some evidence

of positive pre-trends associated with adopting a higher minimum wage, which could make it more

difficult to detect negative employment effects.

        For high school dropouts (Table 6C) the estimated employment effects in the three highlighted

columns are also negative in two out of three cases (this time for one and two years post-treatment) but

not statistically significant. The post-treatment trends are positive, and in one case significant at the 5%

(or less) level based on both inference procedures.

        Turning to the poverty thresholds in Tables 7A-7C, there is no consistent evidence of an effect

one way or the other. Both the jump effects and post-treatment trends are small, insignificant, and vary in

sign. For all three cases there are negative and significant pre-trends associated with minimum wage

increases, which could potentially obscure evidence of increases in the shares with low-income.

        Overall, then, for employment there is fairly consistent evidence pointing to negative effects for

teens and youths, although most of it is not statistically significant. The estimates for high school

dropouts are more ambiguous. There is no consistent evidence of an effect on the share below the poverty

line or other low-income thresholds.

        We next move on to a more standard panel data analysis of the effects of minimum wages, using


21
  We have a fairly large number of groups, but relatively few treated groups (13, 9, or 4 across the columns of
Tables 6A-6C and 7A-7C). We read the state of knowledge of how to best calculate the clustered standard errors
with a fairly large number of groups but few treated groups as somewhat unsettled, but it is likely that the
bootstrapped standard errors would be more accurate (Cameron and Miller, 2015).


                                                        13
a continuous minimum wage variable. In this analysis, we revisit an issue that received more attention in

the beginning stages of the new minimum wage research ­ how to specify the minimum wage variable.

Most of earlier work on minimum wages used a ratio of the minimum wage to an average wage (Neumark

and Wascher 1992) ­ often referred to as a "Kaitz index." 22 Typically, specifications using this approach

defined the dependent variable in levels rather than logs, so one had to compute an elasticity based on the

regression estimate and the means of the dependent variable and the minimum wage variable. More

recently, researchers have specified the minimum wage variable in logs ­ without reference to an average

wage ­ and defined the dependent variable in logs, so that the minimum wage coefficient is the elasticity.

           In our view, however, there are reasons ­ especially in the current context of high minimum

wages ­ to revert to the relative minimum wage specification, and to estimate the specification in levels

rather than logs (of a rate, for employment and poverty). Consider first the employment rate. Suppose, as

seems simplest, that a change in the minimum wage (relative or absolute) has equal absolute effects

regardless of the level of the employment rate. Then using the log of the employment rate can generate

quite misleading evidence on the magnitudes of the effects at different "baseline" employment rates. The

change from, e.g., 0.9 to 0.8 is much smaller in percentage (or log) terms than change from 0.3 to 0.2,

suggesting that that using the level of the employment rate is preferred to the log unless there is a reason

the minimum wage has smaller effects at higher levels of the employment rate.

           What does this imply in our specific context? In our sample period, the employment rate is higher

at the end of the sample period (because of developments since the Great Recession). Large minimum

wage increase are also concentrated at the end of the sample period. Together, this implies that using the

log of the employment rate could obscure the relationship between the high minimum wage increases at

the end of sample period and employment declines ­ which look smaller, at high employment rates, if we

use the log of the employment rate.

           Consider next the minimum wage variable. With a relative measure, when the relative measure is



22
     However, the original Kaitz index (Kaitz, 1970) also incorporated information on coverage.


                                                          14
low, a minimum wage increase affects relatively fewer workers, and should have smaller effects on

employment. Conversely, when the relative measure is high, a minimum wage increase affects relatively

more workers, and hence should have larger effects on the employment rate. Using the log of the relative

measure has the opposite effect. When the relative minimum wage is higher, the change in the log of the

relative measure is smaller for the same nominal increase in the minimum wage. Thus, using the log of a

relative measure obscures the relationship between increases in higher minimum wages (relative to the

average wage) and larger employment declines. The same holds for simply using the log of the minimum

wage. A $1 increase at a higher minimum wage is smaller in percentage terms, but this may generate

larger employment declines. In contrast, using the level of the minimum wage or the level of the relative

minimum wage, an equal minimum wage change induces equal changes. This is preferable, but still does

not capture the potential for larger employment effects at higher minimum wages, for which one might

want to use a convex function of the minimum wage. We do not go this far, but we do revert to using

regressions of the levels of the dependent variables (the employment rate, poverty rate, or

wages/earnings) on the relative minimum wage (in levels, not logged).

           The one issue with using a relative minimum wage variable is that unobserved demand variation

that is positively correlated with average wage in the denominator, and with the employment rate, induces

a negative relationship. However, the models include an unemployment rate for 25-64 year-olds, which

should control for demand variation. Moreover, as noted above, we lag the average wage variable by an

extra year.

           The estimates in Tables 8 and 9 report results from standard panel data analyses for California.

Note that the minimum wage effects in the California analyses, as in the prior analyses, are identified

from the within-state variation only. Table 8 is for employment effects, and Table 9 for effects on the

shares below different poverty thresholds. 23 In Table 8, the estimated employment effects are always

negative. The elasticity is -0.12 for teens, about -0.01 for youths, and -0.03 for high school dropouts,



23
     See Online Appendix A for parallel analyses that isolate the post-registration variation.


                                                             15
although none of the effects are significant. In Table 9, the evidence is stronger. The estimates for the

100% and 150% thresholds point to statistically significant reductions in the share poor or low-income.

The elasticities are around -0.24 for the poverty line (the 100% threshold), and -0.13 for the 150%

threshold (and -0.17 for the 50% threshold, although that estimate is insignificant).

        Compared to the other statewide specifications reported in Tables 6A-6C and 7A-7C, the

evidence of negative employment effects is more consistent in Table 8, although in no case is the

estimated effect statistically significant. One advantage of Table 8 is that it takes account of the

magnitude of the minimum wage increase, while Tables 6A-6C do not. In addition, Tables 6A and 6B

report evidence of significant positive pre-trends for teens and youths, which could weaken evidence of

disemployment effects in Table 8.

        With regard to poverty, in contrast, Table 9 provides quite clear evidence of reductions in the

probability of being poor or low-income, whereas Tables 7A-7C generated rather unambiguous evidence

of no effect (with estimates small, centered on zero, and varying in sign). However, all three of the prior

tables ­ 7A, 7B, and 7C ­ showed statistically significant evidence of negative pre-trends prior to these

policy changes ­ i.e., the shares poor or low-income were declining in the cities in California that enacted

or increased minimum wages in recent years; this evidence is strongest for the 150% threshold. This

suggests that the evidence of reductions in the share poor or low-income in Table 9 may be driven by

these negative pre-trends rather than actual reductions caused by the minimum wage increases. 24

National Analysis

        Finally, we conduct more standard national panel data analyses of the effects of local minimum

wages. Our panel is constructed from Census places ­ rather than states, which are the focus of most prior

national panel data analyses of the effects of minimum wages. The minimum wage level is defined as the

higher of the city, county, or state minimum wage (and the state minimum wage is always the lower



24
  In Online Appendix B, we explore the effects of minimum wages in California cities on wages and earnings. We
conclude that the ACS data are most likely not useful for estimating the effects of minimum wages on wages or
earnings, because of difficulties in measuring wages in the ACS.


                                                      16
bound).

          We begin, to provide a benchmark relative to other literature, with estimates of the effects of state

minimum wages in our sample period. We then substitute the local minimum wage, which will be the

higher of the state or the local minimum wage. Finally, we add both, in which case we identify the effect

of local minimum wages only from the variation that is independent of state minimum wages. In the latter

specifications, we enter the state minimum wage (relative to the average wage), and the difference

between the city and state minimum wage (also relative to the average wage). In this specification, the

estimated coefficient of the state minimum wage is comparable to state minimum wage estimates from

state panels. The estimated coefficient of the "city ­ state" difference is the additional effect of the city

minimum wage, and isolates the effects of city minimum wages.

          This latter specification is of particular interest in light of concerns raised by Allegretto et al.

(2011) and Dube et al. (2010) about the potential correlation between state minimum wages and economic

conditions for low-skilled workers. 25 In particular, one response to this potential criticism is to use within-

state variation in minimum wages and allow the state minimum wage variation to control for the potential

state-level shocks that are correlated with minimum wages (at the state level). 26 If one takes this criticism

seriously, then the effects we identify from city minimum wage variation relative to state minimum wage

variation might be viewed as more credibly identified. However, we do not want to overstate this; we

noted earlier, with respect to the evidence for California only, that there was evidence of negative pre-

trends in the shares poor or low-income in the cities in the state that raised minimum wages, relative to

other cities in the state. And as discussed in Neumark and Wascher (2017), many approaches to

controlling for potential correlations between state minimum wage variation and unmeasured shocks yield



25
   See Neumark et al. (2014a, 2014b), Allegretto et al. (2017), and Neumark and Wascher (2017) for subsequent
discussion of these issues.
26
   This parallels the approach in Thompson (2009), although he uses variation in the bindingness of the minimum
wage within a state, rather than policy variation. An alternative is to control for state shocks by using within-state
variation in the effects of minimum wages on workers directly affected by the minimum wage and low-skilled
workers subject to the same shocks (by assumption) but not directly affected by the minimum wage (as in Clemens
and Strain (2019), and Clemens and Wither (2019)). One could also saturate the model with state-by-period effects,
and hence only identify the effects of the city minimum wages.


                                                          17
evidence of disemployment effects as larger or larger than the standard two-way fixed effects model.

         Table 10 reports the estimates for employment. 27 Columns (1)-(3) present the results using the

Census place data ("cities"), with state minimum wages assigned. Columns (4)-(6) instead substitute the

city minimum wages. Not surprisingly, these estimates are fairly similar, since the prevailing minimum

wage in the city is most often the state minimum wage. 28 The estimates indicate a small and insignificant

negative employment effect for teenagers, a positive and significant effect for youths (at the 10% level),

and a negative but insignificant effect for high school dropouts. The elasticities are generally small.

         Columns (7)-(9) include the state minimum wage variable and the city-relative-to-state minimum

wage variable. The latter estimates in these specifications isolate the effects of city minimum wages. As

we would expect, the estimated effects of the state minimum wage are little changed. The estimated

effects of city minimum wages are small for young adults and high school dropouts, but the estimate for

teens is statistically significant at the 10% level, with an elasticity of about -0.15.

         Note that the teen elasticity is larger (in absolute value) than the estimated effect of state

minimum wages, suggesting that city minimum wages may have more adverse employment effects for

them. However, they are imprecise, with standard errors on the employment effects of around 0.07 (for

teens), suggesting that it is difficult to get enough power to reject the hypothesis of no employment effects

for true effects in the lower part of the expected range from other studies that find negative effects of

minimum wages (say, around -0.10 elasticities). 29

         Finally, Table 11 reports the estimates for poverty and similar thresholds. Columns (1)-(3)

present the results using the Census place data, and provide no clear evidence that state minimum wages

affect poverty or low-income shares. The estimates are small and insignificant, although all are negative.

In columns (4)-(6), where we substitute the city minimum wage variation, the estimates remain negative,

and are statistically insignificant in two of the three cases, with small elasticities (in the range of -0.015


27
   See Online Appendix A for parallel analyses that isolate the post-registration variation.
28
   In the national data, across the different samples and outcomes, only 1.90-1.97% of the observations have the city
minimum wage greater than the state minimum wage.
29
   For a summary of preferred estimates from published studies, see Neumark and Shirley (2000).


                                                         18
to -0.041).

        In columns (7)-(9) we isolate the effects of city minimum wage variation. In this case, while most

of the estimated effects are small and statistically insignificant, the estimate for 150% of the poverty line

is statistically significant, with an elasticity of -0.126, consistent with reducing the share with low

income. 30 The estimate for extreme poverty (50% of the poverty line) is positive, rather than negative.

        Thus, the evidence from the national analysis of city minimum wages suggests there may be some

job loss among the least-skilled, although not for all groups, although the evidence is not statistically

significant only for teens, and only at the 10% level. There is also evidence that city minimum wages

reduced the share below 150% of the poverty line; the estimate for the poverty line is in the same

direction, but smaller and insignificant, while the estimate for extreme poverty is the opposite sign.

However, recall that Tables 7A-7C indicated that, for California, there was a fairly strong negative pre-

trend in the shares poor or low-income (strongest for the 150% threshold), which could generate spurious

evidence of reduction in the shares poor or low-income. This is most important for Table 9 ­ which uses

the same California minimum wage increases. However, while Table 11 uses city minimum wages

nationwide, California cities still contribute a large share of the variation (across the different samples and

outcomes, 33-34 percent of observations with city minimum wage exceeding state minimum wages), and

hence the same problem could arise.

Conclusions and Discussion

        Our goal in this paper was to pre-specify analyses of city minimum wage increases ­ mainly in

California, but also elsewhere. We registered a pre-analysis plan (PAP) in September 2019, that dictated

how we would use American Community Survey (ACS) data released in the fall of 2019 and the fall of

2020 ­ data that covered 2018 and 2019. Our analyses included city-by-city analyses of minimum wage

increases in California, pooled analyses of city minimum wage increases in California, and pooled




30
   The larger poverty-reduction effects the 100% and 150% thresholds are consistent with the more negative effects
in columns (4)-(6) vs. columns (1)-(3).


                                                        19
analysis of city (and state) minimum wage increases nationwide.

       Our analysis reveals the following evidence:

       ·   Analyzing minimum wage effects on employment for individual cities in California, there is

           no clear evidence on the sign of the employment effects. There is sometimes evidence of a

           negative effect that is sizable but not very precisely estimated and hence not statistically

           significant, and the same is true for positive effects. Overall the synthetic control analysis city

           by city is inconclusive regarding employment effects.

       ·   In the city-specific analyses, there is some limited evidence pointing to increases in the share

           low-income, or adverse distributional effects. While there is virtually no evidence of poverty

           (low-income) reductions, there is some evidence of adverse effects, although it arises in a

           relatively small number of cases.

       ·   In general, the city-specific estimates are quite imprecise, which is not surprising. We do,

           though, find suggestive evidence that where the estimated employment effect is negative (and

           more negative), the estimated change in the share poor or low-income is positive (or more

           positive).

       ·   In analyses pooling across California cities, there is relatively consistent evidence pointing to

           job loss, although the estimated effects are not statistically significant. In our analysis of teen

           and young adult employment, positive pre-trends may mask disemployment effects. Across

           our different pooled analyses of recent California minimum wages, there is no clear evidence

           of distributional effects.

       ·   Our national analysis ­ which covers state and city minimum wages but focuses on the latter

           ­ finds evidence of a significant (at the 10% level) negative employment effect of city

           minimum wages for teens, with an elasticity of -0.15.

       ·   In the national analysis of distributional effects, the evidence points to reductions in the share

           below 150% of the poverty line, with a significant the estimated elasticity of -0.13. This



                                                     20
             evidence, however, may be driven in part by the kinds of pre-trends we found for city

             minimum wages in California.

        One might argue that our analysis is incomplete because it does not explore hypotheses about the

results, or potential problems for some of the estimators, suggested by our analyses based on our PAP.

For example, one might argue that having raised the issue of pre-trends, we should evaluate models that

allow for or control for these ­ like we did, at least partially, in the pooled California analysis (as planned

in the PAP). However, our intention in this paper is to present the results from analyses specified in the

PAP, and to leave to other research ­ and other researchers ­explorations of some of the issues or

hypotheses that stem from this paper. Pursuing analyses suggested by our results ­ such as seeing whether

the apparent evidence of beneficial distributional effects is in fact spurious ­ poses the question of which

analyses and questions to pursue, which would potentially take us back to authors' decisions, based on the

data, influencing which kinds of results are reported. 31

        We are by no means arguing that research of the latter type is not valuable. Indeed, we anticipate

that in non-experimental research the use of PAP's will remain very limited. For example, their use in

minimum wage research was made at least feasible in the contemporaneous period because it was a safe

bet that many more jurisdictions would be raising their minimum wages. Even so, the imprecision of

many of our estimates, especially for single or smaller jurisdictions, highlights a potentially serious cost

of using only future minimum wage increases in a period following the registration of a PAP. At the same

time, the approach we use is feasible for early evidence on newly implemented minimum wage increases

(or other policy changes).




31
   Nonetheless, while this is our intention, during the peer-review process we may well get pushed to conduct these
additional analyses to present a fuller picture of the evidence on recent minimum wage increases. (We did not have
any kind of pre-commitment to publish based on the PAP, unlike the case with the Industrial Relations mini-
symposium that pre-committed to publish Neumark (2001).) If so, we will be sure to delineate which analyses go
beyond those described in the PAP, which is described as good practice for using pre-specified research designs in
non-experimental research by Christensen et al. (2019).


                                                         21
                                              References

Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. "Synthetic Control Methods for
   Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California's Tobacco Control Program." Journal of
   the American Statistical Association 105: 493-505.
Allegretto, Sylvia A., Arindrajit Dube, and Michael Reich. 2011. "Do Minimum Wages Really Reduce
    Teen Employment? Accounting for Heterogeneity and Selectivity in State Panel Data." Industrial
    Relations 50: 205-40.
Allegretto, Sylvia A., Arindrajit Dube, Michael Reich, and Ben Zipperer. 2017. "Credible Research
    Designs for Minimum Wage Studies." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 70: 559-92.
Allegretto, Sylvia, Anna Godøy, Carl Nadler, and Michael Reich. 2018. "The New Wave of Local
    Minimum Wage Policies: Evidence from Six Cities." Center on Wage and Employment Dynamics,
    University of California, Berkeley.
Cameron, Colin A., and Douglas L. Miller. 2015. "A Practitioner's Guide to Cluster-Robust Inference."
   Journal of Human Resources 54: 317-72.
Campolieti, Michele, Morley Gunderson, and Chris Riddell. 2006. "Minimum Wage Impacts from a
   Prespecified Research Design: Canada 1981-1997." Industrial Relations 45: 195-216.
Christensen, Garret, Jeremy Freese, and Edward Miguel. 2019. Transparent and Reproducible Social
   Science Research: How to Do Open Science. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael R. Strain. 2019. "Minimum Wage Analysis Using a Pre-Committed
   Research Design: Evidence through 2017." IZA Discussion Paper No. 12388.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael R. Strain. 2018. "The Short-Run Employment Effects of Recent Minimum
   Wage Changes: Evidence from the American Community Survey." Contemporary Economic Policy
   36: 711-22.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael R. Strain. 2017. "Estimating the Employment Effects of Recent Minimum
   Wage Changes: Early Evidence, An Interpretative Framework, and a Pre-Commitment to Future
   Analysis." NBER Working Paper No. 23084.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael Wither. 2019. "The Minimum Wage and the Great Recession: Evidence of
   Effects on the Employment and Income Trajectories of Low-Skilled Workers." Journal of Public
   Economics 170: 53-67.
Cengiz, Doruk, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer. 2019. "The Effect of Minimum Wages
   on Low-Wage Jobs." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134: 1405-54.
Dube, Arindrajit. "Minimum Wages and the Distribution of Family Incomes." American Economic
   Journal: Applied Economics 11: 268-304.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. "Minimum Wage Effects across State
   Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties." Review of Economics and Statistics 92: 945-64.
Godøy, Anna and Michael Reich. 2019. "Minimum Wage Effects in Low-Wage Areas." IRLE Working
   Paper, University of California, Berkeley.
Kaitz, Hyman B. 1970. "Experience of the Past: The National Minimum." In Youth Unemployment and
    Minimum Wages, Bulletin 1657, U.S. Department of Labor, pp. 30-54.
Kaul, Ashok, Stefan Klößner, Gregor Pfeifer, and Manuel Schieler. 2015. "Synthetic Control Methods:
   Never Use All Pre-Intervention Outcomes Together with Covariates." MPRA Paper, University
   Library of Munich, Germany, https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:pra:mprapa:83790.
Neumark, David. 2001. "The Employment Effects of Minimum Wages: Evidence from a Prespecified
   Research Design." Industrial Relations 40: 121-44.
Neumark, David, J.M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014a. "Revisiting the Minimum Wage-
   Employment Debate: Throwing out the Baby with the Bathwater?" Industrial and Labor Relations
   Review 67: 608-48.
Neumark, David, J.M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014b. "More on Recent Evidence on the Effects
   of Minimum Wages in the United States." IZA Journal of Labor Policy 3:24 (on-line).
Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. 2004. "Minimum Wage Effects Throughout the
   Wage Distribution." Journal of Human Resources 39: 425-50.
Neumark, David, and Peter Shirley. 2020. "Myth or Measurement: What Does the New Minimum Wage
   Research Say about Minimum Wages and Job Loss in the United States?" NBER Working Paper No.
   28388.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2017. "Reply to Credible Research Designs for Minimum Wage
   Studies." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 70: 593-609.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1992. "Employment Effects of Minimum and Subminimum
   Wages: Panel Data on State Minimum Wage Laws." ILR Review 46, no. 1 (October 1992): 55-81.
Neumark, David, and Maysen Yen. 2020. "Effects of Recent Minimum Wage Policies in California and
   Nationwide: Initial Results from a Pre-Specified Analysis." IZA Discussion Paper No. 13062.
Rice, Glenn. n.d. "Geocorr 2014: Geographic Correspondence Engine." Missouri Census Data Center.
    http://mcdc.missouri.edu/applications/geocorr2014.html.
Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas, and Matthew
   Sobek. 2019. IPUMS USA: Version 9.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2019.
   https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V9.0.
Thompson, Jeffrey P. 2009. "Using Local Labor Market Data to Re-examine the Employment Effects of
   the Minimum Wage." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 62: 343-66.
Wang, Jing, and Morley Gunderson. 2011. "Minimum Wage Impacts in China: Evidence from a
  Prespecified Research Design, 2000-2007." Contemporary Economic Policy 29: 392-406.
                     Figure 1: The Evolution of Minimum Wages in California


                                   California Minimum Wage




           16




                                                                                               15
                14




                                                                                               Count of Cities with MW
   Minimum Wage




                                                                                                                10
     10    12




                                                                                                   5
           8
           6




                                                                                               0
                     2005   2007    2009    2011    2013         2015      2017
                                                Year

                              # of Cities or Counties with MWs          Prevailing MW
                              State MW


 Note: The figure includes Los Angeles County as a single city. It excludes Cupertino, El
 Cerrito, Emeryville, and Los Altos, because they are too small to appear in the American
 Community Survey 1-year data (summary files) that we use. In the pre-analysis plan, we
 erroneously coded the average minimum wage for California in 2014 as $9 instead of
 $8.50, which has been fixed.

 Figure 2: City Minimum Wages Weighted by Population Aged 16 and Over

                                    California Minimum Wage
         16
         14
  Minimum Wage
    10   8
         612




                 2005       2007     2009        2011       2013           2015         2017
                                                   Year

                                    Prevailing MW                 State MW


Note: This figure plots city minimum wages with plots weighted by the average
population aged 16 and over from 2005 to 2018. In the pre-analysis plan, we erroneously
coded the average minimum wage for California in 2014 as $9 instead of $8.50, which
has been fixed.
                                                                             Figure 3: Synthetic Control Estimates, Los Angeles County

                                     Employment: Teens                                                                Employment: Young adults                                                      Employment: High school dropouts




                                                                                                                                                                                              .66
                                                                                                   .48
           .3




                                                                                                   .46




                                                                                                                                                                                              .64
           .25




                                                                                                                                                                                       emp_hsdrop
                                                                                                    .44
                                                                                             emp_youth
 teenemp




                                                                                                                                                                                          .62
                                                                                             .42
           .2




                                                                                                                                                                                              .6
                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                                   .38
           .15




                                                                                                                                                                                              .58
                 2005                 2010                     2015                   2020                  2005             2010                    2015                   2020                    2005            2010                       2015                   2020
                                                    year                                                                                  year                                                                                    year

                                    treated unit            synthetic control unit                                         treated unit           synthetic control unit                                         treated unit              synthetic control unit




                                Poverty status: Below 50%                                                          Poverty status: Below 100%                                                              Poverty Status: Below 150%




                                                                                                                                                                                         .32
                                                                                                   .2
                 .08




                                                                                                                                                                                         .3
                 .075




                                                                                                   .18
                                                                                             pov_perc_100




                                                                                                                                                                                   pov_perc_150
                                                                                                                                                                                            .28
           pov_perc_50
                   .07




                                                                                                 .16




                                                                                                                                                                                     .26
           .065




                                                                                                   .14




                                                                                                                                                                                         .24
                 .06
                 .055




                                                                                                                                                                                         .22
                                                                                                   .12




                         2005           2010                    2015                  2020                  2005             2010                   2015                   2020                   2005           2010                       2015                    2020
                                                     year                                                                                 year                                                                                  year

                                     treated unit            synthetic control unit                                       treated unit           synthetic control unit                                        treated unit              synthetic control unit



Note: The synthetic control estimation matches on the outcome variables of the pre-treatment period for each pre-treatment year. We lag the
treatment year by one to take into account the lagged minimum wage effect.
                                                                                       Figure 4: Synthetic Control Estimates, Santa Clara
                                    Employment: Teens                                                                      Employment: Young                                                               Employment: High school dropouts




                                                                                                                                                                                           .9
                                                                                                         .55
                   .35




                                                                                                                                                                                           .8
                   .3




                                                                                                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                                     emp_hsdrop
                                                                                                 emp_youth
          teenemp
               .25




                                                                                                                                                                                          .7
                                                                                                   .45
                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                                           .6
                                                                                                         .4
                   .15




                                                                                                                                                                                           .5
                                                                                                         .35
                   .1




                         2005            2010                     2015                  2020                     2005             2010                  2015                  2020                 2005               2010                      2015                    2020
                                                      year                                                                                    year                                                                                  year

                                      treated unit            synthetic control unit                                           treated unit          synthetic control unit                                         treated unit             synthetic control unit




                                Poverty status: Below 50%                                                               Poverty status: Below 100%                                                               Poverty Status: Below 150%
        .08




                                                                                                                                                                                               .2
                                                                                                       .12  .1
             .06




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .15
                                                                                                                                                                                         pov_perc_150
                                                                                               pov_perc_100
   pov_perc_50




                                                                                                   .08
.04




                                                                                                                                                                                       .1
                                                                                                       .06
        .02




                                                                                                       .04




                                                                                                                                                                                               .05
                   2005               2010                      2015                    2020                     2005            2010                   2015                  2020                        2005          2010                       2015                   2020
                                                     year                                                                                     year                                                                                    year
                                    treated unit             synthetic control unit                                            treated unit          synthetic control unit                                          treated unit              synthetic control unit



    Note: See notes to Figure 3.
                                                                                Figure 5: Synthetic Control Estimates vs. Minimum Wage Increases, Cumulative
                                              Employment: Teens                                                                                                             Employment: Young adults                                                                                                 Employment: High school dropouts
                              Teen Employment Estimates by Size of MW Increases                                                                              Youth Employment Estimates by Size of MW Increases                                                                                 HS Dropout Employment Est by Size of MW Increases




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                                                                     .2
                   .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mountain View




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .1
                                                                                                                                            .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mountain View
                        .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Oakland
                                                                                          Mountain View                                                                                                        Richmond                                                                                                                                               Sunnyvale




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Employment Effect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Berkeley




                                                                                                                          Employment Effect
      Employment Effect


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              San Diego
                                                                                                                                                             Milpitas                                                                                                                                              San Jose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              San Leandro
                                                                            Richmond                                                                                                                                                  Sunnyvale   Oakland
                                          Los Angeles County                 Berkeley                          Oakland                                                      Los Angeles County
                                                                                                                                                                                         San Mateo                                                                                                           Los Angeles County




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                           San Leandro San Mateo




                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                  San Jose
                0



                                                San Jose                                           Sunnyvale                                                                 San Diego                                                                                                                                Santa Clara
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Mateo         Richmond
                              Milpitas     San Diego                                                                                                                                 Santa Clara
                                                                                                                                                                             San Leandro           Palo Alto
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Berkeley
                                                  Santa Clara   Palo Alto                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Milpitas




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.1
                                                                                                                             -.1
         -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                                                                                                                     -.2
                   -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.3
                                                                                                                                     -.3
                   -.3




                                     2               4                  6                    8                 10                                                  2                   4                   6                   8                  10                                                  2                 4                  6                   8                  10
                                         Cumulative Minimum Wage Difference (City-State)                                                                                    Cumulative Minimum Wage Difference (City-State)                                                                                  Cumulative Minimum Wage Difference (City-State)

                                              Estimated effect                    Fitted values                                                                                  Estimated effect                    Fitted values                                                                               Estimated effect                   Fitted values



                                            Poverty status: Below 50%                                                                                                   Poverty status: Below 100%                                                                                                          Poverty Status: Below 150%
                              Poverty Status (Below 50%) by Size of MW Increases                                                                             Poverty Status (Below 100%) by Size of MW Increases                                                                                Poverty Status (Below 150%) by Size of MW Increases
              .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                                                             .2
                         .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                                                                                                                        .1
   Poverty Status Effect




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Poverty Status Effect
                                                                                                                                  Poverty Status Effect
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Berkeley                                                                                                                         Berkeley
                                          San     Santa Clara
                                              Leandro                     Berkeley
                                                                         Richmond                               Oakland                                                               Santa Clara
                                                      San MateoPalo Alto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Santa Clara
                0




                                         Los Angeles County                               Mountain View                                                                       San Leandro San MateoPalo Alto Richmond                                                                                          San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Los  Diego
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Angeles County




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                          San Diego
                                               San Jose                                            Sunnyvale                                                                 Los Angeles County                                                                                                  Milpitas




                                                                                                                                               0
                              Milpitas                                                                                                                        Milpitas        San Diego
                                                                                                                                                                                   San Jose                                           Sunnyvale    Oakland                                                          San Jose        Palo Alto Richmond
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mountain View                                                                     San Leandro San Mateo                                  Sunnyvale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mountain View         Oakland
       -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.1
                                                                                                                                      -.1
-.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -.2
                                                                                                                               -.2
              -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.3
                                                                                                                                             -.3




                                    2               4                       6                8                 10                                                       2                4                     6                8                 10                                                   2                 4                  6                   8                 10
                                         Cumulative Minimum Wage Difference (City-State)                                                                                     Cumulative Minimum Wage Difference (City-State)                                                                                  Cumulative Minimum Wage Difference (City-State)

                                              Estimated effect                     Fitted values                                                                                  Estimated effect                    Fitted values                                                                                Estimated effect                   Fitted values



        Note: We plot the average synthetic control estimates across all post-treatment years against the total cumulative nominal minimum wage difference
        (based on one-year lags of the minimum wage) between the city and state minimum wage across all post-treatment years. Slopes of the lines, across
        the three panels in the top row and then the bottom row, are: 0.000 (p-value 0.910), 0.001 (p-value 0.704), 0.012 (p-value 0.006), 0.001 (p-value =
        0.093), -0.001 (p-value = 0.470), and -0.004 (p-value = 0.017).
Figure 6A: Synthetic Control Estimates: Employment Effects vs. Poverty Effects (100% Threshold)
                                                     Employment: Teens                                                                                                                                           Employment: Young adults
                                             Teen Employment & Poverty %                                                                                                                                       Youth Employment & Poverty %




                                                                                                                                                                              .15
              .15




                                                                                                                                                                Change in Youth Employment
 Change in Teen Employment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mountain View




                                                                                                                                                                                       .1
                       .1
                                                            Mountain View
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Richmond




                                                                                                                                                                                 .05
                  .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Milpitas
                                                                         Richmond
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sunnyvale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oakland
                                                                              Angeles
                                                                          LosSan
                                                                     Oakland          County
                                                                                 Leandro
                                                                               San Mateo                                                    Berkeley                                                                                         Los Angeles   County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    San Mateo
                                                             Sunnyvale




             0




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      San Jose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Diego
                                                                 San Jose
                                                               MilpitasSan Diego                                                                                                                                                               Palo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SanAlto Santa Clara
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Leandro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Berkeley



 -.1 -.05




                                                                                                                                                                -.1 -.05
                                                                                                            Palo Alto
                                                                                                                        Santa Clara
              -.15




                                                                                                                                                                              -.15
                             -.05   -.04   -.03      -.02   -.01                                   0              .01      .02        .03       .04    .05                                   -.05    -.04     -.03      -.02     -.01        0       .01       .02     .03       .04    .05

                                                       Change in % Below 100% PL                                                                                                                                            Change in % Below 100% PL

                                                  Estimated effect                                                      Fitted values                                                                                Estimated effect                      Fitted values


                                                                                                                               Employment: High school dropouts

                                                                                                                               HS Dropout Employment & Poverty %
                                                                                                     .15                                               Mountain View
                                                                       Change in HS Dropout Employment
                                                                                                 .1


                                                                                                                                                               Oakland
                                                                                                                                                        Sunnyvale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Berkeley
                                                                                           .05




                                                                                                                                                                  San Diego
                                                                                                                                                              San Jose San Leandro
                                                                                                                                                                                      Los Angeles County
                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                      Richmond Santa Clara
                                                                                                                                                                                           San Mateo
                                                                   -.15 -.1 -.05




                                                                                                                                                          Milpitas




                                                                                                           -.05         -.04     -.03         -.02     -.01            0                       .01      .02          .03       .04        .05
                                                                                                                                                 Change in % Below 100% PL

                                                                                                                                        Estimated effect                                             Fitted values


Note: We plot the synthetic control employment estimates against the synthetic control estimates for those below
100% of the poverty line. The estimates are computed across all post-treatment years. Slopes of the lines across the
top row and the bottom panel are: -0.875 (p-value = 0.373), -2.11 (p-value =0.023), and -0.877 (p-value = 0.560).
        Figure 6B: Synthetic Control Estimates: Employment Effects vs. Poverty Effects (50% Threshold)
                                                        Employment: Teens                                                                                                                                     Employment: Young adults
                                               Teen Employment & Poverty %                                                                                                                                   Youth Employment & Poverty %




                .15




                                                                                                                                                                            .15
   Change in Teen Employment




                                                                                                                                                              Change in Youth Employment
                         .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mountain View




                                                                                                                                                                                     .1
                                                                            Mountain View
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Richmond




                    .05




                                                                                                                                                                               .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Milpitas
                                                                                  Richmond
                                                                        Los Angeles County
                                                                                   Berkeley
                                                                              Oakland                                                                                                                                                 Sunnyvale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Oakland
                                                                     San  Mateo  San  Leandro                                                                                                                                        SanLos Angeles County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mateo
                                                                       Sunnyvale


               0




                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                      San Jose                                                                                                                                                        San Jose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Diego
                                                                      San Diego
                                                                 Milpitas                                                                                                                                                                         Santa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PaloSan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Alto   Clara
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Leandro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Berkeley
   -.1 -.05




                                                                                                                                                              -.1 -.05
                                                                                                               Palo Alto
                                                                                                                    Santa Clara
                -.15




                                                                                                                                                                            -.15
                               -.05   -.04   -.03      -.02   -.01                 0                             .01      .02      .03       .04    .05                                    -.05     -.04   -.03      -.02    -.01      0       .01       .02    .03   .04   .05
                                                          Change in % Below 50% PL                                                                                                                                      Change in % Below 50% PL
                                                    Estimated effect                                                   Fitted values                                                                              Estimated effect                   Fitted values


                                                                                                                            Employment: High school dropouts

                                                                                                         .15                    HS Dropout Employment & Poverty %
                                                                                                                                                             Mountain View
                                                                           Change in HS Dropout Employment
                                                                                                     .1



                                                                                                                                                                   Oakland
                                                                                                                                                            Sunnyvale
                                                                                                                                                                        Berkeley
                                                                                               .05




                                                                                                                                                            San Diego
                                                                                                                                                            San Jose San Leandro
                                                                                                                                                              Los Angeles County
                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                            San Mateo   Santa Clara
                                                                                                                                                                        Richmond
                                                                       -.15 -.1 -.05




                                                                                                                                                      Milpitas




                                                                                                               -.05     -.04      -.03      -.02   -.01        0                            .01      .02     .03       .04     .05
                                                                                                                                               Change in % Below 50% PL

                                                                                                                                         Estimated effect                                         Fitted values


Note: We plot the synthetic control employment estimates against the synthetic control estimates for those below 50% of
the poverty line. The estimates are computed across all post-treatment years. Slopes of the lines across the top row and the
bottom panel are: -0.758 (p-value = 0.664), -1.842 (p-value = 0.301), and 0.625 (p-value = 0.815).
   Figure 6C: Synthetic Control Estimates: Employment Effects vs. Poverty Effects (150% Threshold)
                                                       Employment: Teens                                                                                                                                        Employment: Young adults
                                              Teen Employment & Poverty %                                                                                                                                      Youth Employment & Poverty %




                                                                                                                                                                             .15
               .15




                                                                                                                                                               Change in Youth Employment
  Change in Teen Employment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mountain View




                        .1




                                                                                                                                                                                      .1
                                                       Mountain View
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Richmond




                   .05




                                                                                                                                                                                .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Milpitas
                                                                      Richmond
                                                                              Los Angeles County                                        Berkeley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sunnyvale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oakland
                                                       Oakland
                                                         San Mateo
                                                        San  Leandro                                                                                                                                                      San Mateo            Los Angeles County
                                                         Sunnyvale




              0




                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                              San Jose                                                                                                                                                          San Jose        San Diego
                                                                               San Diego
                                                                         Milpitas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Leandro Palo Alto Santa Clara
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Berkeley

  -.1 -.05




                                                                                                                                                               -.1 -.05
                                                                       Palo Alto
                                                                                                                  Santa Clara
               -.15




                                                                                                                                                                             -.15
                              -.05   -.04   -.03      -.02    -.01               0                               .01      .02     .03        .04     .05                                    -.05     -.04     -.03      -.02    -.01       0         .01       .02    .03       .04   .05
                                                        Change in % Below 150% PL                                                                                                                                         Change in % Below 150% PL

                                                   Estimated effect                                                    Fitted values                                                                                 Estimated effect                      Fitted values


                                                                                                                            Employment: High school dropouts
                                                                                                                                HS Dropout Employment & Poverty %
                                                                                                         .15
                                                                                                                                              Mountain View
                                                                           Change in HS Dropout Employment
                                                                                                     .1

                                                                                                                                             Oakland
                                                                                                                                               Sunnyvale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Berkeley
                                                                                               .05




                                                                                                                                                                                            San Diego
                                                                                                                                                    San Jose
                                                                                                                                               San Leandro
                                                                                                                                                                     Los Angeles County
                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                               San Mateo      Richmond Santa Clara
                                                                       -.15 -.1 -.05




                                                                                                                                                                       Milpitas




                                                                                                               -.05      -.04    -.03       -.02    -.01         0                           .01        .02    .03        .04      .05
                                                                                                                                              Change in % Below 150% PL

                                                                                                                                        Estimated effect                                           Fitted values


Note: We plot the synthetic control employment estimates against the synthetic control estimates for those below 150%
of the poverty line. The estimates are computed across all post-treatment years. Slopes of the lines across the top row and
the bottom panel are: -0.841 (p-value = 0.264), -1.023 (p-value = 0.186), -1.000 (p-value = 0.386).
                                                Table 1: History of CA Minimum Wage Increases (2015-2018)
                                                     2015                             2016                                2017                          2018
                                              Date of                         Date of                              Date of                       Date of
                                             increase/                       increase/                            increase/                     increase/
  City/County                             implementation          MW      implementation           MW        implementation        MW        implementation       MW
  State of California                         No Inc.                9          1/1                  10              1/1            10.5            1/1             11
  Total New City Minimum Wages                   4                               5                                    4                              0
  Total City Minimum Wage Increases              1                               5                                   10                             13
  Berkeley                                                                     10/1                12.53            10/1           13.75           10/1             15
  Los Angeles County                                                            7/1                 10.5             7/1             12             7/1           13.25
  Milpitas                                                                                                           7/1             11             1/1             12
  Mountain View                                                                    1/1               11              1/1             13             1/1             15
  Oakland                                         3/1             12.25            1/1             12.55             1/1           12.86            1/1           13.23
  Palo Alto                                                                        1/1               11              1/1             12             1/1            13.5
  Richmond                                        1/1               9.6            1/1             11.52             1/1            12.3            1/1             13
  San Diego                                       1/1              9.75            1/1              10.5             1/1            11.5
  San Francisco                                   5/1*            12.25            7/1               13              7/1             14             7/1             15
  San Jose                                                                                                           7/1             12             1/1            13.5
  San Leandro                                                                                                        7/1             12             7/1             13
  San Mateo                                                                                                          1/1             12             1/1            13.5
  Santa Clara                                                                      1/1               11              3/1            11.1            1/1             13
  Sunnyvale                                       1/1              10.3            7/1               11              1/1             13             1/1             15
Notes: In the second and third rows, we report the counts, rather than dates. Cupertino, El Cerrito, Emeryville, and Los Altos have city minimum wages in the time frame,
but do not appear in this table because they do not appear in the ACS 1-year summary files. All minimum wages are at the city-level in California, except for Los Angeles
County. Census places in Los Angeles County that show up in the ACS 1-year summary files include Alhambra, Baldwin Park, Bellflower, Burbank, Carson, Compton,
Downey, East Los Angeles CDP, El Monte, Florence-Graham CDP, Glendale, Hawthorne, Inglewood, Lakewood, Lancaster, Long Beach, Los Angeles (city), Lynwood,
Norwalk, Pasadena, Pomona, Redondo Beach, Santa Clarita, Santa Monica, South Gate, Torrance, West Covina, and Whittier. The Census places that appear in the 1-year
ACS Summary files but do not have city or county minimum wages in this timeframe, and serve as controls, include Alameda, Anaheim, Antioch, Apple Valley, Arden-
Arcade CDP, Bakersfield, Buena Park, Camarillo, Carlsbad, Carmichael CDP, Castro Valley CDP, Chico, Chino, Chino Hills, Chula Vista, Citrus Heights, Clovis,
Concord, Corona, Costa Mesa, Daly City, Davis, El Cajon, Elk Grove, Escondido, Fairfield, Folsom, Fontana, Fremont, Fresno, Fullerton, Garden Grove, Hayward,
Hemet, Hesperia, Huntington Beach, Indio, Irvine, Jurupa Valley, Laguna Niguel, Lake Elsinore, Lake Forest, Livermore, Lodi, Madera, Manteca, Menifee, Merced,
Mission Viejo, Modesto, Moreno Valley, Murrieta, Napa, Newport Beach, Oceanside, Ontario, Orange, Oxnard, Pittsburg, Pleasanton, Rancho Cordova, Rancho
Cucamonga, Redding, Redlands, Redwood City, Rialto, Riverside, Roseville, Sacramento, Salinas, San Bernardino, San Buenaventura (Ventura), San Clemente, San
Marcos, San Ramon, Santa Ana, Santa Barbara, Santa Cruz, Santa Maria, Santa Rosa, Simi Valley, South San Francisco, Stockton, Temecula, Thousand Oaks, Tracy,
Turlock, Tustin, Union City, Upland, Vacaville, Vallejo, Victorville, Visalia, Vista, Walnut Creek, Westminster, Yorba Linda, and Yuba City. Among these cities,
Fremont and Redwood City have their first minimum wage increases in 2019 but that is outside our timeframe.
*
  San Francisco had two minimum wage increases in 2015, one on Jan 1st to $11.05.
                                                                Table 2: City/County Minimum Wage Increases Since 2013
                                             2013                2014                     2015                    2016                  2017                2018
   State     City/County               I/I          MW    I/I           MW       I/I             MW        I/I           MW       I/I          MW    I/I           MW                  Notes:
 Total New Minimum Wages               1a                  1                      7                         7                     12                  1
 Total MW Increases                     2                  3                      4                         9                     16                 26
    AZ       Flagstaff                                                                                                           7/1       10.5     1/1         11
    CA       Berkeley                                                                                      10/1          12.53   10/1      13.75    10/1        15
    CA       Los Angeles County                                                                            7/1           10.5    7/1        12      7/1        13.25               26+ Employees
    CA       Milpitas                                                                                                            7/1        11      1/1         12
    CA       Mountain View                                                                                 1/1            11     1/1        13      1/1         15
    CA       Oakland                                                            3/1              12.25     1/1           12.55   1/1       12.86    1/1        13.23
    CA       Palo Alto                                                                                     1/1            11     1/1        12      1/1        13.5
    CA       Richmond                                                            1/1            9.6        1/1           11.52   1/1       12.3     1/1         13
    CA       San Diego                                                           1/1            9.75       1/1           10.5    1/1       11.5
    CA       San Francisco            1/1       10.55     1/1       10.74     1/1 & 5/1    11.05 & 12.25   7/1            13     7/1        14      7/1         15
    CA       San Jose                                                                                                            7/1        12      1/1        13.5
    CA       San Leandro                                                                                                         7/1        12      7/1         14
    CA       San Mateo                                                                                                           1/1        12      1/1        13.5       Non-profits subject to lower MW
    CA       Santa Clara                                                                                   1/1            11     3/1       11.1     1/1         13
    CA       Sunnyvale                                                          1/1              10.3      7/1            11     1/1        13      1/1         15
     IL      Chicago                                                            7/1               10       7/1           10.5    7/1        11      7/1         12
     IL      Cook County b                                                                                                       7/1        10      7/1         11
    MD       Montgomery Countyc                           10/1          8.4     10/1             9.55      7/1           10.75   7/1       11.5     7/1        12.25
    ME       Portland                                                                                      1/1           10.1    1/1       10.68    7/1        10.9
    MN       Minneapolis                                                                                                                            1/1         10                 100+ employees
    NM       Albuquerque              1/1           8.5   1/1           8.6     1/1              8.75                            1/1        8.8     1/1        8.95     $1 lower if health/child care provided
    NM       Las Cruces                                                         1/1               8.4                            1/1        9.2
    NM       Santa Fe                 3/1       10.51     3/1       10.66       3/1              10.84     3/1           10.91   3/1       11.09    3/1        11.80
    NY       New York City                                                                                                       1/1d       11      1/1d        13
    NY       Suffolk Countye                                                                                                     1/1d       10      1/1 d       11
    NY       Westchester Countyf                                                                                                 1/1d       10      1/1d        11
    OR       Portland UGBg                                                                                                       7/1       11.25    7/1         12
    WA       Seattle                                                            4/1               11       1/1            13     1/1        15      1/1        15.45
    WA       Tacoma                                                                                        2/1           10.35   1/1       11.15    1/1         12
Notes: "I/I" denotes date of increase/implementation, except in first two rows, where we report the counts. Cupertino (CA), El Cerrito (CA), Emeryville (CA), Los Altos (CA), Bangor (ME) have city-
level minimum wages but are omitted from the ACS 1-year summary files. Prince George's County (MD) and Nassau County (NY) are omitted because they do not have any Census places that are
large enough to show up in the ACS 1-year summary files. Bernalillo County (NM) has a county-wide minimum wage ordinance that is different from Albuquerque, but Albuquerque is the only
Census place large enough to show up in the ACS 1-year summary files. Santa Fe County (NM) has a county-wide minimum wage ordinance that is different from Santa Fe city, but Santa Fe city is
the only Census place large enough to show up in the ACS 1-year summary files.
a
  Santa Fe and San Francisco had their first minimum wage prior to 2013.
b
  Cook County includes Arlington Heights, Cicero, Elgin, Evanston, Palatine, Schaumburg, and Skokie in the ACS data.
c
  Montgomery County includes Bethesda CDP, Gaithersburg, Germantown CDP, Rockville, and Silver Spring in the ACS data.
d
  In NY, the actual reported minimum wage increase date is on 12/31 in the preceding year. We report the minimum wage increase as 1/1 in the following year, because we treat it as such in the data.
e
  Suffolk county includes Brentwood CDP
f
  Westchester County includes Mount Vernon, New Rochelle, and Yonkers.
g
  Oregon in 2016 established three separate geographical guidelines for determining the minimum wage ­ Portland Urban Growth Boundary (UGB), Standard, and Nonurban counties. Portland Urban
Growth Boundary (UGB) contains most of Washington, Clackamas, and Multnomah counties but does not necessarily include the whole county. Non-urban counties include Baker, Coos, Crook,
Curry, Douglas, Gilliam, Grant, Harney, Jefferson, Klamath, Lake, Malheur, Morrow, Sherman, Umatilla, Union, Wallowa, and Wheeler. These counties have a minimum wage lower than the
standard minimum wage beginning in July 1, 2016. The Portland UGB first has a minimum wage higher than the standard minimum wage on July 1, 2017, which is the variation we study. Among the
Census places appearing in the ACS, we use Portland UGB's minimum wage for Portland, Beaverton, Gresham, and Hillsboro and the standard minimum wage for Bend, Eugene, Medford, and
Salem. (There are some complications here, but this is our best reading of how to treat the corresponding Census places.)
                   Table 3: History of San Francisco and Santa Fe Minimum Wages
                                                    Santa Fe
                                   Date                                   MW
                                 1/1/2004                                   8.5
                                 1/1/2006                                   9.5
                                 1/1/2010                                  9.85
                                 3/1/2012                                 10.30
                                 3/1/2013                                 10.51
                                 3/1/2014                                 10.66
                                 3/1/2015                                 10.84
                                 3/1/2016                                 10.91
                                 3/1/2017                                 11.09
                                 3/1/2018                                 11.80
                                                 San Francisco
                                   Date                                     MW
                                2/23/2004                                     8.5
                                 1/1/2005                                    8.62
                                 1/1/2006                                    8.82
                                 1/1/2007                                    9.14
                                 1/1/2008                                    9.36
                                 1/1/2009                                    9.79
                                 1/1/2011                                    9.92
                                 1/1/2012                                   10.24
                                 1/1/2013                                   10.55
                                 1/1/2014                                   10.74
                                 1/1/2015                                   11.05
                                 5/1/2015                                   12.25
                                 7/1/2016                                     13
                                 7/1/2017                                     14
                                 7/1/2018                                     15
                Notes: Santa Fe increase dates for 2010 and earlier are not well documented.
                These are our best assessments of dates from newspaper articles.



                 Table 4: Timing of Measurement of ACS Outcomes and Other Data
ACS 1-Year Summary Files (Place level)
Employment                                               Contemporaneous
Mean earnings (full-time year-round workers)             Last 12 months
Poverty status                                           Last 12 months
Demographic data (age, sex, race, marital status,        Contemporaneous
citizenship, education)
Public Use Microdata (PUMA level)
Employment                                               Contemporaneous
Wage income                                              Last 12 months
Usual hours worked                                       Last 12 months
Usual weeks worked                                       Last 12 months
Poverty status                                           Last 12 months
Demographic data (age, sex, race, marital status,        Contemporaneous
citizenship, education)
                  Table 5A: Synthetic Control Analyses, Berkeley, 2006-2019
                      Teen          Youth        HSDO          Poor              Poor           Poor
                      empl.         empl.         empl.       (50%)             (100%)         (150%)
                       (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)            (6)
                                      Post-treatment (2017-2019)
Estimate              0.012         -0.037        0.065        0.010             0.031          0.031
p-value               0.789         0.275         0.218        0.272             0.123          0.235
Donor pool              68            68            77           80               80             80
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                0.026          0.053           0.110         0.021          0.016          0.016
Group                12,109         30,598          2,537        104,337        104,337        104,337
population
(2006-2019)
                                                    2017
Estimate              0.098          0.017            0.105          -0.018          0.019           0.033
p-value               0.246          0.768            0.282           0.173          0.494           0.284
                                                    2018
 Estimate              -0.068         -0.073         -0.052           0.004          0.035           0.026
 p-value                0.362          0.304          0.500           0.778          0.198           0.407
                                                    2019
 Estimate               0.004         -0.055          0.142         0.046***         0.040           0.032
 p-value                0.957          0.319          0.128           0.000          0.123           0.259
Notes: The first post-treatment year is one year after the implementation of the minimum wage, because
we lag the minimum wage one year. We match on the pre-treatment outcome variable for each pre-
treatment year. The p-value is calculated from the placebo inference procedure (Abadie, et al., 2010)
where estimates are obtained for each Census place in the donor pool. The group population represents
the average population of the specified group (teens, youths, high school dropouts, or population below
the poverty thresholds). When there is more than one post-treatment year, as in this table, we report the
average effect. Note that for teens and youths three Census places were dropped from the donor pool
when compared to the donor pool in the pre-analysis plan owing to missing data for 2018. (This is two
more than in our initial update, because of missing data in 2019.) This had no effect on the 2017
estimates, but changed the p-values slightly, relative to the results reported in the pre-analysis plan.
Estimates below the highlighted line are based on minimum wage increases after the PAP was registered.
We indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level with *, **, and ***.
              Table 5B: Synthetic Control Analyses, Mountain View, 2006-2019
                     Teen           Youth         HSDO          Poor             Poor           Poor
                     empl.          empl.          empl.       (50%)            (100%)         (150%)
                      (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)
                                       Post-treatment (2017-2019)
Estimate              0.090        0.102***       0.152**      -0.003            -0.014         -0.022
p-value               0.143         0.000          0.026        0.691            0.333           0.346
Donor pool             69             69             77           80               80             80
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                 0.094         0.088          0.074          0.006          0.011           0.014
Group                 2,485         7,047          3,591          76,729         76,729         76,729
population
(2006-2019)
                                                2017
Estimate             0.200**       0.172**      0.162*          -0.004         -0.020        -0.042
p-value               0.029         0.014        0.090          0.741          0.494          0.210
                                                2018
 Estimate               -            -           0.008          0.000          -0.005         0.017
 p-value                -            -           0.859          0.963          0.741          0.519
                                                2019
 Estimate            -0.020       0.032         0.286**         -0.014         -0.018        -0.040
 p-value              0.771       0.629          0.013          0.259          0.432          0.185
Notes: See notes to Table 5A. Mountain View is missing 2013 data, so 2013 is omitted from the pre-
treatment match. Mountain View is also missing 2018 data for teens and youths.



                  Table 5C: Synthetic Control Analyses, Oakland, 2006-2019
                      Teen          Youth       HSDO           Poor               Poor           Poor
                      empl.         empl.        empl.        (50%)              (100%)         (150%)
                       (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)                (5)            (6)
                                     Post-treatment (2016-2019)
Estimate              0.011         0.015        0.094         0.004             -0.004         -0.023
p-value               0.797         0.667        0.128         0.519              0.753          0.296
Donor pool              68           68            77            80                80             80
(number of
Census
places)
RMSPE                0.015           0.012         0.003          0.004          0.004          0.002
Group                17,489         42,517         42,150        398,834        398,834        398,834
population
(2006-2019)
                                                  2016
Estimate             -0.024          0.044         0.130          0.019           0.011         -0.014
p-value              0.609           0.551         0.128          0.173           0.642          0.605
                                                  2017
 Estimate             0.079          0.084         0.142          -0.009         -0.002         -0.015
 p-value              0.304          0.188         0.154          0.420           0.926          0.691
                                                  2018
 Estimate             0.009         -0.027         0.078          0.011          -0.023         -0.042
 p-value              0.913          0.652         0.333          0.432           0.309          0.222
                                                  2019
 Estimate             -0.020        -0.041         0.026          -0.003         -0.001         -0.020
 p-value              0.768          0.449         0.846          0.840           0.926          0.469
Notes: See notes to Table 5A. Note that in the PAP, for the 2016 estimate for Poor (50%), there was a
rounding error, and the estimate should have been 0.019 (not 0.018 as reported in the pre-analysis plan).
                  Table 5D: Synthetic Control Analyses, Palo Alto, 2006-2019
                      Teen          Youth        HSDO          Poor              Poor           Poor
                      empl.         empl.        empl.        (50%)             (100%)         (150%)
                       (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)               (5)            (6)
                                      Post-treatment (2017-2019)
Estimate              -0.059        -0.023          -          0.004             0.003          -0.005
p-value               0.272          0.556          -          0.689             0.933          0.822
Donor pool              80            80            -            89               89              89
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                 0.046          0.047            -          0.007           0.005          0.014
Group                 2,840          6,028            -          66,051         66,051          66,051
population
(2011-2019)
                                                   2017
Estimate              -0.077        -0.088             -          0.015            0.021          0.023
p-value               0.395          0.210             -          0.389            0.456          0.433
                                                   2018
 Estimate             -0.070         -0.008            -          0.003           -0.000         -0.007
 p-value              0.333           0.926            -          0.789            1.000          0.822
                                                   2019
 Estimate             -0.031          0.027            -          -0.007          -0.013         -0.030
 p-value              0.765           0.630            -          0.589            0.567          0.356
Notes: See notes to 5A. We match on the pre-treatment outcome variable for each pre-treatment year,
starting in 2011 when Palo Alto first appears in the data. We omit estimates for high school dropout
employment for Palo Alto, because it is insufficiently reported. Note that for teens and youths three
Census places were dropped from the donor pool when compared to the donor pool in the pre-analysis
plan owing to missing data for 2019. For poverty estimates, one Census place was dropped.



                 Table 5E: Synthetic Control Analyses, Richmond, 2006-2019
                      Teen                       HSDO          Poor              Poor           Poor
                      empl.      Youth empl.     empl.        (50%)             (100%)         (150%)
                       (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)               (5)            (6)
                                     Post-treatment (2016-2019)
Estimate              0.031        0.079**       -0.013        0.010             0.001          -0.004
p-value               0.420         0.043         0.872        0.222             0.938           0.815
Donor pool             68            68            77           80                80              80
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                 0.025          0.029           0.025        0.006          0.009          0.011
Group                 5,243         13,147          13,204       105,437        105,437        105,437
population
(2006-2019)
                                                    2016
Estimate              0.029          0.051           -0.067         -0.001          -0.008     -0.042
p-value               0.551          0.478            0.385          0.889           0.691      0.284
                                                    2017
 Estimate             -0.046          0.041          -0.017          0.011           0.008     -0.006
 p-value               0.507          0.522           0.795          0.395           0.753      0.901
                                                    2018
 Estimate              0.083          0.111          -0.020          0.015          -0.012     -0.042
 p-value               0.275          0.188           0.705          0.358           0.519      0.222
                                                    2019
 Estimate              0.059         0.112**          0.054          0.013           0.015     0.073*
 p-value               0.464          0.029           0.654          0.309           0.494      0.062
Notes: See notes to Tables 5A. Note that the 2016 and 2017 estimates differ from those reported in the
pre-analysis plan, due to errors reported there (which failed to capture our final estimates).
                  Table 5F: Synthetic Control Analyses, San Diego, 2006-2019
                      Teen        Youth        HSDO           Poor      Poor        Poor
                      empl.       empl.         empl.        (50%)     (100%)      (150%)
                       (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)
                                    Post-treatment (2016-2019)
 Estimate             -0.016      -0.005        0.049        -0.004     -0.002      0.005
 p-value              0.638       0.928         0.397         0.519      0.889      0.815
 Donor pool             68          68            77           80         80          80
 (number of
 Census places)
 RMSPE                0.000        0.002       0.000         0.000       0.000       0.000
 Group                74,095      195,138      85,902      1,312,502   1,312,502   1,312,502
 population
 (2006-2019)
                                              2016
 Estimate             -0.009       0.021       0.012         -0.004     -0.006      0.008
 p-value              0.855        0.797       0.885          0.630      0.765      0.827
                                              2017
 Estimate             -0.001      -0.010       0.064         0.004      -0.001      0.009
 p-value              0.971       0.884        0.500         0.704       0.975      0.827
                                              2018
 Estimate             -0.059      -0.042       0.021         -0.013     0.001       0.001
 p-value              0.420       0.522        0.692          0.407     0.914       0.975
                                              2019
 Estimate              0.008       0.013       0.099         -0.004     -0.004      0.002
 p-value               0.855       0.841       0.346          0.741      0.827      0.963
 Notes: See notes to Tables 5A.


                Table 5G: Synthetic Control Analyses, Santa Clara, 2006-2019
                      Teen        Youth        HSDO           Poor      Poor        Poor
                      empl.       empl.        empl.         (50%)     (100%)      (150%)
                       (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)
                                   Post-treatment (2017 - 2019)
 Estimate             -0.070      -0.022       -0.010         0.010     0.013       0.008
 p-value              0.145        0.594       0.846          0.284     0.407       0.654
 Donor pool             68          68           77             80        80          80
 (number of
 Census places)
 RMSPE                0.029        0.020       0.078         0.006      0.009       0.018
 Group                6,830       15,327       4,565        115,934    115,934     115,934
 population
 (2006-2019)
                                              2017
 Estimate             -0.042      -0.062       -0.089        0.011      0.018       -0.018
 p-value              0.536        0.275       0.359         0.358      0.506       0.556
                                              2018
 Estimate             -0.088      -0.030       0.022        0.033**     0.045*      0.078**
 p-value              0.232        0.652       0.808         0.049      0.086        0.049
                                              2019
 Estimate              -0.080      0.026       0.038        -0.015      -0.025      -0.036
 p-value               0.333       0.638       0.705        0.235       0.284       0.235
Notes: See notes to Table 5A.
                 Table 5H: Synthetic Control Analyses, Sunnyvale, 2006-2019
                     Teen           Youth        HSDO          Poor            Poor           Poor
                     empl.          empl.        empl.        (50%)           (100%)         (150%)
                      (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)
                                     Post-treatment (2016-2019)
Estimate             0.001          0.018        0.081        -0.004           -0.013        -0.020
p-value              0.957          0.667        0.218         0.568           0.395         0.321
Donor pool             68             68           77           80               80            80
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                0.009         0.012           0.039        0.006          0.004          0.007
Group                4,887         11,867          6,487       144,561        144,561        144,561
population
(2006-2019)
                                                 2016
Estimate             -0.012         0.060          0.079         0.002         -0.006         0.000
p-value              0.812          0.420          0.333         0.790         0.728          1.000
                                                 2017
Estimate             0.052          0.016          0.021         0.007         -0.000        -0.011
p-value              0.435          0.812          0.782         0.556         0.975         0.815
                                                 2018
Estimate             -0.148*        -0.098         0.097        -0.019         -0.043        -0.054
p-value               0.087         0.144          0.167         0.235         0.111         0.136
                                                 2019
Estimate              0.113         0.092*         0.128        -0.006         -0.002        -0.014
p-value               0.116         0.072          0.282         0.667         0.914         0.593
Notes: See notes to Tables 5A.



                 Table 5I: Synthetic Control Analyses, LA County, 2006-2019
                      Teen          Youth       HSDO           Poor            Poor           Poor
                      empl.         empl.       empl.         (50%)           (100%)         (150%)
                       (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                    Post-treatment (2017 - 2019)
Estimate              0.013         0.008       0.005         -0.002           0.001          0.004
p-value               0.768         0.812       0.923          0.815           0.877          0.790
Donor pool             68            68           77             80             80             80
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                0.002          0.000         0.000          0.000         0.000          0.000
Group               565,319       1,304,623     1,161,306      9,843,498     9,843,498      9,843,498
population
(2006-2019)
                                                  2017
Estimate              0.014         -0.008         -0.012        -0.004          0.005        0.004
p-value               0.855          0.899          0.872         0.790          0.889        0.840
                                                  2018
 Estimate               0.021         0.008        -0.015        -0.006         -0.007        0.000
 p-value                0.855         0.899         0.795         0.630          0.728        0.975
                                                  2019
 Estimate               0.003         0.024         0.042         0.003          0.005        0.009
 p-value                0.986         0.652         0.667         0.864          0.753        0.765
Notes: See notes to Table 5A. We use county-level data for Los Angeles rather than providing separate
estimates for all 29 of Los Angeles' non-censored Census places.
Table 5J: Synthetic Control Analyses, Milpitas, 2006-2019 ­ First Minimum Wage in 2017
                     Teen          Youth       HSDO            Poor             Poor           Poor
                     empl.         empl.        empl.         (50%)            (100%)         (150%)
                      (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)              (5)            (6)
                                    Post-treatment (2018 ­ 2019)
Estimate             -0.021        0.040        -0.071        -0.009            -0.010         -0.001
p-value               0.722        0.431        0.266          0.383            0.605           0.975
Donor pool             71            71           78             80               80             80
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                0.046         0.027          0.041          0.012         0.011           0.005
Group                3,124         7,479          4,313          70,054        70,054         70,054
population
(2007-2019)
                                                  2018
Estimate             -0.123        0.017          -0.093         0.002          0.016          0.025
p-value               0.111        0.750           0.215         0.914          0.432          0.346
                                                  2019
 Estimate             0.087         0.063         -0.049         -0.021         -0.036        -0.026
 p-value              0.250         0.250          0.582         0.148          0.148          0.272
Notes: See notes to Table 5A. Analyses for Census places in Tables 5J-5M were not reported in the pre-
analysis plan because their minimum wages were first implemented in 2017. Due to using a lag of the
minimum wage data, we needed to wait for an additional year of ACS data for this Census place when
the PAP was registered. Note that for teens and youths three Census places was dropped from the donor
pool when compared to the previous release with 2018 data owing to missing data for 2019.



Table 5K: Synthetic Control Analyses, San Leandro, 2006-2019 ­ First Minimum Wage in
                                         2017
                     Teen          Youth        HSDO            Poor            Poor           Poor
                     empl.         empl.         empl.         (50%)           (100%)         (150%)
                      (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
                                     Post-treatment (2018 - 2019)
Estimate             0.008         -0.029        0.030          0.009           0.005          -0.020
p-value              0.913         0.623         0.615          0.395           0.741           0.370
Donor pool            68             68            77             80              80             80
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                0.043         0.010          0.023          0.005         0.017           0.007
Group                3,724         9,221          7,692          87,978        87,978         87,978
population
(2006-2019)
                                                 2018
Estimate             -0.029        -0.033         0.046           -0.006       -0.008          -0.053*
p-value               0.739        0.594          0.590           0.679        0.679            0.086
                                                 2019
 Estimate             0.045       -0.024          0.014           0.023*       0.019            0.013
 p-value              0.536        0.710          0.833           0.099        0.370            0.704
Notes: See notes to Table 5A and 5J. Analyses for cities in Tables 5J-5M were not reported in pre-
analysis plan because their minimum wages were first implemented in 2017.
5L: Synthetic Control Analyses, San Jose, 2006-2019 ­ First Minimum Wage in 2017
                     Teen          Youth        HSDO            Poor            Poor          Poor
                     empl.         empl.         empl.         (50%)           (100%)        (150%)
                      (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)
                                     Post-treatment (2018 - 2019)
Estimate             -0.008        -0.003        0.032         -0.005          -0.008         -0.014
p-value               0.928        0.986         0.628          0.679          0.642           0.531
Donor pool             68            68            77             80             80             80
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                 0.000        0.000          0.000          0.002         0.003          0.002
Group                48,032       114,720         83,914        974,005       974,005        974,005
population
(2006-2019)
                                                 2018
Estimate             -0.010        -0.010         0.013           -0.007       -0.012          -0.005
p-value               0.928        0.870          0.859           0.630        0.593            0.802
                                                 2019
 Estimate            -0.007        0.004          0.050           -0.002       -0.003          -0.023
 p-value              0.913        0.942          0.603           0.901        0.827            0.358
Notes: See notes to Table 5A and 5J. Analyses for cities in Tables 5J-5M were not reported in pre-
analysis plan because their minimum wages were first implemented in 2017.



 5M: Synthetic Control Analyses, San Mateo, 2006-2019 ­ First Minimum Wage in 2017
                     Teen          Youth       HSDO            Poor             Poor          Poor
                     empl.         empl.        empl.         (50%)            (100%)        (150%)
                      (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)              (5)           (6)
                                    Post-treatment (2018 - 2019)
Estimate             0.008         0.005       -0.014         -0.005            0.008         -0.020
p-value              0.942         0.957        0.859          0.654            0.667          0.370
Donor pool            68             68           77             80               80            80
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                0.065         0.055          0.073         0.003          0.010           0.012
Group                3,605         8,842          5,383         98,803         98,803         98,803
population
(2006-2019)
                                                 2018
Estimate             -0.091        -0.003         -0.028          -0.007       0.005           -0.020
p-value               0.203        0.971          0.731           0.593        0.728            0.481
                                                 2019
 Estimate             0.107        0.014          0.001           -0.003       0.010           -0.021
 p-value              0.145        0.841          1.000           0.864        0.617            0.494
Notes: See notes to Table 5A and 5J. Analyses for cities in Tables 5J-5M were not reported in pre-
analysis plan because their minimum wages were first implemented in 2017.
         Table 6A: Employment Estimates, Pooled California Cities, 2005-2019 ­ Teens
Post-Treatment Years              Two         Two          Two           Three         Three            Four
                                   (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)              (6)
Number of treated cities           13           9            4              9            4                4
Jump estimate                    -0.005       0.002      -0.017*         0.005        -0.013*        -0.024**
Regular SEs                     [0.010]     [0.008]      [0.009]        [0.007]       [0.008]         [0.010]
Bootstrap p-values                0.643       0.773       0.340          0.555         0.405           0.392
                                                               ***,                        ***,
Pre-treatment trend               0.001       0.001     0.005            0.001       0.005          0.005***,
Regular SEs                     [0.001]     [0.001]      [0.001]        [0.001]       [0.001]         [0.001]
Bootstrap p-values                0.454       0.609       0.066          0.610         0.066           0.066
Post-treatment trend             -0.000      -0.006       -0.009         -0.009      -0.019**          -0.003
Regular SEs                     [0.009]     [0.008]      [0.013]        [0.006]       [0.008]         [0.004]
Bootstrap p-values                0.987       0.428       0.607          0.273         0.415           0.419
Unemployment (25-64)              0.002       0.021       0.051          0.006         0.042           0.038
                                [0.114]     [0.113]      [0.116]        [0.112]       [0.115]         [0.114]
Relative group size               0.165       0.124       0.152          0.122         0.158           0.165
                                [0.151]     [0.150]      [0.158]        [0.150]       [0.158]         [0.158]
N                                 1450        1398         1340           1407         1344             1348
Notes: The table follows the specifications of Allegretto et al. (2018) in estimating an immediate "jump"
effect and a "post-trend," with a few modifications. Consistent with lagging the minimum wage one year, we
treat the year following the first city-minimum wage implementation as the first post-treatment year. We omit
Census places in Los Angeles County and instead include Los Angeles County-level data. Regression
includes place and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by place. The bootstrapped p-values are
based on the Wild bootstrap as in Allegretto et al. We denote significance based on the usual clustered
standard errors with the symbol *, and significance based on the bootstrap with the symbol . We indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level with one, two, or three symbols. Regressions are
weighted by the population of the group (teens, youths, or high school dropouts in Tables 6A, 6B, and 6C,
respectively, and the population for which poverty status is defined in Tables 7A-7C). In column (4), we only
include cities that first implemented minimum wages in 2016 (when t = 0 in 2017). In column (6), we only
include cities that first implemented minimum wages in 2015, which also allows for a post-trend for all
treated cities ­ now for an additional year. Columns (2) and (3) run the same specification as column (1) but
only including the treatment cities in column (4) and (6) respectively. Column (5) runs the same specification
as column (4) but only including the treatment cities in column (6). Note that Table 6 from the PAP is broken
into Tables 6A-6C, because we have an additional post-treatment observation and hence more columns to
report. The registered code inadvertently omitted the clustering, which has been added to this table.
         Table 6B: Employment Estimates, Pooled California Cities, 2005-2019 ­ Youths
 Post-Treatment Years             Two       Two           Two         Three         Three           Four
                                   (1)       (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)
 Number of treated cities          13         9             4            9             4              4
 Jump estimate                   -0.003     0.000       -0.017*       0.007         -0.006         -0.014
 Regular SEs                    [0.009]   [0.008]       [0.009]      [0.007]       [0.009]        [0.010]
 Bootstrap p-values               0.725     0.964        0.572        0.391          0.682         0.610
 Pre-treatment trend              0.001     0.001      0.006***,      0.001       0.006***,      0.006***,
 Regular SEs                    [0.001]   [0.001]       [0.002]      [0.001]       [0.002]        [0.002]
 Bootstrap p-values               0.342     0.379        0.022        0.396          0.022         0.023
 Post-treatment trend             0.005     0.004        0.013*       -0.005      -0.018***,       -0.006
 Regular SEs                    [0.005]   [0.006]       [0.007]      [0.006]       [0.004]        [0.004]
 Bootstrap p-values               0.333     0.527        0.268        0.520          0.098         0.293
 Unemployment (25-64)            -0.127    -0.128        -0.107       -0.140        -0.111         -0.118
                                [0.110]   [0.111]       [0.109]      [0.111]       [0.109]        [0.109]
 Relative group size              0.108     0.096        0.119        0.101          0.121         0.131
                                [0.096]   [0.097]       [0.102]      [0.095]       [0.103]        [0.102]
 N                                1450      1398          1340         1407          1344           1348
Notes: See notes to Table 6A.



      Table 6C: Employment Estimates, Pooled California Cities, 2005-2019 ­ High School
                                   Dropouts (HSDO)
 Post-Treatment Years            Two          Two           Two         Three          Three       Four
                                  (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)        (6)
 Number of treated cities         13            9             4            9              4          4
 Jump estimate                  -0.011       -0.014        0.003        -0.018         0.009       0.012
 Regular SEs                   [0.010]      [0.010]       [0.013]      [0.011]        [0.013]     [0.015]
 Bootstrap p-values              0.348        0.284        0.848        0.321          0.487       0.422
 Pre-treatment trend             0.001        0.001        0.001        0.001          0.001       0.001
 Regular SEs                   [0.001]      [0.001]       [0.002]      [0.001]        [0.002]     [0.002]
 Bootstrap p-values              0.302        0.328        0.493        0.316          0.495       0.497
 Post-treatment trend            0.010        0.011        0.030*     0.016***,        0.011*      0.006
 Regular SEs                   [0.008]      [0.009]       [0.017]      [0.004]        [0.006]     [0.009]
 Bootstrap p-values              0.294        0.344        0.384        0.048          0.241       0.589
 Unemployment (25-64)         -0.615***    -0.614***     -0.606***    -0.614***      -0.606***   -0.600***
                               [0.100]      [0.102]       [0.104]      [0.102]        [0.104]     [0.104]
 Relative group size             0.101        0.105        0.087        0.105          0.084       0.094
                               [0.082]      [0.083]       [0.088]      [0.082]        [0.087]     [0.086]
 N                               1450         1448          1391         1457           1395       1399
 Notes: See notes to Table 6A.
           Table 7A: Poverty Estimates, Pooled California Cities ­ Below 50% of Poverty Line
 Post-Treatment Years           Two            Two            Two            Three           Three           Four
                                 (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)
 Number of treated               13              9              4              9               4               4
 places
 Jump estimate                  -0.000          0.000          0.002            -0.001         0.003          0.003
 Regular SEs                   [0.003]         [0.004]        [0.004]          [0.003]        [0.003]        [0.002]
 Bootstrap p-values             0.892           0.960          0.658            0.861          0.292          0.221
 Pre-treatment trend         -0.001***,     -0.001***,      -0.002***,       -0.001***,     -0.002***,     -0.002***,
 Regular SEs                   [0.000]         [0.000]        [0.000]          [0.000]        [0.000]        [0.000]
 Bootstrap p-values             0.000           0.008          0.023            0.010          0.023          0.023
 Post-treatment trend           0.001           -0.000         0.002            0.002          0.000          0.000
 Regular SEs                   [0.003]         [0.004]        [0.008]          [0.001]        [0.002]        [0.001]
 Bootstrap p-values             0.797           0.970          0.646            0.377          0.852          0.905
 Unemployment (25-64)          0.164***       0.161***        0.148***        0.161***       0.148***       0.147***
                               [0.040]         [0.041]        [0.042]          [0.041]        [0.042]        [0.042]
 N                               1510            1458          1398              1467          1402           1406
Notes: See notes to Table 6A. Note that Table 7 from the pre-analysis plan is broken into Tables 7A-7C, because we
have an additional post-treatment observation and hence more columns to report.

          Table 7B: Poverty Estimates, Pooled California Cities ­ Below 100% of Poverty Line
 Post-Treatment Years           Two            Two            Two            Three           Three           Four
                                 (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)
 Number of treated               13              9              4              9               4               4
 places
 Jump estimate                 -0.001          -0.002         -0.001         -0.003          -0.001          -0.001
 Regular SEs                  [0.006]         [0.006]        [0.006]        [0.005]         [0.005]         [0.004]
 Bootstrap p-values            0.868           0.819          0.857          0.621           0.937           0.692
 Pre-treatment trend        -0.001***,      -0.001***,     -0.002***,     -0.001***,      -0.002***,      -0.002***,
 Regular SEs                  [0.000]         [0.000]        [0.000]        [0.000]         [0.000]         [0.000]
 Bootstrap p-values            0.000           0.002          0.027          0.003           0.027           0.026
 Post-treatment trend          -0.001          -0.001         0.002          0.002           -0.001          0.000
 Regular SEs                  [0.005]         [0.005]        [0.009]        [0.003]         [0.006]         [0.002]
 Bootstrap p-values            0.873           0.851          0.812          0.558           0.848           0.824
 Unemployment (25-64)         0.356***        0.356***      0.331***        0.358***       0.334***        0.333***
                              [0.056]         [0.057]        [0.057]        [0.057]         [0.057]         [0.057]
 N                              1511            1459           1399           1468            1403            1407
Notes: See notes to Tables 6A and 7A.

          Table 7C: Poverty Estimates, Pooled California Cities ­ Below 150% of Poverty Line
Post-Treatment Years           Two            Two            Two            Three           Three            Four
                                (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)              (6)
Number of treated               13              9              4              9               4                4
places
Jump estimate                  -0.005         -0.004         0.003          -0.004           0.002           -0.001
Regular SEs                   [0.004]        [0.005]        [0.004]        [0.005]         [0.004]          [0.005]
Bootstrap p-values             0.383          0.439          0.515          0.532            0.656            0.857
Pre-treatment trend         -0.002***,     -0.002***,      -0.003***,    -0.002***,       -0.003***,      -0.003***,
Regular SEs                   [0.000]        [0.000]        [0.001]        [0.000]         [0.001]          [0.000]
Bootstrap p-values             0.000          0.000          0.079          0.000            0.080            0.077
Post-treatment trend           0.002          0.000          -0.009         0.001           -0.006           -0.002
Regular SEs                   [0.003]        [0.003]        [0.007]        [0.003]         [0.006]          [0.003]
Bootstrap p-values             0.589          0.917          0.269          0.892            0.339            0.536
Unemployment (25-64)          0.390***       0.392***       0.373***       0.396***        0.378***        0.376***
                              [0.064]        [0.066]        [0.068]        [0.066]         [0.067]          [0.068]
N                               1510           1458           1398           1467            1402             1406
Notes: See notes to Tables 6A and 7A.
       Table 8: Employment Effects, Pooled California Cities, 2005-2019
                          Teens              Youths               HSDO
                           (1)                  (2)                  (3)
  MW/average wage        -0.085              -0.012                -0.052
                         [0.075]             [0.080]              [0.073]
  MW elasticity          -0.120              -0.008                -0.028
  N                       1259                1259                  1275
  R2                      0.649               0.724                 0.757
  Notes: Control variables include unemployment rate of 25-64, relative cohort size of the
  group (teen (16-19), youths (16-24), and high school dropouts (25-64)), shares U.S. citizens,
  nonwhite, black, high school graduates, some college graduate, BA or higher, and male. The
  shares are typically shares of the whole population except for education, which uses 18-to-24
  for teen and youth employment regressions and is omitted in the high school dropout
  regression. We omit Census places in Los Angeles County and instead include Los Angeles
  County-level data. Regressions includes place and year fixed effects. Standard errors are
  clustered by place. Regressions are weighted by the population of the group (teens, youths, or
  high school dropouts). The average wage is defined as the average earnings of full-time year-
  round workers aged 16 and over, divided by 2087, which is the assumed hours worked. Our
  MW/average wage measure is a one-year lag of the minimum wage divided by a two-year lag
  of the average wage. The elasticity is determined by taking the estimate multiplied by the
  ratio of the average of the MW/average wage to the average employment rate of the group. In
  the pre-analysis plan, we erroneously coded the average minimum wage for California in
  2014 as $9 instead of $8.50 which has been fixed.




   Table 9: Effects on Poverty Thresholds, Pooled California Cities, 2005-2019
                        Below 50% of       Below 100% of         Below 150% of
                         poverty line       poverty line           poverty line
                                                     ***
MW/average wage            -0.034             -0.111                 -0.102**
                           [0.021]             [0.032]               [0.041]
MW elasticity              -0.168              -0.236                 -0.129
N                           1280                1280                   1280
 2
R                           0.840               0.917                  0.949
Notes: See notes to Table 8. The education controls here use the shares high school graduate, some
college graduate, and BA or higher for ages 18 and over. We indicate statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level with *, **, and ***.
                                      Table 10: Employment Effects of City and State Minimum Wages, 2005-2019
                                  State minimum wages              City minimum wages                                                State and city minimum wages
                            Teens         Youths    HSDO      Teens      Youths     HSDO                                            Teens       Youths      HSDO
                              (1)           (2)       (3)      (4)          (5)       (6)                                            (7)           (8)         (9)
State MW/average wage       -0.026        0.058*    -0.043                                          State MW/average wage          -0.024       0.067**      -0.042
                           [0.041]        [0.030]   [0.040]                                                                        [0.040]      [0.032]     [0.039]
State MW elasticity         -0.029         0.042    -0.023                                            State MW elasticity          -0.028        0.042       -0.022
City MW/average wage                                           -0.039   0.058*       -0.043    (City MW-state MW)/average wage     -0.132*       0.002       -0.046
                                                              [0.039]   [0.030]     [0.034]                                        [0.071]      [0.050]     [0.100]
City MW elasticity                                             -0.045    0.037       -0.023           City MW elasticity           -0.150        0.001       -0.025
N                           6312        6312        6434        6312     6312         6434                                          6312         6312         6434
R2                          0.756       0.818       0.811      0.756     0.818       0.811                                          0.756        0.818        0.811
Notes: See notes to Table 8. The construction of the variables is the same, except we use all Census places nationally and use state, county, and city minimum wages
(applying state or county minimum wages to any city for which these are the binding minimum wages). The first three columns report regressions of employment on the
state minimum wage over the average state wage. The next three columns use the city minimum wage, or state minimum wage if no city minimum wage exists, over the
average city wage. The last three columns use the state and city minimum wages, over the average city wage, with the city minimum wage as defined for the middle
three columns. In the pre-analysis plan, we erroneously coded the average minimum wage for California in 2014 as $9 instead of $8.50 and for Maryland in 2006 as
$5.05 instead of $6.07, which has been fixed in this iteration. Note that we made one change relative to the pre-analysis plan, substituting (City MW-state
MW)/average wage for City MW/average wage in the last three columns. This has no effect on the model fit or the city MW estimates, but implies that one can read the
effect of state minimum wage variation off of the State MW/average wage coefficient alone, rather than having to subtract off the city minimum wage effect (which
would be redundant since the city MW is defined as the maximum of the two). (In other words, this has no impact on the estimated effects of either city or state
minimum wage; it just makes it easier to read these directly from the table.) The state minimum wage elasticity is calculated using only the State MW/average wage
variable; this is the correct elasticity for any city in which the state minimum wage binds, which is almost all observations. The city minimum wage elasticity is
calculated using the average city minimum wage over the average wage, not the variable based on the average difference between the city and state minimum wage; the
coefficient of the (City MW-state MW)/average wage variable is the partial effect on employment of the city minimum wage divided by the average wage, because we
control for the state minimum wage. We indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level with *, **, and ***.
                                              Table 11: Poverty Effects of City and State Minimum Wages
                                State minimum wages               City minimum wages                                            State and city minimum wages
                         Below          Below     Below     Below        Below     Below                                      Below        Below        Below
                         50% of        100% of   150% of    50% of      100% of   150% of                                     50% of      100% of      150% of
                            PL            PL        PL        PL           PL        PL                                         PL            PL          PL
                            (1)           (2)       (3)       (4)          (5)       (6)                                        (7)           (8)         (9)
 State MW/average wage    -0.006        -0.012    -0.023                                         State MW/average wage        -0.006        -0.011      -0.021
                         [0.012]        [0.018]   [0.023]                                                                     [0.012]      [0.018]     [0.022]
 State MW elasticity      -0.021        -0.020    -0.025                                           State MW elasticity        -0.021        -0.019      -0.023
 City MW/average wage                                       -0.004      -0.016    -0.037*   (City MW-state MW)/average wage    0.005        -0.039    -0.114***
                                                            [0.010]    [0.015]    [0.021]                                     [0.028]      [0.032]     [0.039]
 City MW elasticity                                         -0.015      -0.027    -0.041           City MW elasticity          0.018        -0.068      -0.126
 N                        6449        6451        6449       6449        6451      6449                                        6449          6451        6449
 R2                       0.884       0.936       0.951      0.884      0.936      0.951                                       0.884        0.936       0.951
Note: See notes to Table 10. "PL" denotes "poverty line." The sample size difference for 100% of PL is because some city observations do not have
information about 50%/150% of PL.
            Online Appendix A: Estimates Isolating Post-Registration Variation

           Alternative Table 5A: Synthetic Control Analyses, Berkeley, 2006-2019
                     Teen         Youth        HSDO          Poor        Poor       Poor
                     empl.        empl.         empl.       (50%)       (100%)     (150%)
                      (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)
                                    Post-treatment (2017-2019)
Estimate             0.012        -0.037        0.065        0.010       0.031      0.031
p-value              0.789        0.275         0.218        0.272       0.123      0.235
Donor pool             68           68            77           80         80         80
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                0.026        0.053          0.110        0.021      0.016      0.016
Group                12,109       30,598         2,537       104,337    104,337    104,337
population
(2006-2019)
                                Post-Registration Years (2018-2019)
Estimate             -0.032       -0.064         0.045       0.025**    0.038*      0.029
p-value              0.565         0.188         0.423         0.049    0.086       0.259
                                                2017
Estimate             0.098         0.017         0.105        -0.018     0.019      0.033
p-value              0.246         0.768         0.282         0.173     0.494      0.284
                                                2018
Estimate             -0.068       -0.073         -0.052        0.004     0.035      0.026
p-value              0.362         0.304         0.500         0.778     0.198      0.407
                                                2019
Estimate              0.004       -0.055         0.142       0.046***    0.040      0.032
p-value               0.957        0.319         0.128         0.000     0.123      0.259
Notes: See notes to Table 5A.


       Alternative Table 5B: Synthetic Control Analyses, Mountain View, 2006-2019
                     Teen         Youth         HSDO          Poor       Poor       Poor
                     empl.        empl.          empl.       (50%)      (100%)     (150%)
                      (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)       (5)        (6)
                                     Post-treatment (2017-2019)
Estimate             0.090       0.102***       0.152**      -0.003     -0.014     -0.022
p-value              0.143        0.000          0.026        0.691     0.333       0.346
Donor pool            69            69             77           80        80         80
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                0.094        0.088         0.074        0.006      0.011       0.014
Group                2,485        7,047         3,591        76,729     76,729     76,729
population
(2006-2019)
                                Post-Registration Years (2018-2019)
Estimate            -0.020        0.032         0.147**      -0.007     -0.011     -0.012
p-value              0.771        0.629          0.013        0.531     0.444       0.531
                                                2017
Estimate            0.200**      0.172**        0.162*       -0.004     -0.020     -0.042
p-value              0.029        0.014          0.090        0.741     0.494       0.210
                                                2018
Estimate               -             -           0.008        0.000     -0.005      0.017
p-value                -             -           0.859        0.963     0.741       0.519
                                                2019
Estimate             -0.020       0.032         0.286**      -0.014     -0.018     -0.040
p-value               0.771       0.629          0.013        0.259     0.432       0.185
Notes: See notes to Table 5B.
           Alternative Table 5C: Synthetic Control Analyses, Oakland, 2006-2019
                     Teen         Youth       HSDO           Poor       Poor         Poor
                     empl.        empl.        empl.        (50%)      (100%)       (150%)
                      (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)          (6)
                                   Post-treatment (2016-2019)
Estimate             0.011        0.015        0.094         0.004      -0.004      -0.023
p-value              0.797        0.667        0.128         0.519       0.753       0.296
Donor pool             68          68            77            80         80          80
(number of
Census
places)
RMSPE                0.015         0.012        0.003         0.004     0.004        0.002
Group                17,489       42,517        42,150       398,834   398,834      398,834
population
(2006-2019)
                                Post-Registration Years (2018-2019)
Estimate             -0.005       -0.034         0.052        0.004     -0.012      -0.031
p-value              0.942         0.464         0.474        0.667      0.469       0.235
                                                2016
Estimate             -0.024        0.044         0.130        0.019     0.011       -0.014
p-value              0.609         0.551         0.128        0.173     0.642        0.605
                                                2017
Estimate             0.079         0.084         0.142        -0.009    -0.002      -0.015
p-value              0.304         0.188         0.154        0.420      0.926       0.691
                                                2018
Estimate             0.009        -0.027         0.078        0.011     -0.023      -0.042
p-value              0.913         0.652         0.333        0.432      0.309       0.222
                                                2019
Estimate             -0.020       -0.041         0.026        -0.003    -0.001      -0.020
p-value               0.768        0.449         0.846        0.840      0.926       0.469
Notes: See notes to Table 5C.

           Alternative Table 5D: Synthetic Control Analyses, Palo Alto, 2006-2019
                     Teen         Youth        HSDO          Poor       Poor         Poor
                     empl.        empl.        empl.        (50%)      (100%)       (150%)
                      (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)
                                    Post-treatment (2017-2019)
Estimate             -0.059       -0.023          -          0.004     0.003        -0.005
p-value              0.272         0.556          -          0.689     0.933        0.822
Donor pool             80           80            -            89       89            89
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                 0.046        0.047          -          0.007      0.005       0.014
Group                 2,840        6,028          -          66,051    66,051       66,051
population
(2011-2019)
                                Post-Registration Years (2018-2019)
Estimate             -0.051        0.009           -         -0.002    -0.007       -0.018
p-value              0.407         0.815           -         0.822      0.756       0.511
                                                2017
Estimate             -0.077       -0.088           -         0.015     0.021        0.023
p-value              0.395         0.210           -         0.389     0.456        0.433
                                                2018
Estimate             -0.070       -0.008           -         0.003     -0.000       -0.007
p-value              0.333         0.926           -         0.789      1.000       0.822
                                                2019
Estimate              -0.031       0.027           -         -0.007    -0.013       -0.030
p-value               0.765        0.630           -         0.589      0.567       0.356
Notes: See notes to 5D.
           Alternative Table 5E: Synthetic Control Analyses, Richmond, 2006-2019
                     Teen                        HSDO          Poor      Poor      Poor
                     empl.       Youth empl.     empl.        (50%)     (100%)    (150%)
                      (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)       (5)       (6)
                                     Post-treatment (2016-2019)
Estimate             0.031         0.079**       -0.013        0.010     0.001     -0.004
p-value              0.420          0.043         0.872        0.222     0.938      0.815
Donor pool            68             68            77           80        80         80
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                0.025          0.029         0.025        0.006     0.009     0.011
Group                5,243         13,147        13,204       105,437   105,437   105,437
population
(2006-2019)
                                 Post-Registration Years (2018-2019)
Estimate             0.071         0.111**         0.017        0.014    0.002     0.015
p-value              0.174          0.029          0.808        0.173    0.938     0.519
                                                 2016
Estimate             0.029          0.051         -0.067       -0.001   -0.008     -0.042
p-value              0.551          0.478          0.385        0.889    0.691      0.284
                                                 2017
Estimate             -0.046         0.041         -0.017        0.011    0.008     -0.006
p-value               0.507         0.522          0.795        0.395    0.753      0.901
                                                 2018
Estimate             0.083          0.111         -0.020        0.015   -0.012     -0.042
p-value              0.275          0.188          0.705        0.358    0.519      0.222
                                                 2019
Estimate              0.059        0.112**         0.054        0.013    0.015     0.073*
p-value               0.464         0.029          0.654        0.309    0.494     0.062
Notes: See notes to Tables 5E.
            Alternative Table 5F: Synthetic Control Analyses, San Diego, 2006-2019
                      Teen          Youth        HSDO           Poor       Poor        Poor
                      empl.         empl.         empl.        (50%)      (100%)      (150%)
                       (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)
                                      Post-treatment (2016-2019)
 Estimate             -0.016        -0.005        0.049        -0.004      -0.002      0.005
 p-value              0.638         0.928         0.397         0.519       0.889      0.815
 Donor pool             68            68            77           80          80          80
 (number of
 Census places)
 RMSPE                0.000          0.002        0.000         0.000       0.000       0.000
 Group                74,095        195,138       85,902      1,312,502   1,312,502   1,312,502
 population
 (2006-2019)
                                  Post-Registration Years (2018-2019)
 Estimate             -0.026         -0.015        0.060        -0.009     -0.001      0.002
 p-value              0.609          0.812         0.410         0.395      0.938      0.951
                                                  2016
 Estimate             -0.009         0.021         0.012        -0.004     -0.006      0.008
 p-value              0.855          0.797         0.885         0.630      0.765      0.827
                                                  2017
 Estimate             -0.001         -0.010        0.064         0.004     -0.001      0.009
 p-value              0.971          0.884         0.500         0.704      0.975      0.827
                                                  2018
 Estimate             -0.059         -0.042        0.021        -0.013     0.001       0.001
 p-value              0.420          0.522         0.692         0.407     0.914       0.975
                                                  2019
 Estimate              0.008         0.013         0.099        -0.004     -0.004      0.002
 p-value               0.855         0.841         0.346         0.741      0.827      0.963
 Notes: See notes to Tables 5F.

          Alternative Table 5G: Synthetic Control Analyses, Santa Clara, 2006-2019
                       Teen         Youth        HSDO           Poor       Poor        Poor
                       empl.        empl.        empl.         (50%)      (100%)      (150%)
                        (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)
                                     Post-treatment (2017 - 2019)
 Estimate             -0.070        -0.022       -0.010         0.010      0.013       0.008
 p-value              0.145          0.594       0.846          0.284      0.407       0.654
 Donor pool             68            68           77             80         80          80
 (number of
 Census places)
 RMSPE                 0.029         0.020        0.078        0.006       0.009       0.018
 Group                 6,830        15,327        4,565       115,934     115,934     115,934
 population
 (2006-2019)
                                  Post-Registration Years (2018-2019)
 Estimate             -0.084         -0.002        0.030        0.009      0.010       0.021
 p-value
                                                 2017
 Estimate             -0.042         -0.062       -0.089        0.011      0.018       -0.018
 p-value              0.536           0.275       0.359         0.358      0.506       0.556
                                                 2018
 Estimate             -0.088         -0.030       0.022        0.033**     0.045*      0.078**
 p-value              0.232           0.652       0.808         0.049      0.086        0.049
                                                 2019
 Estimate              -0.080        0.026        0.038        -0.015      -0.025      -0.036
 p-value               0.333         0.638        0.705        0.235       0.284       0.235
Notes: See notes to Table 5G.
           Alternative Table 5H: Synthetic Control Analyses, Sunnyvale, 2006-2019
                      Teen         Youth        HSDO          Poor        Poor        Poor
                      empl.        empl.        empl.        (50%)       (100%)      (150%)
                       (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)
                                    Post-treatment (2016-2019)
Estimate              0.001        0.018        0.081        -0.004       -0.013      -0.020
p-value               0.957        0.667        0.218         0.568       0.395       0.321
Donor pool              68           68           77           80           80          80
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                 0.009        0.012          0.039        0.006      0.004       0.007
Group                 4,887        11,867         6,487       144,561    144,561     144,561
population
(2006-2019)
                                 Post-Registration Years (2018-2019)
Estimate              -0.017        -0.003         0.112       -0.012     -0.023      -0.034
p-value               0.696         0.957          0.115        0.272     0.247       0.210
                                                 2016
Estimate              -0.012        0.060          0.079        0.002     -0.006       0.000
p-value               0.812         0.420          0.333        0.790     0.728        1.000
                                                 2017
Estimate              0.052         0.016          0.021        0.007     -0.000      -0.011
p-value               0.435         0.812          0.782        0.556     0.975       0.815
                                                 2018
Estimate             -0.148*        -0.098         0.097       -0.019     -0.043      -0.054
p-value               0.087         0.144          0.167        0.235     0.111       0.136
                                                 2019
Estimate              0.113         0.092*         0.128       -0.006     -0.002      -0.014
p-value               0.116         0.072          0.282        0.667     0.914       0.593
Notes: See notes to Tables 5H.

           Alternative Table 5I: Synthetic Control Analyses, LA County, 2006-2019
                      Teen          Youth       HSDO           Poor       Poor        Poor
                      empl.         empl.       empl.         (50%)      (100%)      (150%)
                       (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)       (5)         (6)
                                    Post-treatment (2017 - 2019)
Estimate              0.013         0.008       0.005         -0.002      0.001       0.004
p-value               0.768         0.812       0.923          0.815      0.877       0.790
Donor pool             68            68           77             80        80          80
(number of
Census places)
RMSPE                 0.002         0.000         0.000        0.000       0.000       0.000
Group                565,319      1,304,623     1,161,306    9,843,498   9,843,498   9,843,498
population
(2006-2019)
                                 Post-Registration Years (2018-2019)
Estimate              0.012          0.016         0.014       -0.001     -0.001      0.005
p-value               0.783          0.841         0.821        0.889      0.988      0.864
                                                 2017
Estimate              0.014         -0.008        -0.012       -0.004     0.005       0.004
p-value               0.855          0.899         0.872        0.790     0.889       0.840
                                                 2018
Estimate              0.021          0.008        -0.015       -0.006     -0.007      0.000
p-value               0.855          0.899         0.795        0.630      0.728      0.975
                                                 2019
Estimate              0.003          0.024         0.042        0.003     0.005       0.009
p-value               0.986          0.652         0.667        0.864     0.753       0.765
Notes: See notes to Table 5I.
   Alternative Table 6A: Employment Estimates, Pooled California Cities,
         2005-2019 ­ Teens (Isolating Post-Registration Variation)
 Post-Treatment Years                                    Two        Three          Four
                                                          (1)         (4)           (6)
  Number of treated cities                                13           9             4
  Number of treated cities (post-reg)                      9           9             4
  Jump estimate × Pre-Registration                      -0.002      0.003        -0.017**
  Regular SEs                                          [0.010]     [0.008]       [0.008]
  Bootstrap p-values                                     0.788      0.711          0.328
  Jump estimate × Post-Registration                     -0.039      0.009        -0.126**
  Regular SEs                                          [0.027]     [0.015]       [0.054]
  Bootstrap p-values                                     0.250      0.607          0.452
  Pre-treatment trend                                    0.001      0.001       0.005***,
  Regular SEs                                          [0.001]     [0.001]       [0.001]
  Bootstrap p-values                                     0.448      0.608          0.066
  Post-treatment trend × Pre-Registration               -0.005      -0.005        -0.009
  Regular SEs                                          [0.015]     [0.014]       [0.013]
  Bootstrap p-values                                     0.830      0.814          0.608
  Post-treatment trend × Post-Registration               0.033      -0.011        0.036*
  Regular SEs                                          [0.024]     [0.011]       [0.019]
  Bootstrap p-values                                     0.251      0.432          0.532
  Unemployment (25-64)                                   0.001      0.006          0.038
                                                       [0.115]     [0.113]       [0.115]
  Relative group size                                    0.166      0.124          0.158
                                                       [0.151]     [0.149]       [0.158]
  N                                                      1450        1407          1348
Notes: See notes to Table 6A. "Pre-Registration" and "Post-Registration" refer to the data
from periods before or after the PAP was registered; the post-registration data are for
2018 and 2019. Columns (2), (3), and (5) from Table 6A are dropped because with the
distinction between pre- and post-registration years, they no longer provide as sensible a
comparison to estimates for the same treatment cities as later columns for the more
limited set of treatment cities (e.g., in Table 6A, column (2) for the 9 treatment cities in
column (4)), because when we distinguish pre- and post-registration years we can end up
with different numbers of pre- and post-registration years even when the number of post-
treatment years is the same.
   Alternative Table 6B: Employment Estimates, Pooled California Cities,
         2005-2019 ­ Youths (Isolating Post-Registration Variation)
 Post-Treatment Years                              Two       Three          Four
                                                    (1)        (4)           (6)
 Number of treated cities                           13          9             4
 Jump estimate × Pre-Registration                 -0.000     0.004        -0.017*
 Regular SEs                                     [0.009]    [0.009]       [0.009]
 Bootstrap p-values                                0.989     0.711         0.570
 Jump estimate × Post-Registration                -0.017     0.008       -0.119***
 Regular SEs                                     [0.018]    [0.015]       [0.037]
 Bootstrap p-values                                0.571     0.696         0.251
 Pre-treatment trend                               0.001     0.001       0.006***,
 Regular SEs                                     [0.001]    [0.001]       [0.002]
 Bootstrap p-values                                0.324     0.360         0.023
 Post-treatment trend × Pre-Registration        0.021**,    0.021**,       0.013*
 Regular SEs                                     [0.009]    [0.008]       [0.007]
 Bootstrap p-values                                0.074     0.093         0.275
 Post-treatment trend × Post-Registration          0.013     -0.007       0.033**
 Regular SEs                                     [0.010]    [0.011]       [0.014]
 Bootstrap p-values                                0.519     0.762         0.384
 Unemployment (25-64)                             -0.133     -0.145        -0.122
                                                 [0.111]    [0.113]       [0.110]
 Relative group size                               0.108     0.103         0.122
                                                 [0.096]    [0.095]       [0.103]
 N                                                 1450       1407          1348
Notes: See notes to Table 6A and Alternative Table 6A.

  Alternative Table 6C: Employment Estimates, Pooled California Cities,
  2005-2019 ­ High School Dropouts (HSDO) (Isolating Post-Registration
                              Variation)
Post-Treatment Years                              Two           Three        Four
                                                   (1)            (4)         (6)
Number of treated cities                           13              9           4
Jump estimate × Pre-Registration                 -0.006         -0.008       0.003
Regular SEs                                     [0.010]        [0.011]     [0.013]
Bootstrap p-values                               0.563           0.457       0.868
Jump estimate × Post-Registration                -0.008     -0.043***,       0.027
Regular SEs                                     [0.031]        [0.011]     [0.056]
Bootstrap p-values                               0.798           0.008       0.671
Pre-treatment trend                              0.001           0.001       0.001
Regular SEs                                     [0.001]        [0.001]     [0.002]
Bootstrap p-values                               0.262           0.297       0.489
Post-treatment trend × Pre-Registration         0.045***      0.045***      0.030*
Regular SEs                                     [0.009]        [0.009]     [0.017]
Bootstrap p-values                               0.152           0.143       0.382
Post-treatment trend × Post-Registration         -0.002      0.029***,      -0.001
Regular SEs                                     [0.027]        [0.006]     [0.026]
Bootstrap p-values                               0.964           0.007       0.951

Unemployment (25-64)                            -0.619***    -0.619***    -0.602***
                                                 [0.100]      [0.102]      [0.104]
Relative group size                               0.091        0.096        0.092
                                                 [0.082]      [0.082]      [0.086]
N                                                  1500        1457         1399
Notes: See notes to Table 6A and Alternative Table 6A.
Alternative Table 7A: Poverty Estimates, Pooled California Cities ­ Below 50%
            of Poverty Line (Isolating Post-Registration Variation)
 Post-Treatment Years                               Two          Three        Four
                                                     (1)           (4)         (6)
 Number of treated places                            13             9           4
 Jump estimate × Pre-Registration                  -0.001        0.000        0.002
 Regular SEs                                      [0.003]       [0.004]      [0.004]
 Bootstrap p-values                                0.865         0.907        0.658
 Jump estimate × Post-Registration                 -0.000        -0.003       0.003
 Regular SEs                                      [0.004]       [0.004]      [0.007]
 Bootstrap p-values                                0.983         0.766        0.735
 Pre-treatment trend                            -0.001***,    -0.001***,   -0.002***,
 Regular SEs                                      [0.000]       [0.000]      [0.000]
 Bootstrap p-values                                0.001         0.008        0.023
 Post-treatment trend × Pre-Registration           0.000         0.000        0.002
 Regular SEs                                      [0.006]       [0.006]      [0.008]
 Bootstrap p-values                                0.913         0.906        0.646
 Post-treatment trend × Post-Registration          0.001         0.003        0.000
 Regular SEs                                      [0.003]       [0.002]      [0.003]
 Bootstrap p-values                                0.864         0.603        0.994
 Unemployment (25-64)                             0.164***      0.161***    0.146***
                                                  [0.040]       [0.041]      [0.042]
 N                                                  1510          1467        1406
Notes: See notes to Table 6A, 7A, and Alternative Table 6A.

Alternative Table 7B: Poverty Estimates, Pooled California Cities ­ Below 100%
             of Poverty Line (Isolating Post-Registration Variation)
 Post-Treatment Years                                Two         Three         Four
                                                      (1)          (4)          (6)
 Number of treated places                             13            9            4
 Jump estimate × Pre-Registration                   -0.003       -0.002       -0.001
 Regular SEs                                       [0.005]      [0.006]      [0.005]
 Bootstrap p-values                                 0.711        0.824        0.843
 Jump estimate × Post-Registration                  0.012*       -0.005       -0.011
 Regular SEs                                       [0.007]      [0.007]      [0.024]
 Bootstrap p-values                                 0.145        0.693        0.676
 Pre-treatment trend                            -0.001***,    -0.001***,   -0.002***,
 Regular SEs                                       [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]
 Bootstrap p-values                                 0.000        0.002        0.026
 Post-treatment trend × Pre-Registration            -0.002       -0.002       0.002
 Regular SEs                                       [0.007]      [0.007]      [0.009]
 Bootstrap p-values                                 0.637        0.644        0.805
 Post-treatment trend × Post-Registration         -0.013***      0.003        0.004
 Regular SEs                                       [0.005]      [0.004]      [0.008]
 Bootstrap p-values                                 0.110        0.646        0.709
 Unemployment (25-64)                              0.357***     0.359***    0.332***
                                                   [0.056]      [0.057]      [0.057]
 N                                                   1511         1468         1407
Notes: See notes to Table 6A, 7A, and Alternative Table 6A.
 Alternative Table 7C: Poverty Estimates, Pooled California Cities ­ Below 150%
              of Poverty Line (Isolating Post-Registration Variation)
 Post-Treatment Years                                Two         Three        Four
                                                      (1)          (4)         (6)
 Number of treated places                             13            9           4
 Jump estimate × Pre-Registration                   -0.006       -0.005       0.003
 Regular SEs                                       [0.004]      [0.005]     [0.004]
 Bootstrap p-values                                 0.282        0.395        0.550
 Jump estimate × Post-Registration                  0.000        -0.000      -0.020
 Regular SEs                                       [0.009]      [0.009]     [0.030]
 Bootstrap p-values                                 0.981        0.974        0.533
 Pre-treatment trend                             -0.002***,   -0.002***,   -0.003***,
 Regular SEs                                       [0.000]      [0.000]     [0.001]
 Bootstrap p-values                                 0.000        0.000        0.077
 Post-treatment trend × Pre-Registration            -0.003       -0.003      -0.009
 Regular SEs                                       [0.006]      [0.006]     [0.007]
 Bootstrap p-values                                 0.798        0.800        0.272
 Post-treatment trend × Post-Registration           -0.002       -0.001       0.006
 Regular SEs                                       [0.007]      [0.005]     [0.011]
 Bootstrap p-values                                 0.813        0.851        0.610
 Unemployment (25-64)                              0.391***     0.397***    0.377***
                                                   [0.064]      [0.066]     [0.068]
 N                                                   1510         1467        1406
Notes: See notes to Table 6A, 7A, and Alternative Table 6A.
         Alternative Table 8: Employment Effects, Pooled California Cities, 2005-2019
                                           Teens               Youths              HSDO
                                            (1)                  (2)                 (3)
 (MW/average wage) × Pre-registration     -0.109               -0.068              -0.050
                                          [0.079]              [0.085]             [0.076]
 MW elasticity (Pre-registration)         -0.154               -0.048              -0.027
 MW/average wage × Post-registration      -0.069                0.026              -0.053
                                          [0.081]              [0.084]             [0.080]
 MW elasticity (Post-registration)        -0.097                0.018              -0.029
 N                                         1259                 1259                1275
 R2                                        0.649                0.725               0.757
Notes: See notes to Table 8 and Alternative Table 6A.


      Alternative Table 9: Effects on Poverty Thresholds, Pooled California Cities, 2005-2019
                                             Below 50% of Below 100% of Below 150% of
                                              poverty line     poverty line      poverty line
     (MW/average wage) × Pre-registration        -0.015          -0.040              -0.015
                                                [0.024]          [0.033]            [0.040]
     MW elasticity (Pre-registration)            -0.075          -0.084              -0.019
     MW/average wage × Post-registration        -0.046**        -0.154***          -0.154***
                                                [0.020]          [0.033]            [0.041]
     MW elasticity (Post-registration)           -0.224          -0.327              -0.195
     N                                            1280            1280                1280
      2
     R                                            0.841           0.920               0.951
    Notes: See notes to Table 9 and Alternative Table 6A.
                                              Alternative Table 10: Employment Effects of City and State Minimum Wages, 2005-2019
                                                      State minimum wages               City minimum wages                                                                      State and city minimum wages
                                                 Teens       Youths     HSDO       Teens      Youths     HSDO                                                                  Teens       Youths      HSDO
                                                  (1)          (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)                                                                  (7)          (8)         (9)
 (State MW/average wage) × Pre-registration     -0.047        0.033    -0.095**                                       (State MW/average wage) × Pre-registration              -0.042        0.031     -0.100**
                                                [0.044]      [0.031]   [0.042]                                                                                                [0.042]      [0.031]     [0.045]
 State MW elasticity (Pre-registration)         -0.052        0.021     -0.052                                        State MW elasticity (Pre-registration)                  -0.047        0.020      -0.054
 State MW/average wage × Post-registration       0.002       0.113***    0.021                                        State MW/average wage × Post-registration               -0.001      0.113***      0.023
                                                [0.042]      [0.036]   [0.036]                                                                                                [0.043]      [0.036]     [0.036]
 State MW elasticity (Post-registration)         0.002        0.071      0.011                                        State MW elasticity (Post-registration)                 -0.001        0.071       0.013
 (City MW/average wage) × Pre-registration                                         -0.057     0.022      -0.096***    (City MW-state MW)/average wage × Pre-registration      -0.063        0.020      -0.139
                                                                                   [0.042]   [0.029]      [0.036]                                                             [0.120]      [0.120]     [0.218]
 City MW elasticity (Pre-registration)                                             -0.065     0.014       -0.053      City MW elasticity (Pre-registration)                   -0.071        0.013      -0.076
 (City MW/average wage) × Post-registration                                        -0.017    0.104***      0.027      (City MW-state MW)/average wage × Post-registration     -0.127*       0.037       0.056
                                                                                   [0.040]   [0.033]      [0.030]                                                             [0.077]      [0.050]     [0.089]
 City MW elasticity (Post-registration)                                            -0.020     0.066        0.015      City MW elasticity (Post-registration)                  -0.145        0.023       0.031
 N                                              6312         6312       6434        6312      6312         6434                                                                6312         6312        6434
 R2                                             0.756        0.818      0.812       0.756     0.818        0.812                                                               0.756        0.818       0.812
 Notes: See notes to Tables 8, 10, and Alternative Table 6A.


                                                          Alternative Table 11: Poverty Effects of City and State Minimum Wages
                                                      State minimum wages                City minimum wages                                                                     State and city minimum wages
                                                Below         Below     Below      Below        Below     Below                                                             Below
                                                50% of       100% of   150% of     50% of      100% of   150% of                                                            50% of        Below         Below
                                                  PL           PL         PL         PL           PL        PL                                                                PL       100% of PL 150% of PL
                                                  (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)                                                               (7)           (8)          (9)
                                                                                                                     (State MW/average wage) × Pre-registration
(State MW/average wage) × Pre-registration       0.008       0.016       0.010                                                                                                0.008       0.019          0.017
                                                [0.011]     [0.017]     [0.021]                                                                                             [0.012]     [0.017]        [0.020]
State MW elasticity (Pre-registration)           0.031       0.028       0.011                                       State MW elasticity (Pre-registration)                   0.031       0.033          0.019
State MW/average wage × Post-registration       -0.024*     -0.048**   -0.067***                                     State MW/average wage × Post-registration              -0.023*    -0.049***      -0.070***
                                                [0.013]     [0.020]     [0.026]                                                                                             [0.013]     [0.019]        [0.023]
State MW elasticity (Post-registration)         -0.090       -0.083     -0.073                                       State MW elasticity (Post-registration)                 -0.090      -0.085         -0.076
(City MW/average wage) × Pre-registration                                           0.010      0.015       0.002     (City MW-state MW)/average wage × Pre-registration      -0.026      -0.049        -0.091*
                                                                                   [0.010]    [0.014]     [0.018]                                                           [0.024]     [0.033]        [0.047]
City MW elasticity (Pre-registration)                                               0.038      0.026       0.003     City MW elasticity (Pre-registration)                   -0.099      -0.001         -0.100
(City MW/average wage) × Post-registration                                         -0.021*   -0.053***   -0.085***   (City MW-state MW)/average wage × Post-registration     -0.002     -0.066*       -0.156***
                                                                                   [0.011]    [0.016]     [0.021]                                                           [0.031]     [0.035]        [0.035]
City MW elasticity (Post-registration)                                             -0.080     -0.092      -0.093     City MW elasticity (Post-registration)                  -0.008      -0.001         -0.171
N                                               6449         6451       6449        6449       6451        6449                                                               6449        6451           6449
R2                                              0.884        0.936      0.951       0.884      0.936       0.951                                                              0.884       0.936          0.951
Note: See notes to Table 10 and Alternative Table 6A.
                                     Online Appendix B: Effects on Wages

         In this appendix, we consider evidence on the effects of minimum wages on wages in California

cities. This is a common "first stage" analysis in the minimum wage literature. We do not emphasize this

analysis, however, because it is actually rather complicated to do this analysis with the public ACS data.

For mean earnings, the public ACS data reports estimates for year-round full-time workers aged 16 and

over (which we used to construct the denominator of the relative minimum wage variable). However,

these data do not allow the construction of earnings measures for demographic subgroups (like teens).

Thus, we need to go to the microdata to construct wage (or earnings) measures for our demographic

subgroups.

         While our focus was measuring wages (or earnings), we decided to construct our other covariates

used in this analysis ­ such as averages for education levels, race, etc. ­ the same way, defining all

variables are defined on a consistent basis. 32 Additionally, we also change the average wage measure to

use in the denominator of the minimum wage variable. Previously, the average wage was measured as

earnings of aged 16 and over full-time year-round workers in the ACS summary files (divided by 2,087,

our assumed hours worked). Since we are using the microdata for the analysis of wages and earnings, we

now refine this measure to use earnings of 25-64 year-old, non-high school dropout, full-time year-round

workers, divided by their reported hours worked and weeks worked (based on midpoints of the ranges for

weeks worked). This allows us to use a wage measure that is even more exogenous to the minimum wage.

         The problem is that in the microdata that we now have to use, cities are not identified, but rather

observations are classified by PUMA. We therefore use a complex procedure to allocate people to cities

based on PUMAs. The complicating factor is that PUMAs do not respect city boundaries, and (as in the

example given below) can be larger than cities and hence have to be allocated.

         We first constructed a panel dataset by PUMA and year from the ACS individual-level microdata

using IPUMS (Ruggles et al., 2019). While IPUMS identifies cities for certain individuals in easily


32
  As we discuss below, this creates challenges for estimates at the city level, which is why we did not do this for the
preceding analyses of employment effects and shares poor or low income.


                                                          B.i
identifiable cities, most individuals (71.32%) are not in identifiable cities, including large cities such as

San Diego. While more individuals could be identified using MSAs, this was too large of a geographical

area, and inapplicable to Bay Area cities (which have large differences in minimum wage policies), as

most of these cities fell into the San Jose metropolitan area. Thus, we use the allocation factors provided

by the Missouri Census Data Center (Rice, n.d.) to convert our dataset from PUMAs to Census places.

         To convert variables on population sizes, such as the population of teens, youths, and high school

dropouts, we use the PUMA-to-Census-place allocation. The purpose of the PUMA-to-Census-place

allocation is to reliably convert population totals from these two geographies. For example, to convert the

"Alameda County (North)--Berkeley & Albany Cities" teen population to the "Berkeley city" Census

place, we take the teen population of the PUMA (14,728 in 2017) and multiply it by the allocation factor

0.859. (See Appendix Table B1.) The assumption we have to make is that the allocation for the teen

population is like the allocation for the overall population. While this is a reasonable assumption for teen

and youth population, it should be used with more caution for high school dropouts, who are more likely

to be geographically segregated (because of income differences).

         However, for converting variables that are given as averages for the PUMA, such as earnings and

the shares by education level, race, etc., we instead use Census-place-to-PUMA allocations, because in

this case we are trying to determine how much weight to put on each PUMA's reported average to

construct an average for a Census place. For example, to get average teen earnings for Oakland, we take

the weighted average of the four listed PUMAs that cover Oakland, using the allocation factors as

weights. (See Appendix Table B2.) For cities with only one PUMA that is larger than the city, the city

average will be the same as the PUMA. The assumption here is that the PUMA is representative of the

Census place.

         We restrict the Census places to be the ones identified in the ACS Summary Files (which we used

in our preceding analyses of employment and the shares poor or low-income). We also only use 2012 to

2017, given that PUMA boundaries were different (corresponding to 2000 PUMA definitions) in prior

years.


                                                      B.ii
        The results for wages and earnings are reported in Appendix Table B3. The estimates are of

varying sign, and there is only one significant positive estimate (for earnings for high school dropouts).

The case where there is the strongest prediction of positive effects is for wages ­ because earnings,

conditional on work, can still reflect hours effects. Thus, for wages, in particular, the absence of positive

effects is unexpected, and not consistent with other studies that have better wage measures (e.g., Neumark

et al., 2004; Cengiz et al., 2019).

        As stated above, the assumption that the PUMA is representative of the Census place is strong. It

may be beneficial to restrict the analysis to a subset of Census places where the match is good. We

calculate how well the fit of a Census place to a PUMA is by taking the weighted average of the PUMA-

to-Census-place allocation factor, weighted based on the percent of the Census place allocated to that

PUMA. An example for Oakland is in Appendix Table B4. Oakland's "allocation measure" ­ the

weighted average of the third column, using the weights in the fourth columns ­ is 0.942, which places it

relatively high in the scale. It makes sense that Oakland has a high measure, because most of the weight is

on PUMAs almost entirely within Oakland. The distribution of allocation measures for all Census places

is given in Appendix Figure B1. 33

        Based on these calculations, we estimated the models from Appendix Table B3 using only the

subset of Census places with an allocation measure above 0.75. These are reported in Appendix Table B5. 34

This does not provide any stronger evidence of positive effects on wages or earnings. We conclude that the

ACS data are most likely not useful for estimating the effects of minimum wages on wages or earnings,

presumably for the measurement-related reasons discussed above.




33
  The allocation measures are based on 2010 Census data, and remain fixed when we updated the ACS data.
34
  To modify the analyses in Appendix Tables B3 and B5 to use only the minimum wage effects observed in data
released after filing the PAP, we introduce interactions between the minimum wage effect and a dummy variable for
the 2018 and 2019 data, thus allowing for different effects in the data covered by these two years. These estimates
are reported in Alternative Appendix Tables B3 and B5.


                                                       B.iii
Appendix Figure B1: Distribution of Allocation Measures for PUMAs and Census Places




              15
              10
    Percent
              5
              0




                   .2       .4                 .6                 .8                 1
                                      Allocation Measure

  Note: This figure shows the distribution of the constructed allocation measure for all
  Census places. We calculate how well the fit of a Census place to a PUMA is by taking
  the weighted average of the PUMA-to-Census-place allocation factor, weighted based
  on the percent of the Census place allocated to that PUMA.
  Sources: Rice (n.d.).
  Appendix Table B1: PUMA-to-Census Place Allocations, Alameda County (North) ­ Berkeley &
                                        Albany Cities
 PUMA                  Census place              Population (2010)      Allocation factor
 Alameda County
 (North)--Berkeley &
 Albany Cities         Albany city, CA                 18,539                 0.141
 Alameda County
 (North)--Berkeley &
 Albany Cities         Berkeley city, CA              112,580                 0.859
Source: Rice (n.d.).



                  Appendix Table B2: Census Place-to-PUMA Allocations, Oakland
 Census place             PUMA                      Population (2010)     Allocation factor
 Oakland city, CA         Alameda County
                          (Northwest)--Oakland
                          (Northwest) &
                          Emeryville Cities             148,011                0.379
 Oakland city, CA         Alameda County
                          (Northeast)--Oakland
                          (East) & Piedmont
                          Cities                        114,562                0.293
 Oakland city, CA         Alameda County
                          (North Central)--
                          Oakland City (South
                          Central)                      124,599                0.319
 Oakland city, CA         Alameda County
                          (West)--San Leandro,
                          Alameda & Oakland
                          (Southwest) Cities             3,552                 0.009
Source: Rice (n.d.).
   Appendix Table B3: Effects on Wages and Earnings, (Imputed) Census Place,
                                  2012-2019
                                        Teens        Youths         HSDO
                                         (1)           (2)            (3)
                                    Wages
 Minimum wage/average wage             13.596        -5.948         -4.241
                                       [8.396]       [8.357]       [10.551]
 MW elasticity                          0.355        -0.139         -0.085
 N                                       690           690            690
 R2                                     0.264         0.568          0.403
                                   Earnings
 Minimum wage/average wage           -5316.786     -3204.728     21441.435***
                                    [4190.780]    [6814.604]      [6324.306]
 MW elasticity                         -0.270        -0.072          0.265
 N                                       690           690            690
 R2                                     0.465         0.846          0.674
Notes: Constructed from ACS 1-year microdata in California converted from PUMAs to Census
places using Rice (n.d.). For Los Angeles County, we simply aggregate or take a weighted average
of all the PUMAs that encompass Los Angeles County, since PUMAs in LA County respect
county boundaries. Earnings are measured as the average of non-zero wage income last year for
the group. Hourly wages are measured as earnings divided by the usual hours worked last year and
the usual weeks worked last year. Usual weeks worked are given in intervals, so we assume the
median of the interval as the weeks worked. Control variables include unemployment rate of 25-
64 year-olds, relative cohort size of the group (teen (16-19), youths (16-24), and high school
dropouts (25-64)), shares U.S. citizens, nonwhite, black, high school graduate, some college
graduate, BA or higher (with the education shares omitted for the analysis of high school
dropouts), and male. The shares are of the relevant group (teens, youths, and high school
dropouts). Regressions include place and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by place.
Regressions are weighted by the population of the group (teens, youths, or high school dropouts).
The average wage is defined as the average earnings of full-time (35+ hours) year-round (50-52
weeks worked) workers, aged 25-64, who are not high school dropouts, divided by the usual hours
worked and the weeks worked, which we assumed as 51. The MW/average wage measure is a
one-year lag of the minimum wage divided by a two-year lag of the average wage. The elasticity is
determined by taking the estimate multiplied by the ratio of the average of the MW/average wage
measure to the average employment rate of the group. Note that the results for this table in the pre-
analysis plan were based on a specification that inadvertently omitted the U.S. citizenship share
(but the table notes correctly noted our intention to include this variable). The results were very
similar excluding it, although the effect on earnings for the HSDO column was no longer
significant at the 10% level. In the pre-analysis plan, we erroneously coded the average minimum
wage for California in 2014 as $9 instead of $8.5, which has been fixed in this iteration. We also
miscoded the average wage using high school dropouts rather than non-high school dropouts and
used a one-year lag of the state minimum wage rather than the city minimum wage. Finally, the
registered code inadvertently omitted the clustering, which has been added in this table. We
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level with *, **, and ***.
         Appendix Table B4: Measuring PUMA Representativeness of Census Place, Example
                                           of Oakland
                                                           Allocation factor Allocation factor
   Census place             PUMA         Population (2010) (PUMA-to-place) (place-to-PUMA)
 Oakland, CA          Alameda County
                      (Northwest)--
                      Oakland
                      (Northwest) &
                      Emeryville Cities      148011             0.936             0.379
 Oakland, CA          Alameda County
                      (Northeast)--
                      Oakland (East) &
                      Piedmont Cities        114562             0.915             0.293
 Oakland, CA          Alameda County
                      (North Central)--
                      Oakland City
                      (South Central)        124599                1              0.319
 Oakland, CA          Alameda County
                      (West)--San
                      Leandro, Alameda
                      & Oakland
                      (Southwest) Cities       3552             0.022             0.009
Sources: Rice (n.d.).
         Appendix Table B5: Effects on Wages and Earnings, (Imputed)
               Census Place, 2012-2019, Allocation Measure  0.75
                                          Teens       Youths       HSDO
                                            (1)         (2)          (3)
                                       Wages
Minimum wage/average wage                 -2.042      -9.974       -6.820
                                         [11.726]    [10.485]     [21.101]
MW elasticity                             -0.053      -0.235       -0.138
N                                           258         258          258
 2
R                                          0.344       0.765        0.414
                                     Earnings
Minimum wage/average wage               -7713.946   -8405.238    13849.127
                                       [6207.967] [11180.229]    [8522.330]
MW elasticity                             -0.391      -0.188        0.172
N                                           258         258          258
R2                                         0.462       0.905        0.725
Notes: See notes to Appendix Table B3.
       Alternative Appendix Table B3: Effects on Wages and Earnings, (Imputed) Census
                     Place, 2012-2019 (Isolating Post-Registration Variation)
                                                           Teens           Youths           HSDO
                                                            (1)              (2)              (3)
                                                Wages
 Minimum wage/average wage × Pre-registration             14.488           -4.019           -8.060
                                                         [10.279]          [8.562]         [12.450]
 MW elasticity (Pre-registration)                          0.378           -0.094           -0.162
 Minimum wage/average wage × Post-registration            13.319           -6.720           -1.244
                                                          [8.284]          [8.579]         [10.136]
 MW elasticity (Post-registration)                         0.347           -0.157           -0.025
 N                                                          690              690              690
 R2                                                        0.264            0.569            0.404
                                               Earnings
 Minimum wage/average wage × Pre-registration                -           -3053.569       15499.369**
                                                      11873.056**
                                                       [4796.408]       [7326.305]        [6469.623]
 MW elasticity (Pre-registration)                         -0.603           -0.068            0.191
 Minimum wage/average wage × Post-registration          -3284.472        -3265.185       26103.320***
                                                       [4231.051]       [6797.706]        [6440.203]
 MW elasticity (Post-registration)                        -0.167           -0.073            0.322
 N                                                          690              690              690
 R2                                                        0.474            0.846            0.676
Notes: See notes to Appendix Table B3. "Pre-Registration" and "Post-Registration" refer to the data
from periods before or after the PAP was registered; the post-registration data are for 2018 and 2019.
 Alternative Appendix Table B5: Effects on Wages and Earnings, (Imputed) Census Place, 2012-
             2019, Allocation Measure  0.75 (Isolating Post-Registration Variation)
                                                        Teens         Youths        HSDO
                                                          (1)           (2)           (3)
                                              Wages
 Minimum wage/average wage × Pre-registration           -4.155        -8.496        -9.749
                                                       [13.534]      [10.354]      [23.454]
 MW elasticity (Pre-registration)                       -0.108        -0.200        -0.197
 Minimum wage/average wage × Post-registration          -0.312       -11.351        -2.449
                                                       [11.398]      [11.091]      [19.784]
 MW elasticity (Post-registration)                      -0.008        -0.267        -0.049
 N                                                        258           258           258
 R2                                                      0.344         0.765         0.414
                                             Earnings
 Minimum wage/average wage × Pre-registration       -15667.526**    -7060.951     8410.332
                                                     [6871.330]   [11136.122]    [8722.488]
 MW elasticity (Pre-registration)                       -0.793        -0.158         0.105
 Minimum wage/average wage × Post-registration        -1204.070     -9658.660    21963.591**
                                                     [6159.174]   [11520.637]    [8986.407]
 MW elasticity (Post-registration)                      -0.061        -0.216         0.273
 N                                                        258           258           258
 R2                                                      0.462         0.905         0.725
Notes: See notes to Appendix Table B3 and Alternative Appendix Table B3.
