                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE DIFFUSION OF HEALTH CARE FRAUD:
                                A NETWORK ANALYSIS

                                       A. James O'Malley
                                        Thomas A. Bubolz
                                       Jonathan S. Skinner

                                       Working Paper 28560
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28560


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




This research was supported by grants P01AG019783 and U01AG046830 from the National
Institute on Aging. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28560.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by A. James O'Malley, Thomas A. Bubolz, and Jonathan S. Skinner. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Diffusion of Health Care Fraud: A Network Analysis
A. James O'Malley, Thomas A. Bubolz, and Jonathan S. Skinner
NBER Working Paper No. 28560
March 2021
JEL No. I1,K42

                                         ABSTRACT

Many studies have examined the diffusion of health care innovations but less is known about the
diffusion of health care fraud. In this paper, we consider the diffusion of potentially fraudulent
Medicare home health care billing in the United States during 2002-16, with a focus on the 21
hospital referral regions (HRRs) covered by local Department of Justice anti-fraud "strike force"
offices. We hypothesize that patient-sharing across home health care agencies provides a
mechanism for the rapid diffusion of fraudulent strategies; we measure such activity using a
novel bipartite mixture (or BMIX) network index. First, we find a remarkable increase in home
health care activity between 2002 and 2009 in some but not all regions; average billing per
Medicare enrollees in McAllen TX and Miami increased by $2,127 and $2,422 compared to a
$289 increase in other HRRs not targeted by the Department of Justice. Second, we establish that
the HRR-level BMIX (but not other network measures) was a strong predictor of above-average
home care expenditures across HRRs. Third, within HRRs, agencies sharing more patients with
other agencies were predicted to increase spending the following year. Finally, the initial 2002
BMIX index was a strong predictor of subsequent changes in HRR-level home health billing
during 2002-9. These results highlight the importance of bipartite network structure in diffusion
and in infection models more generally.

A. James O'Malley                                        Jonathan S. Skinner
The Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy                Department of Economics
and Clinical Practice                                    6106 Rockefeller Hall
and Department of Biomedical Data Science                Dartmouth College
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth                   Hanover, NH 03755
Williamson Translational Research Building, Level 5      and NBER
1 Medical Center Drive                                   jonathan.skinner@dartmouth.edu
Lebanon, NH 03756
James.Omalley@dartmouth.edu

Thomas A. Bubolz
The Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy
and Clinical Practice (emeritus)
23 Alice Peck Day Dr.
Lebanon, NH 03766
Thomas.A.Bubolz@dartmouth.edu


Supporting code/data is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28560
I. Introduction

         Since the landmark study by James Coleman and colleagues (1966) of tetracycline, there

has been interest in understanding how new medical technologies diffuse, and especially why

they appear to exhibit such pronounced geographic patterns. Less well understood, however, is

the process by which new fraudulent innovations diffuse over time and across regions. 1 One

previous study suggested that Medicare fraud alone could account for 8 percent of total Medicare

spending, or $52 billion in 2017 (GAO, 2017). In this paper, we consider the rapid diffusion

during the 2000s of a major source of Medicare fraud: Home health care expenditures.

         In the aggregate, there was substantial growth in Medicare expenditures for home health

care services, with a more than doubling of expenditures over just 7 years -- from $14.9 billion in

2002 to $33.7 billion in 2009 (in 2016 dollars). However, the increase in expenditures was

highly concentrated in just a few regions of the U.S. For example, in the Miami Hospital

Referral Region (HRR), home health expenditures rose 302% from $802 in 2002 to $3,229 in

2009 per Medicare enrollee (in 2016 dollars). By contrast, in Los Angeles, home health spending

barely budged, from $782 in 2002 to $861 in 2009, a 10 percent increase. 2 Largely in response

to the rapid growth of home health spending in Miami, the Department of Justice (DOJ) together

with the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) opened a local Southern Florida

strike force to prosecute Medicare fraud in 2007; given its success the program was expanded to

8 other locations by fiscal year 2016.




1
  Baker and Faulkner (2006) studied the diffusion of fraud with an interest in how new investment victims are
drawn in, rather than the informal sharing of strategies among perpetrators, as we do below. More recently, Nash et
al. (2013) considered the role of social networks in attracting new investors to a Ponzi scheme in British Columbia.
2
  Note that the denominator includes all fee-for-service Medicare enrollees, and not just those receiving home health
services.

                                                          1
       In a pioneering study, Glaeser, Sacerdote, and Scheinkman (1996), hereafter GSS,

suggested that the wide regional variation in financial crime was consistent with a model of peer

effects, in which fraudulent financial strategies spread rapidly by learning from criminals who

live nearby, and the geographical variation in home health care expenditures is clearly consistent

with this approach. However, regional variations in health care are also likely associated with

other explanations, including regional differences in underlying health (Wolf and Schoomaker,

2019; Chetty et al., 2016), physician beliefs and patient demand (Cutler et al., 2019), peer effects

associated with the quality of clinical care (Weng et al., 2019), or variations across regions in

social capital and physician professionalism (Skinner, 2011).

       To address these concerns, we focus on the network structure of home health care

agencies to better understand the remarkable growth of Medicare fraud during the 2000s in just a

few regions of the U.S. We build on Becker's (1968) canonical model of criminal behavior to

consider explicitly why some regions are so much more likely to invest in fraudulent activities,

and more importantly what this implies for the structure of patient-sharing networks most

conducive to the rapid diffusion of fraud. As in Sah (1991), agencies may update their objective

probabilities of being caught; these, coupled with networks effects, can generate both rapid

diffusion as well as scaling back following criminal and civil legal proceedings against agency

owners and physicians (Leder-Luis, 2020).

       Based on our theoretical model, we develop a new bipartite mixture measure, the BMIX

index, that captures the idea that a few patients shared across three, four, or more health agencies

would more rapidly speed the diffusion of potentially fraudulent billing strategies than a network




                                                  2
structure with many patients shared between just two agencies. 3 By contrast, conventional

network measures such as density, transitivity, and betweenness-centrality are unipartite

measures that do not directly capture the importance of these bipartite relationships. As a

measure of "infection," the bipartite BMIX index could also find applications in other analyses

of networks, for example in nursing home employee networks associated with the diffusion of

COVID-19 outbreaks (Chen et al., 2020).

         Briefly, we find using Medicare claims data results that are consistent with GSS at the

macro (and micro) level, with a remarkable degree of regional variation across HRRs in home

health spending; the coefficient of variation rose from 0.44 in 2002 to 0.69 in 2009, before

dropping to 0.49 in 2016. The network BMIX index varied widely across regions and was

strongly associated with per-enrollee home health care expenditures; other network measures

predicted little variation in home health expenditures. The BMIX index from the initial year of

2002 was highly predictive of the growth (in either dollar or log terms) of home health care

spending for the period 2002-09 and was a strong predictor of the subsequent growth in the

number of home health agencies, and whether the region would attract a DOJ strike force office.

Finally, we found evidence of peer associations within HRRs; home health agencies sharing

patients with multiple high-spending agencies were more likely to experience higher

expenditures in the following year. 4 In sum, our results suggest an important role for market

bipartite network structure in the diffusion of fraudulent behavior.




3
  An analogy might be to the pressure or heat (e.g., enthalpy) in the market; low values of the BMIX index
correspond to where patients remain with a single home health agency for all their treatment, while larger values are
consistent with high-energy jumps to multiple agencies, whether randomly or because of explicit coordination
among interlocking home health agencies.
4
  We are limited to measuring peer associations rather than causal peer effects given the lack of randomization of
network sharing.

                                                          3
II. The Spatial and Temporal Patterns of Medicare Home Health Care Expenditures

       Medicare provides home health care benefits for patients who are homebound, require

skilled nursing or occupational and physical therapy. Qualified patients receive care by a

qualified home health care agency under the direction of a physician who must sign off on

treatment plans. Allegations of improper billing for home health services are often brought under

the False Claims Act, under the federal anti-kickback provisions, or under civil penalties

(Imperato, 2017). Often a "whistleblower" will be involved who provides key evidence

regarding the alleged fraud in return for a share of what the government recovers (Leder-Luis,

2020). In this section, we document the close link between high home health care expenditures

and fraudulent activity.

       Home health fraud. The population-based measures of home health expenditures capture

a combination of truly fraudulent activities, "gray area" utilization (or classic supplier-induced

demand) unlikely to be prosecuted, and fully legitimate and clinically appropriate use of home

health care services. There is ample anecdotal evidence as to the nature of home health care

fraud as detailed in many HHS/DOJ Reports:

       In August 2016, the owner and manager of three Miami-area agencies was
       sentenced to 20 years in prison and ordered to pay $36.4 million in restitution,
       joint and several. The owner/manager was convicted of conspiracy to commit
       health care fraud and wire fraud and conspiracy to defraud the United States and
       pay health care kickbacks for his role in a $57 million Medicare fraud scheme.
       According to evidence presented at trial, from approximately 2006 to 2013, he
       and his co-conspirators purported to provide home health services to Medicare
       beneficiaries, which were not medically necessary and often were never provided.
       They paid kickbacks to doctors, patient recruiters and staffing groups, which, in
       exchange, referred beneficiaries to his home health agencies. (HHS/DOJ, 2017, p.
       21)


       As is clear from this description, there were several dimensions along which billing

revenue could be expanded. One was to increase the number of patients by paying kickbacks to

                                                 4
"doctors, patient recruiters, and staffing groups." This increases the universe of home health

patients, in part by sharing the same patient across multiple home health care agencies. One

individual in Houston was convicted of selling a single patient's information to 100 different

home health care providers (GAO, 1997, p. 12). 5 Revenue can also be expanded by increasing

billing per patient. This can be done in several ways. The first is to simply extend the use of

home health care services over several months or more. By 2000, CMS had moved to a home

health "bundle" involving 60 days of services, but that bundle could be extended given the

compliant physician certified the additional services. In some cases, different agencies were

owned or controlled by the same people or family (in the quotation above, the owner controlled 3

separate agencies) but patient sharing across agencies was not always coordinated.

         A common approach to enhancing revenue is upcoding (Dafny, 2005; Silverman and

Skinner, 2004; Barros and Braun, 2017; Bauder et al., 2017). This may be as simple as "... in-

home treatment that was shorter and less complicated than the claims indicated," or include

falsely asserting that patients are homebound, a key requirement for home health care eligibility,

or both. 6 Another example of upcoding is when patients are falsely coded as having diabetes and

unable to self-administer insulin; this allows the home health agency to bill Medicare for nursing

visits to provide insulin shots, even if the visits never occurred. 7 In McAllen TX and Miami




5
  Insights can also be gained from a 2003 pamphlet for Medicare and Medicaid enrollees (CMS, 2003, p. 21-22)
where enrollees are encouraged to look for: "home health visits that your doctor orders that you never get; visits by
home health staff that are not needed; bills for services and equipment you never get; faking your signature or your
doctor's signature; pressure to accept items and services that you don't need; and items listed on your Medicare
Summary Notice that you don't think you received..... You also should be careful about activities such as [h]ome
health services your doctor didn't order.... [and] a home health agency that offers you free goods or services in
exchange for your Medicare number.
6
  https://www.justice.gov/usao-ndil/pr/federal-jury-convicts-tinley-park-physician-medicare-fraud-scheme
7
  For example, AARP warned its members about a scam involving calls to Medicare enrollees with diabetes:
https://www.aarp.org/money/scams-fraud/info-06-2010/scam_alert_fraudsters_target_people_with_diabetes_.html


                                                          5
during 2009, for example, we found nearly two-thirds of Medicare home health patients were

coded as having diabetes, in contrast to roughly one-third in the rest of the country.

         Geographic variation in home health care expenditures 2002-16. Home health care

expenditures per Medicare fee-for-service enrollee are derived from age-sex-race-adjusted

measures in the Dartmouth Atlas from 2002-16. 8 The comparisons hold prices constant across

regions using constant-price methods documented in Gottlieb et al. (2010). The measure

therefore captures both the number (and reimbursement rate) of services per patient receiving

home health care, and the fraction of the population receiving any services. All expenditure

measures further adjust for (within-year) differences in age, sex, and race across regions, and are

adjusted for inflation using the GDP deflator, expressed in 2016 dollars. 9

         There are 306 regions in the U.S., each likely experiencing some degree of fraudulent

behavior. However, we consider in detail regions in which by 2016 the Department of Justice

had located special strike forces on health care fraud. Following the first office opened in

Southern Florida in 2007, by 2016, the DOJ had a total of 9 offices: "Los Angeles, California;

Miami and Tampa, Florida; Chicago, Illinois; Brooklyn, New York; Detroit, Michigan; Southern

Louisiana; and Dallas and Southern Texas." (HHS/DOJ, 2017; p. 10) Based on this description,

along with a 2020 documentation of strike force activity that referred to a "Gulf Coast" office, 10




8
  https://www.dartmouthatlas.org/
9
  The spending measures are normalized to the age, sex, and race distribution during the specific year, but are not
normalized to a common age distribution over time. However, the change in the distribution of age conditional on
being 65+ evolves slowly.
10
   Since 2016, additional regions have been added to address the opioid epidemic. As of 2020, the strike force
locations are listed as "Florida (Miami, Tampa, Orlando), Los Angeles, CA, Texas (Houston, Dallas, McAllen/Rio
Grande), The Gulf Coast (New Orleans, Baton Rouge, and Southern Mississippi), Detroit, MI, Brooklyn, NY,
Chicago, IL, Newark, NJ and Philadelphia, PA, Washington, DC (National Rapid Response Strike Force),
Kentucky, Ohio, Virginia, and West Virginia (ARPO North), Tennessee and Northern Alabama (ARPO South)"
(https://www.justice.gov/criminal-fraud/health-care-fraud-unit, accessed December 16, 2020).


                                                         6
we designated 21 regions deemed subject to strike force interest. 11 To provide graphical clarity

in our graphs, we focus on 9 of the larger regions.

        Figure 1 shows the time-series of these 9 regions, plus a population-weighted average of

the 285 HRRs not included in the geographical districts targeted by the DOJ; these are listed as

"Other HRRs." While our formal network analysis begins in 2002 when the 100% fee-for-

service data became available, we show in Figure 1 the Dartmouth Atlas data beginning in 2000

(with 20% samples) and running through 2016 to demonstrate that 2002 appeared to be an

inflection point. 12 The first thing to note is that for "other" HRRs not explicitly targeted by the

DOJ rates were generally low, although there was an increase from $404 in 2002 to $693 in

2009; a large proportional increase (71%) but in dollar terms per enrollee ($289) a barely

perceptible change relative to targeted regions.

        Second, the Department of Justice location of their local strike force offices were largely

(but not exclusively) associated with very high rates of home health care expenditures. McAllen

and Miami were roughly 6-times the average rates of the other HRRs, while Chicago, Dallas, and

New Orleans, were roughly three times the rate; Detroit and Tampa were double. The offices in

Brooklyn and Los Angeles were presumably focused on other types of fraud; the Manhattan

HRR (which includes Brooklyn) tracked the non-targeted average closely. Another way to view

the predictive value of the DOJ field offices is to note that among the 15 HRRs with the highest

level of home health spending in either 2009 or 2010, 11 of them are in our designated targeted




11
   The regions included Gulf Coast HRRs from McAllen to Gulfport. The 21 HRRs are Miami, Manhattan (includes
Brooklyn), Chicago, Tampa, Detroit, Los Angeles, Dallas, Corpus Christi TX, McAllen TX, Harlingen TX,
Victoria TX, Houston, Beaumont TX, Lake Charles TX, Houma LA, Lafayette LA, New Orleans, Baton Rouge LA,
Metairie LA, Slidell LA, and Gulfport, MS.
12
   There is a shift in 2003 from one data series, the Continuous Medicare History Sample File, to the individual 20%
claims data.


                                                         7
list of regions by the DOJ (Appendix Table A.1); the remaining 4 are located in Texas and

Louisiana within driving distance of strike-force HRRs. 13

         Third, as noted above, potentially fraudulent home health activity appears limited to one

or two HRRs and are not characteristic of entire states. Harlingen, McAllen, and Dallas were all

very high-spending HRRs in 2009 and 2010, but other Texas HRRs such as El Paso and Temple

were much closer to the U.S. average. Similarly, Miami is an outlier even within Florida; the

Fort Lauderdale HRR, adjacent to Miami, accounted for $1,175 in 2009, barely one-third the

corresponding level in Miami, and 2009 home health expenditures in the Tallahassee HRR,

$451, was below the U.S. average.

         Fourth, there is a distinct rise and then decline in home health care expenditures,

particularly for those targeted by the DOJ. The decline is likely to have been associated with two

factors. The first is changes in policies enacted in response to potentially fraudulent activities.

For example, until 2010, there were no restrictions on outlier payments, extra payments above

the 60-day bundle allowed for unusually sick patients. While generally rare, the use of these

outlier payments increased dramatically in Miami-Dade County, so much so that the county

alone accounted for nearly half of U.S. home health outlier payments in 2009 (Benzio, 2010). In

response, CMS restricted outlier payments for 2010 (Kim and Norton, 2015), leading to a

particularly sharp reduction in home health care billing for the Miami HRR in 2010 as shown in

Figure 1.

         The other likely reason for the downturn is deterrence because of successful criminal and

civil cases raising the perceived (and actual) probability of detection. For example, Leder-Luis

(2020) found that Qui Tam or "Whistleblower" provisions for Medicare and Medicaid fraud led


13
  As noted in the notes to Table A.1, there is anecdotal evidence that the strike-force regions sometimes prosecuted
cases located in these HRRs.

                                                         8
to a $6.80 specific deterrence effect per dollar of settlement; the general deterrence effect across

the provider market is likely much larger. Despite the increased legal efforts to combat home

health fraud, however, even in 2016 there remained considerable across regions with Miami and

McAllen still exhibiting high home health care billing rates (Figure 1).

       A key feature of the expansion in home health care expenditures was an increase in the

number of home health care agencies in areas identified by the DOJ. In Figure 2, we show the

number of home health agencies in the 9 HRRs as a ratio of the original number of agencies in

2002. In some cases, the number of agencies declines, as for example in New Orleans which

experienced a decline in population after Hurricane Katrina in 2005, while Manhattan's number

of agencies did not increase. But for 7 of the 9 regions the number of agencies grew rapidly, with

a roughly 10-fold increase in Miami. This rapid increase may be the response to high incremental

profits (particularly when services are not even provided) and low fixed costs (often just an

office address and telephone), or it could be the result of a single business entity or family

expanding the number of agencies. Unfortunately, tracing new agency formation is problematic

as ownership is often disguised through shell corporations (Holly, 2020).

       This section has established a diffuse pattern of home health care expansion that in

equilibrium is consistent with a GSS model in which peer effects play an important role. We

next turn to a more formal analysis of market structure identifying factors likely to contribute to

a rapid diffusion in health care fraud.



III. A Model of Marginal Costs and Patient Referral Networks

       Figures 1 and 2 raise questions about why expansion occurred so rapidly in some health

care markets but not others. What is different about Miami and McAllen TX compared to Fort



                                                  9
Lauderdale or Temple TX? We hypothesize that in some regions, a bipartite network structure in

place contributed to the diffusion of fraudulent billing activities spreading rapidly through the

region.

           Consider a model of home health care agency behavior in which the utility of the

agency owner is a function of three objectives: Social benefits arising from patient treatment and

care, the home health agency's profits, and the risks of conviction, fines, and possible

imprisonment. The relative importance of each objective is assumed to vary across owners and

markets. We follow Becker (1968) in writing expected utility of the home health care agency as

a function of each:

          (1)              U j =  j ( X j ) +  j PX j - C ( X j ) -  ( X j )  j

          In Equation (1), j denotes the individual home health agency, 14  ( X j ) is the aggregate

(dollar) social health benefits arising from the mix of k = 1, ..., K inputs in agency j, X j , while

P is the vector of Medicare reimbursement rates for each of the k services. Financial cost C ( X j )

enters in the objective function, as does a more subtle form of cost;  ( X j ) is the probability of

conviction depending on the legality of the collective activities summarized by X j , while  j is

the penalty, which also can vary across agencies with regard to the perceived or actual penalty,

defined broadly to include both economic and psychic adverse consequences. 15




14
   Note that we focus on the home health agency rather than the physician, for two reasons. First, a reading of the
legal cases suggests a central role for the agency owner(s), and while sometimes there was overlap between agency
principals and the signing physician, often the physician was simply hired to refer and sign authorizations, or their
authorization was forged. Second, preliminary analysis using physicians as "nodes" in network analysis suggested
little evidence of systematic network effects.
15
   For simplicity we do not subscript  by region or time, but acknowledge that it may vary along these dimensions,
for example if a DOJ strike force office is present; this regional variation is captured instead by variation in the
penalty. As well, the penalty may differ depending on who is responsible for the fraud; physicians face a larger
penalty than non-physician agency owners because they may lose their medical license.

                                                         10
        The vector X j describes the complex set of patient services (both type and quantity)

provided by the home health agency. For example, suppose the kth element, X jk , describes

number of home health visits for well-documented patients (e.g., with strong medical

justification); X jk ' or the kth element captures visits without documentation, while the kth

element measures the number of visits that are entirely falsified. The Medicare reimbursement

rate for each visit would be the same but cost differences would arise (since undocumented visits

can be expanded without limit, while the dollar marginal cost of a falsified visit is essentially

zero). Most importantly the incremental probability of detection and penalty would be highest

for the k-type fraudulent visit.

        We expect to see different input choices, outcomes, and Medicare reimbursement rates

depending on the extent to which local home health agencies place more or less weight on

patient health (through the parameter  j ), revenue and hence profits (  j ), and on the perceived

risks of criminal or civil penalties (  j ). 16 This can be seen from the first-order conditions:

                                ( X j )               C ( X j )  ( X j )
        (2)                j              +  j Pk -            -         j =
                                                                           0
                                X jk                  X jk       X jk

        There are three polar cases that can be considered. The first is an agency that maximizes

                        j 1,
social benefit, so that=   =  j 0 , and the risk of fraudulent detection is minimal so the third

term is essentially zero. This type of agency corresponds to a (perhaps) not-for-profit firm with

philanthropic goals. The second is an agency that legally profit-maximizes; it cares less about

patient welfare but still wishes to avoid breaking the law; for them,  j  0,  j =
                                                                                1 but where they




16
  We ignore risk aversion and uncertainty here, although risk aversion would obviously make it less likely to
engage in potentially fraudulent activity.

                                                         11
limit themselves to inputs such that for each k, the incremental risk of detection  / dX jk is very

small. The third polar case is one that maximizes profits with potentially fraudulent strategies;

for this group   0 and  =
                        1 (so marginal revenue is no higher than marginal production cost)

but where  j or their perceived penalty (both monetary and psychic) is low.

        In Figure 2, we show hypothetical supply curves for the three types of providers, where

the price of a standardized home health care unit of service (as paid by Medicare) is shown as the

horizontal black line, the horizontal axis is the number of patients, and the vertical axis is in

dollar terms, either revenue, costs, or the dollar value of social benefits. 17 The green line is the

(marginal) social benefit curve, where we assume that patients are lined up by their degree of

appropriateness. The social optimum is given by Q1 where the marginal social benefit is equal to

the marginal cost of providing the service (the blue line, which corresponds to all entirely legal

provisions of service). For the profit-maximizing but legally compliant agency, their output

level is at Q2, a point at which the marginal social benefit of the additional patient is well below

the price the government pays, but where profits are maximized with minimal legal risks.

        Finally, some agencies engage in fraudulent activities in which they access an entirely

different set of inputs X including made-up services that cost nothing to provide, sharing and/or

double-billing patients, and upcoding for expensive services that are not required; this in turn

leads to a new and lower marginal cost curve, which we denote MC*. The lower marginal cost

curve also brings with it increased risk of detection and penalty; the combined marginal cost of




17
  The price appears significantly above marginal cost; the U.S. General Accounting Office estimated margins of 16
to 18 percent in the early 2000s for home health agencies (Florida, 2007); currently Medpac (2020) estimates a
marginal profit rate of 18 percent.

                                                       12
the incremental set of inputs X j is denoted by the red dotted line, which intersects the price level

at Q3 .

          Note that knowledge about the potentially fraudulent activities captured by MC* is not

universally shared; we hypothesize that it is discovered at the local level through informal

networks reflected in (or generated by) patient-sharing by which agencies learn about strategies

necessary to gain access to the frontier MC* technology. 18 While we measure patient sharing, we

acknowledge that this isn't proof of information diffusion across agencies, but earlier evidence

indicates patient sharing is closely associated with physicians seeking each other out for advice

or one actively referring patients to the other (Barnett, 2011). Furthermore, we assume that the

likelihood of agency A discovering a fraudulent strategy from agency B is a positive but

diminishing function of the number of patients shared between the two agencies. 19 This means

that the number of "edges" between home health care nodes, as would be captured by unipartite

network measures, is inadequate to capturing the likelihood of dissemination across markets.

          To see this, consider a hypothetical market with 10 home health agencies, of which

initially just one is engaging in fraudulent activities. If this agency shared 5 patients with a

second agency, the weighted sum of the edge-weights is 5, as it would be if it shared a single

patient with 5 of the agencies. However, under the assumption of diminishing informational

content associated with sharing multiple patients between two agencies, the latter case in which a

single patient is shared across multiple agencies is predicted to lead to a greater market level of

fraud compared to the former. This implies that a bipartite measure that captures the degree to



18
   If instead the MC* technology diffused by a more central mechanism ­ posting on the web, for example ­ we
would not expect to find the sharp geographic variation observed in the data for the 2000s. An alternative
explanation is that high-fraudulent regions just include more owners with preferences for potentially fraudulent
activities, but this would not explain the change in activities and patient sharing since 2002.
19
   For a similar approach, see O'Malley et al. (2020).

                                                         13
which patients are shared with different home health agencies may capture a more rapid

diffusion of fraudulent activity.

           What are the aggregate implications of this rapid diffusion at the market level? A simple

accounting exercise in the context of the model with three types of home health agencies would

lead to the following measure of total home health expenditures, expressed in per-capita terms:

                    (3)              PQ jt= P  µ1 jt Q1 jt + µ2 jt Q2 jt + µ3 jt Q3 jt 

where µlt is the number of home health care agencies of type l relative to the Medicare

population at time t. 20 In a dynamic sense, it is reasonable to assume that the relative fractions

µlt will rise or fall depending on the relative profitability of the home health agency type. Given

that legal (and even profit maximizing) home health agencies did not experience a fundamental

change either in revenues, cost functions, or economies of scale, we assume that most increases

in the number of home health agencies (unrelated to health needs) are the consequence of the

diffusion in the knowledge and adoption of the MC* strategies coupled with high positive profits

and low fixed costs (e.g., a phone number and office mailing address). We can write the change

in the population share of potentially fraudulent activity from time t to t+1 for the (per capita)

number of Type 3 agencies as:

                    (4)              µ3 f ( )(* -  j )
                                     =

where ( * -  j ) reflects the expected profitability, equal to the financial profits associated with

fraudulent activity  * minus the risks of being caught and punished,  j , times the dynamic

function f ( ) that captures the speed of dissemination for information about the new fraudulent

technology. We proxy  with the BMIX index, although empirically we test for other network


20
     We consider a measure of home health care agencies per 10,000 Medicare enrollees below.

                                                           14
measures as well. We assume that changes in underlying health (as proxied by the age-sex-race-

adjusted Medicare mortality rate) affects the quantity of services for Type 1 and 2 agencies,

while  is the primary determinant of the growth in Type 3 agencies.



IV. The BMIX Index

       In this section, we develop a more formal measure of exposure to potentially fraudulent

agencies and show how our bipartite approach differs from commonly used unipartite measures.

Let  be a binary variable that equals 1 if patient  = 1, ... ,  received services from agency

 = 1, ... ,  within the year. In an undirected network, the bipartite mixture (BMIX) index for a

region is defined as:

                                         n

                                        A     ik
                   (5)   BMIX =    n
                                        i<k
                                               n

                                   Aik +  Si
                                  i<k          i=
                                                1


             H
where Aik =  Bhi Bhk is the number of instances when a patient receives support from both
            h =1


                                              H       n
                        =
agencies i and k within a year and Si
                                        =h 1
                                              =
                                               Bhi I ( Bik 0) is the total number of patients that
                                                     ik


receive support from agency i alone, where  () = 1 if event is true and 0 otherwise.

       The index is a mix of a bipartite count of the number of single-source patients and a

count of the number of times the edges in the projected network are affected owing to patients

receiving services from multiple agencies. Unlike many unipartite measures, it is scale-free, thus

making it useful in comparing markets of different sizes, and as we shall see, individual markets

with rapid increase or decrease in the number of nodes (or agencies). In our application, the




                                                     15
quadratic weighting of patients who receive services from multiple agencies and the use of

information on the number of degree 1 (single source) patients will aid its predictive power.

        Further insight into the BMIX index arises by defining a patient h attribute, denoted

 , corresponding to the number of distinct agencies they received care from. Mathematically,

       n                                                                      H
N h =  Bih . Denote the number of patients with attribute value z
                                                                = by d z     =
                                                                              I (N  h   z) .
      i =1                                                                   h =1


                n         n        n
                                       z       1 n
Because d1 =  S j and
                    =  Aik        =
                                   d       z     z ( z - 1)d z it follows that the BMIX index is
                j        i<k   =  2
                                z 2            2z 2
                                               =



also given by

                                               n          n

                                      z z  w d           w d  z   z
                (6)       =
                          BMIX  =z 2=
                                    n
                                         =z 2
                                           n
                                         d1 +  wz d z    w d  z   z
                                       =z 2=z 1


where  = 1 if  = 1 and  = ( - 1)/2 for  > 1, so that in general  =  ( = 1) +

( - 1)/2.

        The expression in (6) shows that the BMIX index can be viewed as a network statistic of

the bipartite network with patients and agencies as the two distinct sets of nodes. The numerator

and denominator are weighted averages of the frequency distribution of the number of agencies

patients received care from, a degree measure for the patient nodes in the bipartite patient-agency

network. The weight for  > 1,  = ( - 1)/2, equals the number of edges in the patient-

sharing network to which a patient who encounters  agencies contributes. Clearly, as the

number of their agency encounters increases, the impact a patient has on the BMIX index

increases quadratically. We are not aware of this measure having been previously developed in

the network literature (although it is related to market overlap measures, as in Aryal et al., 2020);

the presence of the indicator function in  for the  = 1 case makes the weights and function as

                                                   16
a whole a mixture of patients that do ( > 1) and do not ( = 1) contribute to the network, thus

making BMIX a mixture of two forms of information.

       To illustrate the calculation of BMIX and the above points, suppose that two HRRs each

have 10 agencies, with 20 patients in total. In the first agency, 9 beneficiaries receive services

from exactly 2 of the agencies and 11 receive services from just one agency. In the second

agency, 19 patients receive services from 1 agency and 1 patient receives services from all 10.

The respective values of BMIX are:

                                       2(2 - 1)/2 × 9     9
                          1 =                           =   = 0.45
                                     2(2 - 1)/2 × 9 + 11 20

                                      10(10 - 1)/2 × 1     45
                         2 =                             =    = 0.70
                                    10(10 - 1)/2 × 1 + 19 64

       The same number of services were provided to the same number of beneficiaries but the

BMIX of the HRRs is very different because a single patient can more effectively serve as a

"super-spreader" of potentially fraudulent strategies across all 10 agencies.

       The BMIX index takes values ranging from 0 to 1. Therefore, without scaling, a

regression coefficient for BMIX is interpreted as a change in the expected value of the outcome

if BMIX equals 1 (all beneficiaries receiving care from two or more agencies so that 1 = 0)

compared to the counterfactual that it equals 0 (all beneficiaries receiving care from a single

agency).



V. Peer Effects

       The motivation for this paper stems from peer-effects, also known as social selection or

contagion. For example, GSS has previously suggested that fraudulent financial strategies spread

locally by learning from nearby criminals in a process consistent with peer-effects (also see


                                                 17
Zenou, 2003), and in Section II we hypothesized that a specific network structure is an element

in which the diffusion of fraudulent billing activities can spread rapidly through a market. While

we cannot establish causality, the presence of positive peer associations would suggest that the

type of potentially fraudulent expenditures observed in home health expenditures may spread

from agency-to-agency and thus be akin to peer-effects.

       Our 15-year series of longitudinal data allows us to consider whether peer effects in the

prior year may independently predict agency behavior in the current year. Because an agency

(hereafter the "ego") may have multiple peer agencies, their combined influence on the ego can

be quantified in a multitude of ways. In keeping with the premise for BMIX, we hypothesize that

both the level of spending (outlying behavior) and the number of peers (reinforcement through

multiple exposures) combine to impart influence. That is, being connected to more agencies will

reinforce a willingness to spend higher, given the same average spending, and that exposure to

multiple instances of high spending will have a greater impact than exposure to a single instance

of extreme spending. We represent both an agencies number of peers (referred to as degree in

network parlance) and the average spending of their peers as predictors in our peer association

models.

       Let  denote the (single-source) expenditures of agency i in HRR j in year t and the

adjacency matrix of a HRR network of HHAs by  with mnth off-diagonal element , . We

define a weight matrix,  to be the row stochastic version of  meaning that the rows sum to


1, implemented by dividing the elements on a row by their row sum; the row-sum for the ith row

corresponds to the degree of agency i in HRR j and year t, denoted  . The diagonal elements

of  and  are both equal to 0, so that the spending for shared patients of agency i is limited


only to services received outside the ith agency. The product of  and  yields a vector whose



                                                18
ith element,  = () , is the average spending of the agencies in HRR j with which agency

i shares a network edge.

       To adjust for factors unrelated to peer effects at the HRR and year level, we adjust for

HRR-wide average spending of agencies that are isolated nodes in a given year (meaning that

they have no edges with any other agencies), denoted (-1) . The model already

includes HRR fixed-effects and so this addition serves as a tighter control in that it would

account for longitudinal HRR level factors that could be confounding the peer-effects (e.g.,

unmeasured time-varying HRR-level common causes). Because spending has a highly skewed

distribution, we take the respective logs of ego agency spending, average peer agency spending,

and HRR-wide average spending by isolate agencies. Only observations in which the focal

agency was a non-isolate (and where there was at least one sole-source patient) were used in the

estimation of the model.

       For all home health agencies sharing at least one patient with another agency, the general

model of interest is:

     (7)           log( )

                        = 0 + 1 log(-1)  + 2 log(-1)  + 3 log(-1) 

                        + 4 log(()(-1) ) + 5 log(-1)  log(()(-1) ) +  + 

where 0 denotes year fixed-effects, 1 is the association of the ego's prior year spending with

its current spending, 2 measures the association of isolate home health spending (e.g., for those

not sharing patients) averaged across the HRR in the prior year with its current spending; this is

designed to capture HRR-specific trends in patient health needs. The three key coefficients are

3, the extent to which the number of peers of the agency (their network degree) is predictive of

their spending in the following year, 4 , the extent to which the average spending across peer

                                                19
agencies is predictive of the agency's own spending in the following year, 21 and 5, the

modification of the peer average spending association by the focal agency's network degree.

Finally,  is a fixed-effect of the HRR to capture permanent differences in underlying health and

other factors across HRRs and  is a within-HRR error term. 22

        We consider four basic variants of Equation (7); one that excludes the own-agency

lagged spending (e.g., setting 1 = 1) and one that doesn't, one that assumes the interaction

effect is null (e.g., setting 5 = 1) and one that doesn't. To the extent that own-agency lagged

spending already captures past peer associations, including the lagged effect is likely to bias

downward the true peer association, but doing so may also partially mitigate homophily. 23



VI. Data Preparation and Statistical Analyses

        We build a beneficiary-sharing network for each HRR in each year. The nodes are home

health agencies and the existence of an edge between two agencies indicates that at least one

patient received care from both agencies during a calendar year. We also align the number of

shared patients during the year with each such edge. Besides the bipartite BMIX index measure,

we also construct three unipartite network measures by HRR and year chosen because they are

classic measures with a theoretical and empirical basis for predicting fraudulent activity (Aven,

2015; Ferrara et al., 2014; O'Malley et al., 2020). The first is density, a commonly used measure

capturing the fraction of potential connections among nodes (or agencies) with an edge. The


21
   We refrained from using models with peer-predictors from the current time-period as these would inflate the peer-
effect due to agencies who share patients having also billed for those patients.
22
   Estimates using an HRR random-effects model are similar to the fixed-effects models presented below; thus we
only present fixed effects coefficients.
23
   An alternative is to exclude  (-1) and account for repeated measurements across time through the error
structure.



                                                        20
second is betweenness centralization quantifying heterogeneity in the extent that each agency

intersects the information flow in the network. 24 Finally, we measured transitivity, a measure of

network clustering quantifying "cliques" or unusually high density of edges among subsets of

three nodes, as one might expect in fraudulent behavior. 25 While the BMIX index has a readily

interpretable scale from zero to one, the others are more challenging and their distribution varies

substantially with the number of nodes or agencies; for this reason we scale all four network

measures by their standard deviations to facilitate interpretation. Because the measures other

than BMIX vary mechanically with the number of agencies, we also include the number of

agencies in 2002 in regressions involving these network measures.

Regression Models of Spending

        The Medicare home health claims from the Dartmouth Atlas are used to create HRR-year

level real per-enrollee expenditures in the fee-for-service population. These Atlas measures are

based solely on residence, so if (e.g.) someone from the Rochester NY HRR winters in Tampa

FL, their Tampa-based home health care spending would appear in the Rochester HRR measure.

The primary outcome variable is the average price-adjusted, inflation-adjusted, and age-sex-race-

adjusted payment per patient for an HRR and year. In regression models of per enrollee

spending, we include the HRR/year mortality rates for the entire Medicare population on the

right-hand side of the regression to adjust for differences in the health needs of the population. 26

        Our measures of home health care networks and other measures of utilization are slightly

different; we count only home health visits by residents of an HRR that occur at a home health




24
   For example, a "ring" of agencies has a very low measure of betweenness centralization, while the hub node in a
hub-and-spoke network has a very high one.
25
   We also considered the variance of several of these measures, but they also contained little explanatory power.
26
   Variability in home health spending is highly unlikely to have an impact on population-based mortality (e.g.,
McKnight, 2006).

                                                        21
care agency in that HRR. Each measure is constructed by year for each of the 306 HRRs from

2002 to 2016, leading to 4,590 total HRR/year observations. As a measure of fraudulent activity

in the region, we also consider two other measures: (a) The regional growth in the number of

home health agencies per 1,000 population relative to their 2002 frequency as a measure of

profitability, and (b) whether the HRR was designated of interest to the Department of Justice

strike forces, as noted above.

        We use conventional cross-section time-series regression analysis, first using inflation-

adjusted dollar values (per Medicare enrollee) but also considering per-enrollee spending in

natural logs. We also consider whether our set of network measures in 2002 predict home health

care utilization or number of home health agencies (per Medicare enrollee) in subsequent years

2003-16 conditional on contemporaneous measures of these same indices. 27

        Finally, and more directly, we ask whether network measures (or other measures) in 2002

could have predicted the subsequent growth in home health expenditures between 2002-09.

Because network density and other measures are often related to the size of the network, we also

include log of Medicare (fee-for-service) enrollees in the HRR and the number of "nodes" or

agencies in the initial period 2002 as "intercepts" to adjust for different HRR market sizes. As a

sensitivity test, we consider the reverse ­ did average home health spending in 2002 predict the

change over time in the BMIX index from 2002-2009?

Peer Association Analysis

        We also consider the analysis of individual home health agency expenditures within

HRRs, as described in Section V. To guard against endogeneity from agencies that shared

beneficiaries having their spending measure affected by the same patients, we restrict spending


27
 That is, in predicting (e.g.) 2012 home health spending in an HRR, we include both the contemporaneous 2012
BMIX measure, and the 2002 BMIX measure. Where appropriate, we cluster by HRR.

                                                      22
to the sample of beneficiaries that only receive care at a single agency ("single-source"

beneficiaries). Therefore, the peer-agency regression coefficient is informed only by patients that

did not contribute to the formation of the network; the estimated coefficient that obtains is likely

to be a conservative measure of potentially fraudulent strategies. To aid the interpretation and

comparability of parameter estimates across specifications, the resulting outcome and the peer-

agency predictors were standardized to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1 across the

subset of the dataset for which the original value of spending was positive. We used restricted

maximum likelihood estimation, treating the ego agency as random effects to account for

clustering and their HRRs as fixed effects to restrict the identification of estimates of peer

associations to variation within markets. In a sensitivity analysis, the model was re-estimated

with random effects for HRR; results were similar.



VII. Results

       Table 1 presents summary statistics on home health care expenditures, for specific years

2002, 2009, and 2016, and network measures. We further considered these summary statistics

for HRRs identified by the DOJ, and those not identified. For network measures, there is wide

variability in the average value of the indices across regions, but the differences between the 21

HRRs identified by the DOJ and the other HRRs are modest for network density and transitivity.

Betweenness centrality is about one-third lower, and BMIX about one-half higher, in the 21 DOJ

HRRs compared to the remaining 285 HRRs. The largest differences between the DOJ and

remaining HRRs are the number of home health agencies; there are 8 per 10,000 Medicare

population in the DOJ-targeted HRRs, compared to 2.8 in the non-DOJ regions, and home health

expenditures ($1152 compared to $479).



                                                 23
        Recall that the BMIX index ranges between 0 and 1; as shown in Table 1 the mean is

0.15. Figure 4 shows graphically the distribution of BMIX by year using a box-and-whisker

graph; it exhibits wide variability, while patient sharing rises across the distribution of HRRs

during the peak expenditures of 2009-10. Miami is a consistent extreme outlier (labeled); Fort

Lauderdale, Las Vegas, Houston, and Los Angeles were four other regions with high rates of

BMIX.

The Structure of Patient-Sharing BMIX Networks

         Figure 5 shows the Miami HRR in 2002 and 2009 as networks, while Figure 6 displays

the patient-sharing network in Seattle (a low-growth region) during the same years. The 2009

plot presents just the most connected nodes with the number of displayed agencies equaling the

total number of agencies in the 2002 network. The nodes are colored with red (most), blue and

green (least) corresponding to the number of beneficiaries who only receive care from that

agency. Miami illustrates a fundamental change in the degree of patient sharing ­ a shift from

little patient sharing in 2002 (green nodes) to common sharing in 2009 (red nodes) during this

period, but Seattle remains relatively stable.

         The association between the BMIX index and spending measures can be seen by sorting

HRRs into deciles by their BMIX measure, either in 2002 or in 2009. In Figure 7, Panel A

shows a modest positive association between the 2002 BMIX index and 2002 home health

expenditures per enrollee; the correlation becomes much stronger in 2009 (Panel B) particularly

for the very top BMIX decile. The 2002 BMIX index predicts the subsequent growth in home

health spending between 2002-09 (Panel C) and the corresponding growth in the number of

home health agencies per 10,000 enrollees (Panel D). While most of the agency growth and

expenditure growth is associated with the regions corresponding to the top decile of the BMIX



                                                 24
index, there appears to be a broader association between BMIX and home health expenditures

across all deciles, particularly in 2009.

Spending Regression Results

         The regression model in Table 2A allows for other network measures as explanatory

variables in predicting home health care expenditures. As noted above, each of the four network

measures (starred) has a standard deviation of 1.0 and a mean of zero; the interpretation of each

of these coefficients is the change in the dependent variable with respect to a one-standard-

deviation change in the independent variable.

         The first two columns are least squares regressions both unweighted and weighted by the

number of Medicare enrollees; all regressions include controls for year and are clustered by

HRR. In the first column, a one-standard-deviation increase in BMIX is predicted to increase

home health care spending by $173, or 33 percent of average home health spending; other

network measure coefficients are smaller in magnitude or negative. 28 A higher mortality rate is

associated with higher home health spending; a one-standard deviation increase is predicted to

increase home health spending by $118; 29 weighted regression coefficients are similar. Column

3, for years 2003-16, includes both contemporaneous and 2002 levels of (standardized) network

measures. Once again, BMIX enters significantly, with a slightly larger coefficient for the 2002

value relative to the contemporaneous BMIX measure; their combined impact, corresponding to



28
    While the theoretical sign of the BMIX coefficient is positive, one can construct theories for why the other
network measures would exhibit a negative rather than positive association. For example, one might argue that
higher triadic closure (higher transitivity) is an indication of greater coordination of unnecessary beneficiary sharing
among "like" agencies (perhaps those owned centrally). But higher transitivity could be explained as well by
coordination or geographic proximity within a region; it would be unusual if agencies A and B shared patients and
agencies A and C shared patients, but B and C did not. The question is then whether such sharing patterns should
predict higher home health care expenditures. Likewise, one might argue that a network with greater centralization
is akin to a hub and spoke network whereby one agency dominates patient sharing such that it "polices" the others
and thus guards against fraudulent activity.
29
   The coefficient, $203.7, times the standard deviation, from Table 1 (.579).

                                                          25
a permanent increase in BMIX during the entire period (196.5 = 86.4+110.1) is larger than the

coefficient in Column 1. In the HRR-fixed-effects models, the association between BMIX and

spending is much diminished, suggesting that spending does not track year-to-year with BMIX

(or any of the other variables); we consider longer-term growth in home health care spending

below in Table 2D.

       Table 2B displays similar estimated results for the log of home health care spending by

HRR and by year, with a one-standard deviation rise in BMIX predicted to increase log home

health spending by nearly one third (Columns 1 and 2), but (as in Table 2A) with much smaller

predicted effects in the HRR fixed effects models. Table 2C considers similar regressions, but

with the number of home health care agencies (per 10,000 Medicare population) ­ a measure of

profitability of home health care in a given region -- as the dependent variable. Even when

controlling for the number of agencies in 2002, the regressions suggest a significant positive

impact of BMIX on the expansion of agencies. In this Table, the network density, betweenness

centrality, and network transitivity measures are more closely associated with the number of

agencies, although in part it may be because conventional network measures are often sensitive

to the number of nodes in the network structure.

       Table 2D provides estimates of changes in home health expenditure and number of

agencies between 2002-2009; except for the corresponding change in mortality during the same

period (to adjust for changes over time in underlying health), we used only information known in

2002. Column 1 shows that the BMIX in 2002 is strongly predictive of growth, with a one-

standard-deviation difference predicting $180 more rapid growth (or 68 percent of the average

increase between 2002 and 2009), but with smaller effects ($85, or 32 percent of average

growth) when lagged home health spending from 2002 is included in the regression (Column 2).



                                                26
With logged home health spending changes (Column 3), the coefficient on BMIX is .088 (or 20

percent of the log change) with the dependent variables included. The reverse association does

not hold; a regression of the change in the BMIX between 2009 and 2002 on the initial level of

home health spending in 2002 shows a negative (and barely significant) correlation.

         Finally, Table 2D shows changes between 2002 and 2009 in two additional outcomes.

Column 4 shows a strong positive association between the 2002 BMIX and the change in the

number of home health care agencies, while a linear prediction model suggests that the

likelihood that a given HRR would be designated one of the 21 strike-force HRRs increases by

8.6 percent when the BMIX is one standard deviation higher; both results are highly significant.

Peer Association Analysis Results

         The results of the peer-associated analyses are displayed in Table 3, based on 1.54

million shared home health care patients across home health agencies in the 306 HRRs. We use

the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), also known as the Schwarz criterion (Schwarz 1978),

and marginal R2 (the random effects are considered part of the error-term as opposed to part of

the model fit) to compare the fitted models. 30 We find the specifications with the interaction

between average peer spending and number of peer agencies (i.e., degree) included yields a

superior fit than when this is excluded; the marginal R2 also demonstrates an advantage of

including the interaction term but on a much more restrictive scale. 31 Therefore, we focus



30
   Because the models have the same number of predictors and are estimated on the same data set, all likelihood-
based model comparison procedures are essentially equivalent.
31
   Because we estimate a linear model, the interpretation of the effects as unit-changes in log-predictors in relation to
standardized log-spending in the following year is straight-forward and is not subject to the considerations for
nonlinear models in Ai and Norton (2003). In the case of models (2) and (4), the interpretation of a unit change in
lagged log average peer spending on the focal agencies spending is more complicated and depends on the values of
other variables in the model. This is seen by the fact that the partial derivative of  with respect to () (-1) in
the general model in (7) depends on the exponential of the right-hand-side (RHS) multiplied by (4 +
5 log( (-1) ))/(1 + () (-1) ), clearly a nonlinear expression involving all RHS variables and parameters.


                                                           27
primarily on interpreting the results of the analyses of the models that allow the association of

peer-agency spending to be modified by the degree of the focal agency. 32 We normalize both

variables involved in the interaction so that their standard deviation is 1.0.

        In the absence of the interaction, the dominant network-related predictor is lagged log

degree; in the model without lagged ego spending (e.g., the lagged dependent variable) the

estimated coefficient is 0.327 (standard error 0.002) and in the model with lagged ego spending

the estimated coefficient is 0.029 (standard error 0.003). In both of these models, lagged log peer

average spending is statistically non-significant. We believe that these two pairs of estimates

likely bracket the true peer association; the former is likely biased upward because of homophily

or unmeasured common causes acting contemporaneously across an HRR, while the latter biased

downward because the spending measure is limited to "isolate" (unshared) patients, and does not

capture the dynamics by which peer associations in past years are already reflected in year  - 1

ego spending measures.

        With the addition of the interaction, the overall impact of lagged log peer average

spending amplifies; in the model without lagged ego spending the main and interaction estimated

coefficients are 0.036 (0.003) and 0.036 (0.002), respectively, and in the model with lagged ego

spending they are 0.021 (0.004) and 0.009 (0.002). 33 Considering the interactive terms in

Column 4, the model predicts that when average logged spending is at the 90th percentile (1.28

standard-deviations above the mean), the association between a one-standard deviation increase

in the logged number of peers and subsequent log spending by the ego is 0.033; the




32
   We also focus on the models with random-effects for HHA and fixed-effects for HRR, noting the trivial
differences in estimates between the model when HHR is also specified as a random-effect.
33
   The finding that a combination of a network summary measure about the focal agency (degree) and the network-
averaged outcome of their peer agencies combine as predictors in the best-fitting model emulates the general
structure and results found in O'Malley et al (2020).

                                                      28
corresponding estimate for a one-standard-deviation increase in logged average spending at the

90th percentile for logged number of peers is 0.030. Finally, the prediction associated with a

simultaneous increase in logged average spending and logged average number of peers from

their means to their 90th percentiles is 0.065.

        In sum, we have established that even within HRRs, home health agencies sharing

patients with a greater number of other agencies or with high-spending other agencies were more

likely to increase patient expenditures in the following year. We also explored extending the

model in Equation (7) to allow the peer-associations to be modified by the lagged BMIX of the

HRR. While not reported, we found that in HRRs with a higher BMIX, the peer association

coefficients were smaller in magnitude, suggesting diminishing returns to additional information

about agencies with which the ego agency shares patients.



VIII. Discussion and Conclusion

        It is well established that there are wide geographic variations in the diffusion of highly

effective health care (Coleman et al., 1966; Jencks et al., 2003; Skinner and Staiger, 2007) and

newly developed cancer drugs (Agha and Molitor, 2018); much less is known about the diffusion

of ineffective or potentially harmful use of potentially fraudulent health care. In this paper, we

have studied a rapid increase in billing for Medicare home health care expenditures in some but

not all regions of the U.S. during the 2000s. These billing increases cannot be explained by

changing health needs, nor can they be explained by the substitution of inpatient for home health

care. 34 Instead they appear largely the consequence of widespread fraudulent behavior which in



34
  Using price-adjusted spending for 2003-09 at the HRR level, the correlation coefficient between the change in
home health care spending and the change in inpatient and nursing home case was 0.237 (p < .01). McKnight
(2006) showed that when home health reimbursements were capped, there was no increase in hospital use.

                                                        29
turn attracted specific Department of Justice strike-force offices located in areas with rapid

increases in fraudulent behavior.

           Using a theoretical model as guidance of fraudulent billing in which the potential gains

from such activity outweigh penalties of legal convictions, we develop a novel bipartite mixture

network index, the BMIX, that predicts the diffusion across home health agencies of fraudulent

billing as reflected in the placement of DOJ strike force offices. Commonly-used unipartite

network measures such as density, betweenness-centrality, and transitivity were much less

predictive of this rapid increase in home health spending. But the 2002 BMIX, measured at the

outset of the sharp rise in home health care spending, was predictive of the growth in subsequent

home health care expenditures. 35 The reverse did not hold, however, higher 2002 spending

predicted slightly lower BMIX growth.

           The BMIX index is related to, but distinct from, the idea of fragmentation, or the receipt

of care from multiple physicians. Fragmentation involves tradeoffs; more physicians can in

theory provide greater specialization, albeit with rising coordination costs (as in Becker and

Murphy, 1992). However, the empirical evidence suggests that fragmentation raises costs and

reduces quality (Agha et al., 2019). Yet home health agency patient-sharing differs from

fragmentation or physician patient-sharing in that the agency is supposed to be coordinating the

patient's care, thus the value of involving a second home agency is unclear. 36

           The model suggests why in some regions, home health care fraud might diffuse more

rapidly than in other regions, but we still cannot say why Miami and McAllen Texas (and not

Fort Lauderdale or Temple Texas) were the regions to experience such rapid change. One

potential explanation for why Miami's home health care sector grew so rapidly was relaxed


35
     We recognize that other bipartite measures (e.g., Opsahl, 2013) may also predict diffusion.
36
     The analogy might be when a patient is enrolled in multiple managed care organizations.

                                                           30
state-level regulation in Florida, yet some regions in Florida experienced only average growth in

home health care. Another possibility is the idea of hysteresis or long-standing experience in

fraudulent activities. For example, in the mid- and late-1990s, there was a similar and short-

lived outbreak of potentially fraudulent home health services in the rural South and West

(Vandenburgh, 2005). Dartmouth Atlas data show that in 1995 McAllen Texas was the highest-

spending region for home health services, with Miami ranked barely in the top decile of HRRs.

Yet Miami during this period led the country with regard to expenditures for durable medical

equipment; by 2001 it was spending 6 times the U.S. average for potentially fraudulent

expenditures on (e.g.) motorized wheelchairs. 37 Thus Miami entrepreneurs could have simply

switched from durable medical equipment to home health care during the 2000s. Hysteresis,

however, cannot explain why Chicago (ranked 133rd in 1995) should have exhibited such

unusually rapid increases in home health expenditures during the 2000s.

         Collectively and individually, the pattern of spending for home health agencies within

HRRs support the presence of peer-associations. The coefficient estimates are consistent with

provider communication that, like Barnett et al. (2012) occurs through sharing of patients across

agencies (also see O'Malley et al. 2014; 2020). 38 These results are also consistent with a model

in which rapid market growth occurs when knowledge of a new business model with very low

marginal costs ­ such as fictitious services for patients ­ and low fixed costs spreads across a

market, as is suggested by the 10-fold increase in the number of home health agencies in Miami

over just a few years.




37
   www.dartmouthatlas.org, accessed February 18, 2021. Durable medical equipment fraud in South Florida played
a central role in Carl Hiaasen's novel "Bad Monkey" (2013).
38
   Goel (2020) suggests that these spillover effects may extent even beyond state borders, a result consistent with our
evidence from HRRs which often cross state lines.

                                                          31
        We acknowledge two limitations of the analysis. The first is that we cannot measure

fraud directly because agencies are understandably reticent about their potentially illegal

behavior, and because those successfully charged are only the tip of the iceberg; most fraudulent

(or gray-area) activities are difficult to detect. While we infer fraudulent behavior using a variety

of approaches including the number of home health agencies and the presence of a DOJ strike-

force in the HRR, we recognize that some of the three-fold increase in home health spending in

Miami between 2002 and 2009 could have been legitimate. Second, while we established that

the BMIX index is theoretically consistent with a model of diffusion, and is predictive of

subsequent growth in home health expenditures, we cannot prove causality. The BMIX index is

not likely to be capturing unmeasured health effects ­ it is uncorrelated with mortality39 ­ but

patient sharing patterns could be symptomatic of past or current fraudulent activity which in turn

lays the groundwork for future fraudulent behavior. Still, at a minimum the BMIX index is

predictive of future fraudulent behavior, suggesting value in machine-learning approaches to

unearthing Medicare fraud (Bauder et al., 2017).

        There are a variety of other applications for bipartite network measures that can

potentially capture models of diffusion and infection, for example patterns of staff-sharing across

nursing homes leading to rapid diffusion of COVID-19 infections among nursing home patients

(Chen et al., 2020). One requires relatively recent data to calculate network structures useful in

predicting future behavior, but government agencies should be able to acquire the claims data

needed to compute networks of home health care or of other relevant organizations with only a




39
  A regression of BMIX on mortality with year fixed effects yields a coefficient of .003 (standard error, .007);
similar results are obtained with year and HRR fixed effects. This means that any correlation between BMIX and
unmeasured health is independent of mortality.


                                                        32
few months lag. 40 Furthermore, the government may have access to records of past occurrences

of fraud that could be used to train a predictive machine-learning model to make optimal BMIX-

based predictions.

         Network analysis may also be used to test whether fraud more generally is "contagious"

beyond financial settings (Dimmock et al., 2018). For example, Howard and Desai (2020)

document hospitals (or hospital systems) accused of providing unnecessary stents (percutaneous

coronary interventions) for their patients. Of the 16 systems in their study, 10 were located in

just 4 states: Pennsylvania, Maryland, Ohio, and Kentucky, a finding consistent with networks of

interventional cardiologists within and across hospital systems. In other cases, health care fraud

may diffuse through consultants or device manufacturers advising hospitals to follow overly

aggressive (and ultimately illegal) billing practices (Silverman and Skinner, 2004; U.S.

Department of Justice, 2014). In these cases, networks might not exhibit the sharp geographic

clustering observed in home health care fraud, but a network properly constructed could still

exhibit the bipartite patterns we see in home health care. While future research is needed to test

whether measures such as the BMIX can predict diffusion in other settings, we believe there is a

strong basis for the use of network analysis in the analysis of health care fraud and market

dynamics.




40
  Lee and Skinner (2021) consider several other potential policy changes that would make it easier for the federal
government to pursue home health care fraud.

                                                         33
References

Ai, Chunrong, and Edward C. Norton. "Interaction terms in logit and probit models." Economics
Letters 80, no. 1 (2003): 123-129.

Agha, Leila, and David Molitor. "The local influence of pioneer investigators on technology
adoption: evidence from new cancer drugs." Review of Economics and Statistics 100, no. 1
(2018): 29-44.

Agha, Leila, Brigham Frandsen, and James B. Rebitzer. "Fragmented division of labor and
healthcare costs: Evidence from moves across regions." Journal of Public Economics 169
(2019): 144-159.

Aryal, Gaurab, Dennis J. Campbell, Federico Ciliberto, and Ekaterina Khmelnitskaya.
"Common-subcontracting and multimarket contact in the airline industry." University of Virginia
Working Paper (2020).

Aven, Brandy L. "The paradox of corrupt networks: An analysis of organizational crime at
Enron." Organization Science 26, no. 4 (2015): 980-996.

Baker, Wayne E., and Robert R. Faulkner. "Diffusion of fraud: Intermediate economic crime and
investor dynamics." Criminology 41, no. 4 (2003): 1173-1206.

Barnett, Michael L., Bruce E. Landon, A. James O'Malley, Nancy L. Keating, and Nicholas A.
Christakis. "Mapping physician networks with selfreported and administrative data." Health
Services Research 46, no. 5 (2011): 1592-1609.

Barros, Pedro, and Gisele Braun. "Upcoding in a National Health Service: the evidence from
Portugal." Health Economics 26, no. 5 (2017): 600-618.

Bauder, Richard, Taghi M. Khoshgoftaar, and Naeem Seliya. "A survey on the state of
healthcare upcoding fraud analysis and detection." Health Services and Outcomes Research
Methodology 17, no. 1 (2017): 31-55.

Becker, Gary S. "Crime and punishment: An economic approach." In Gary S. Becker and
William M. Landes (eds.) The Economic Dimensions of Crime, pp. 13-68. Palgrave Macmillan,
London (1968).

Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy. "The division of labor, coordination costs, and
knowledge." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no. 4 (1992): 1137-1160.

Benzio, Brooke. "Fee-for-Disservice: Medicare fraud in the home healthcare industry," Annals of
Health Law Volume 19 Issue 1 (Article 41) (2010).

Chen, M. Keith, Judith A. Chevalier, and Elisa F. Long. "Nursing home staff networks and
COVID-19." No. 27608. National Bureau of Economic Research (2020).

                                              34
Chetty, Raj, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi, Nicholas Turner,
Augustin Bergeron, and David Cutler. "The association between income and life expectancy in
the United States, 2001-2014." JAMA 315, no. 16 (2016): 1750-1766.

CMS, Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Medicare and Home Health Care (2003).
https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment-
Instruments/HomeHealthQualityInits/Downloads/HHQIHHBenefits.pdf (Accessed February 21,
2021).

Coleman, James, Elihu Katz, and Herbert Menzel. Medical Innovation: A Diffusion Study
Indianapolis, The Bobbs-Merrill Company, Inc. (1966).

Cutler, David, Jonathan S. Skinner, Ariel Dora Stern, and David Wennberg. "Physician beliefs
and patient preferences: a new look at regional variation in health care spending." American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11, no. 1 (2019): 192-221.

Dafny, Leemore S. "How do hospitals respond to price changes?" American Economic Review
95, no. 5 (2005): 1525-1547.

Dimmock, Stephen G., William C. Gerken, and Nathaniel P. Graham. "Is fraud contagious?
Coworker influence on misconduct by financial advisors." The Journal of Finance 73, no. 3
(2018): 1417-1450.

Ferrara, Emilio, Pasquale De Meo, Salvatore Catanese, and Giacomo Fiumara. "Detecting
criminal organizations in mobile phone networks." Expert Systems with Applications 41, no. 13
(2014): 5733-5750.

Florida, State of. The Florida Senate Interim Project Report 2008-135 November (2007).
http://archive.flsenate.gov/data/Publications/2008/Senate/reports/interim_reports/pdf/2008-
135hr.pdf

GAO, Medicare and Medicaid: CMS needs to fully align its antifraud efforts with the fraud risk
framework, GAO-18-88 (Washington, D.C.: Dec. 5, 2017).

Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and Jose A. Scheinkman. "Crime and social interactions."
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, no. 2 (1996): 507-548.

Goel, Rajeev K. "Are health care scams infectious? Empirical evidence on contagion in health
care fraud." Managerial and Decision Economics (2020).

Gottlieb, Daniel J., Weiping Zhou, Yunjie Song, Kathryn Andrews, Jonathan Skinner, and Jason
M. Sutherland. "Prices don't drive regional Medicare spending variations." Health Affairs 29, no.
3 (2010): 537-543.




                                               35
HHS/GAO. The Department of Health and Human Services and The Department of Justice
Health Care Fraud and Abuse Control Program Annual Report for Fiscal Year 2016 (2017).
https://oig.hhs.gov/publications/docs/hcfac/FY2016-hcfac.pdf

Holly, Robert. "Home health owners pay price for $38 million `Empire of Fraud'." Home Health
Care News, (January 1, 2020). https://homehealthcarenews.com/2020/01/home-health-owners-
pay-price-for-38-million-empire-of-fraud/

Howard, David H., and Nihar R. Desai. "US False Claims Act investigations of unnecessary
percutaneous coronary interventions." JAMA Internal Medicine 180, no. 11 (2020): 1534-1536.

Hyman, David A. "Health care fraud and abuse: market change, social norms, and the trust
"reposed in the workmen"." The Journal of Legal Studies 30, no. S2 (2001): 531-567.

Imperato, Gabriel, An overview of pervasive allegations in hospice and home health fraud cases,
Broad and Cassel, Fort Lauderdale, FL. (2017) https://www.hcca-
info.org/Portals/0/PDFs/Resources/Conference_Handouts/Regional_Conference/2017/orlando/I
mperatohandout2.docx

Kim, Hyunjee, and Edward C. Norton. "Effects of the ten percent cap in Medicare home health
care on treatment intensity and patient discharge status." Health Services Research 50, no. 5
(2015): 1606-1627.

Jencks, Stephen F., Edwin D. Huff, and Timothy Cuerdon. "Change in the quality of care
delivered to Medicare beneficiaries, 1998-1999 to 2000-2001." JAMA 289, no. 3 (2003): 305-
312.

Leder-Luis, Jetson. "Whistleblowers, private enforcement, and Medicare fraud," Working
Paper, Boston University (2020).

Lee, Stephen, and Jonathan Skinner. "Reforming Health Care Coverage to Reduce Fraud,"
(2021). https://onepercentsteps.com/policy-briefs/reforming-home-health-care-coverage-to-
reduce-fraud/

McKnight, Robin. "Home care reimbursement, long-term care utilization, and health outcomes."
Journal of Public Economics 90, no. 1-2 (2006): 293-323.

Medpac (Medicare Payment Advisory Commission). Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment
Policy. (March 2020). http://www.medpac.gov/docs/default-
source/reports/mar20_medpac_ch9_sec.pdf

Nash, Rebecca, Martin Bouchard, and Aili Malm. "Investing in people: The role of social
networks in the diffusion of a large-scale fraud." Social Networks 35 No. 4 (2013): 686-698.

O'Malley, A. James, Erika L. Moen, Julie PW Bynum, Andrea M. Austin, and Jonathan S.
Skinner. "Modeling peer effect modification by network strength: The diffusion of implantable

                                               36
cardioverter defibrillators in the US hospital network." Statistics in Medicine 39, no. 8 (2020):
1125-1144.

O'Malley, A. James, Felix Elwert, J. Niels Rosenquist, Alan M. Zaslavsky, and Nicholas A.
Christakis. "Estimating peer effects in longitudinal dyadic data using instrumental variables."
Biometrics 70, no. 3 (2014): 506-515.

Opsahl, Tore. "Triadic closure in two-mode networks: Redefining the global and local clustering
coefficients." Social Networks 35, no. 2 (2013): 159-167.

Sah, Raaj K. "Social osmosis and patterns of crime." Journal of Political Economy 99, no. 6
(1991): 1272-1295.

Schwarz, Gideon E. "Estimating the dimension of a model", Annals of Statistics, 6, no. 2 (1978):
461­464.

Silverman, Elaine, and Jonathan Skinner. "Medicare upcoding and hospital ownership." Journal
of Health Economics 23, no. 2 (2004): 369-389.

Skinner, Jonathan. "Causes and consequences of regional variations in health care." In Handbook
of Health Economics, vol. 2, Elsevier (2011): 45-93.

Skinner, Jonathan, and Douglas Staiger. "Technology diffusion and productivity growth in health
care." Review of Economics and Statistics 97, no. 5 (2015): 951-964.

U.S. Department of Justice. "Washington-Based Medical Device Manufacturer to Pay up to
$5.25 Million to Settle Allegations of Causing False Billing of Federal Health Care Programs"
(2014). https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/washington-based-medical-device-manufacturer-pay-
525-million-settle-allegations-causing-false

Vandenburgh, Henry. "Home health care fraud in the 1990s: Did region play a role?" Journal of
Economic Crime Management 13, no. 1 (2005): 1-13.

Welch, H. Gilbert, David E. Wennberg, and W. Pete Welch. "The use of Medicare home health
care services." New England Journal of Medicine 335, no. 5 (1996): 324-329.

Weng, Weifeng, Jessica Van Parys, Rebecca S. Lipner, Jonathan S. Skinner, and Brenda E.
Sirovich. "Association of Regional Practice Environment Intensity and the Ability of Internists to
Practice High-Value Care After Residency." JAMA Open 3, no. 4 (2020): e202494-e202494.

Woolf, Steven H., and Heidi Schoomaker. "Life expectancy and mortality rates in the United
States, 1959-2017." JAMA 322, no. 20 (2019): 1996-2016.

Zenou, Yves. "The spatial aspects of crime." Journal of the European Economic Association 1,
no. 2-3 (2003): 459-467.



                                                37
Figure 1: Per-Enrollee Home Health Expenditures, 2000-2016, by Selected Region
Note: Selected regions from the 21 HRRs selected by the Department of Justice as a location for
(or area of interest of) their fraud strike forces. "Other" is the weighted average of the other 285
HRRs. All Expenditures in 2016 dollars.




                                                38
Figure 2: The Number of Distinct Home Health Care Agencies Relative to 2002, by Selected
Region
Note: Selected regions from the 21 HRRs selected by the Department of Justice as a location for
(or area of interest of) their fraud strike forces. "Other" is the weighted average of the other 285
HRRs. All measures are relative to the initial number of HRRs in 2002; thus New Orleans likely
experienced a decline in the number of home health agencies because of a decline in population
after Hurricane Katrina in 2005.




                                                39
Figure 3: Marginal Cost/Supply Curves for 3 Types of Home Health Care Agencies
This figure characterizes the different output decisions for three different types of home care
agencies. The first type is one that maximizes social welfare, setting marginal social benefits
(the downward sloping green curve) equal to marginal cost at Q1. The second type of agency
maximized profits (legally) by setting marginal cost equal to price, at quantity Q2. Finally, the
third type of agency faces a very low marginal cost curve (MC*) but an ex ante risk of
prosecution (the difference between the red dotted line and the MC* line); this third agency
maximizes their objective function at Q3.




                                                 40
Figure 4: Box and Whisker Plots of the BMIX Index by HRR and by Year, 2002-16
The shaded bar represents the interquartile range (25th to 75th percentile) with the median marked
by the horizontal bar. The "whiskers" are the 95th percentile with individual dots as outliers.
Miami appears as an outlier in multiple years (as labeled). In 2010, the HRRs with the 5 highest
BMIX measures were Miami (.65), Las Vegas (.43), Fort Lauderdale (.40), Houston (.39), and
Los Angeles (.37).




                                               41
                                         Panel A: 2002




                                         Panel B: 2009




Figure 5: Network plots for the Miami HRR (Panel A: 2002, Panel B: 2009).
The 2009 plot is restricted to the most connected agencies of number equal to the total number of
agencies in 2002. The nodes are colored with red (most), blue and green (least) corresponding to
the number of beneficiaries who only receive care from that agency.

                                               42
                                        Panel A: 2002




                                        Panel B: 2009




Figure 6: Network plots for the Seattle HRR (Panel A: 2002, Panel B: 2009)
The nodes are colored with red (most), blue and green (least) corresponding to the number of
beneficiaries who only receive care from that agency.
                                              43
Figure 7: Home Health Care Expenditures in 2002 and 2009 and the Change in the
Number of Home Health Agencies per 10,000 Medicare Enrollees, by Decile of the BMIX
Index
Each decile corresponds to approximately 31 HRRs ranked in order of their BMIX index.




                                          44
Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                           (1)                (2)                    (3)
                                      Full sample         DOJ Targeted           Other HRRs
                                                          HRRs (N=21)             (N=285)
 Home Health Expenditures               525.08              1152.27                478.87
                                        (332.6)             (512.0)                (261.5)

 Home Health Exp.: 2002                 378.84                671.18                357.30
                                        (166.4)               (192.1)               (142.4)

 Home Health Exp.: 2009                 642.00               1578.82                572.97
                                        (444.1)              (676.8)                (329.6)

 Home Health Exp.: 2016                 534.16                983.00                501.09
                                        (263.7)               (249.9)               (232.6)

 BMIX                                    0.15                   0.22                 0.14
                                       (0.0749)               (0.115)              (0.0676)

 No. of Agencies/10,000                   3.20                  8.03                  2.85
                                        (3.119)               (7.210)               (2.186)

 Network Density                          0.34                  0.30                  0.34
                                        (0.236)               (0.243)               (0.235)

 Betweenness Centrality                   0.22                  0.15                  0.22
                                        (0.175)               (0.115)               (0.177)

 Network Transitivity                     0.54                  0.48                  0.54
                                        (0.234)               (0.230)               (0.234)

 Mortality (per 1,000)                    4.98                  5.19                  4.96
                                        (0.579)               (0.698)               (0.566)

 FFS Medicare Population                 93.59                135.71                 90.49
                                        (87.69)               (154.2)               (79.81)
 Observations                            4590                   315                  4275

Measured at the HRR/Year level. Standard deviations in parentheses. FFS Denotes "Fee for Service."




                                                  45
      Table 2A: Regressions Explaining Home Health Expenditures

                                  OLS                OLS             OLS (2003-16)         Fixed Effect   Fixed Effect
                                                  (Weighted)                                              (Weighted)
BMIX*                             173.2             164.1                 86.42               31.59          66.91
                                  (6.59)            (5.67)                (3.20)              (1.79)         (2.27)

Network Density*                  10.37              36.71                -53.59             -18.15         -36.29
                                  (0.77)             (2.27)               (-2.98)            (-2.47)        (-3.43)

Betweenness Centrality*          -34.87              -58.89               -41.15             -12.29         -19.11
                                 (-3.54)             (-4.07)              (-4.49)            (-3.71)        (-3.34)

Network Transitivity*            -58.43              -127.3               -60.21             -17.47         -42.80
                                 (-4.42)             (-4.64)              (-4.70)            (-3.89)        (-3.52)

Mortality (per 1,000)             203.7              165.9                213.1               25.17          58.52
                                  (8.03)             (6.76)               (8.17)              (1.32)         (2.57)

N of Agencies in 2002             1.795              0.115                1.509
                                  (2.43)             (0.17)               (1.63)

N Enrollees 2002 (1000)          -1.192              -0.512               -1.278
                                 (-4.09)             (-2.29)              (-4.42)

BMIX in 2002*                                                             110.1
                                                                          (4.21)

Density in 2002*                                                          64.54
                                                                          (3.60)

Betweenness in 2002*                                                      25.98
                                                                          (1.96)

Transitivity in 2002*                                                     15.66
                                                                          (1.02)

Constant                         -607.5              -442.4               -357.3              250.8          60.55
                                 (-4.00)             (-3.07)              (-2.89)             (2.40)         (0.50)
Observations                      4496                4496                 4149                4496           4496
R2                                0.429               0.495                0.486              0.893          0.895

      t statistics in parentheses. Year fixed-effects included in all regression models.
      * Denotes z-score (standard error = 1). Clustered at the HRR level.




                                                            46
      Table 2B: Regressions Explaining Home Health Care Expenditures (in Logs)

                                   OLS                OLS                  OLS       Fixed Effect   Fixed Effect
                                                   (Weighted)           (2003-16)                   (Weighted)
BMIX*                              0.308             0.273                0.159        0.0619          0.0972
                                  (10.42)            (9.66)               (4.59)       (4.08)          (6.69)

Network Density*                  0.0491              0.0671             -0.0666       -0.0138        -0.0351
                                  (1.63)              (2.05)             (-2.47)       (-1.18)        (-2.38)

Betweenness Centrality*          -0.00555            -0.0432             -0.0134       -0.0108        -0.0161
                                  (-0.27)            (-1.72)             (-0.78)       (-2.22)        (-2.44)

Network Transitivity*            -0.0499              -0.140             -0.0489       -0.0206        -0.0415
                                 (-2.48)              (-3.99)            (-2.49)       (-3.71)        (-4.71)

Mortality (per 1,000)             0.387               0.311               0.381        0.0400          0.103
                                  (9.42)              (7.27)              (9.30)       (1.69)          (3.41)

Log N of Agencies 2002            0.0703              0.0135              0.217
                                  (1.36)              (0.26)              (3.82)

Log N Enrollees 2002              -0.161             -0.0820              -0.230
                                  (-3.34)            (-1.75)              (-5.06)

BMIX in 2002*                                                             0.117
                                                                          (3.27)

Density in 2002*                                                          0.183
                                                                          (4.49)

Betweenness in 2002*                                                      0.0851
                                                                          (3.39)

Transitivity in 2002*                                                     0.0722
                                                                          (2.08)

Constant                           4.318               4.550               4.812        5.644          5.331
                                  (14.73)             (15.69)             (18.66)      (43.17)        (33.59)
Observations                       4496                4496                4149         4496           4496
R2                                 0.471               0.512               0.554        0.943          0.947


      t statistics in parentheses. Year fixed effects included in all regressions.
      * Denotes z-score (standard error = 1). Clustered at the HRR level.



                                                             47
Table 2C: Regressions Explaining the Number of Home Health Agencies (per 10,000)
                             OLS           OLS:           OLS         Fixed Effect
                                       Log(Agencies)
BMIX*                       15.39          0.450         20.12            14.64
                            (2.39)        (16.37)        (2.32)          (1.56)

Network Density*                    3.835               -0.419             -2.909    -7.657
                                    (1.57)             (-13.69)            (-1.48)   (-4.08)

Betweenness Centrality*             -1.490             -0.0747             -2.163    -2.347
                                    (-1.67)            (-4.52)             (-2.31)   (-3.26)

Network Transitivity*               -8.921             -0.0944             -9.806    -4.737
                                    (-3.55)            (-4.42)             (-3.79)   (-3.36)

Mortality (per 1,000)               -9.326              0.0702             -7.607    -7.685
                                    (-4.24)             (1.46)             (-3.48)   (-1.69)

N of Agencies in 2002               2.091              0.00853             2.382
                                    (6.10)              (2.75)             (6.13)

N Enrollees 2002 (1000)             -0.142             0.00197             -0.157
                                    (-3.23)             (4.72)             (-3.40)

BMIX in 2002*                                                              -8.370
                                                                           (-1.93)

Density in 2002*                                                           10.49
                                                                           (4.84)

Betweenness in 2002*                                                       3.499
                                                                           (2.66)

Transitivity in 2002*                                                      3.737
                                                                           (2.22)

Constant                            45.16               2.026              29.85     67.29
                                    (3.01)              (7.38)             (2.67)    (2.95)
Observations                         4496                4496               4149      4496
R2                                  0.703               0.853              0.729     0.872
t statistics in parentheses. All regressions include year fixed-effects.
*Denotes z-score (standard error = 1). Clustered at the HRR level.




                                                      48
      Table 2D: Regressions Explaining the Change (2002-2009) in Home Health Care
      Expenditures and Number of Agencies, and the Probability of Strike Force Designation

                             Home Health         Home Health          Log Home         N of Agencies       Strike Force
                                                                       Health                                  HRR
BMIX in 2002*                    180.5               85.33             0.0883               1.479             0.0862
                                 (8.24)              (3.92)             (3.23)              (7.23)            (4.68)

Density in 2002*                 -3.691             -9.711              0.0350             -0.461             0.0288
                                 (-0.16)            (-0.49)             (1.15)             (-2.19)            (1.52)

Betweenness in 2002*             16.36               0.605              0.0275             -0.100             0.0181
                                 (0.86)              (0.04)             (1.24)             (-0.57)            (1.13)

Transitivity in 2002*            10.29               11.04              0.0390             -0.212            -0.00718
                                 (0.44)              (0.54)             (1.49)             (-0.98)            (-0.37)

Mort. Change 2002-09             208.2               164.2              0.217               1.323             0.0141
                                 (3.95)              (3.53)             (3.65)              (2.69)            (0.32)

N of Agencies in 2002            2.973               2.079                                 0.0630             0.00386
                                 (2.62)              (2.08)                                (5.96)              (4.05)

N Enrollees 2002 (1000)          -1.680             -1.231                                 -0.0216           -0.000897
                                 (-5.77)            (-4.74)                                (-7.97)             (-3.66)

Home Health 2002                                     0.939
                                                     (9.39)

Log N of Agencies 2002                                                  0.156
                                                                        (3.34)

Log N Enrollees 2002                                                    -0.182
                                                                        (-4.80)

Log Home Health 2002                                                   -0.0128
                                                                       (-0.26)

Constant                          469.4              67.83              0.990               4.490             0.0772
                                 (12.05)             (1.24)             (3.11)             (12.35)            (2.36)
Observations                       300                300                300                 300                300
r2                                0.310              0.470              0.181               0.396              0.217

      t statistics in parentheses. The Strike Force regression (final column) is a linear probability model, where
      the dependent variable is 1 if the region became a DOJ-targeted HRR.
      * Denotes z-score (standard error = 1).


                                                           49
Table 3: Peer-Agency Associations of Log-Peer Home Health Spending with Log Ego
Spending
                                     (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)
 Average Linked Home               -0.004             0.003            0.036***           0.021**
 Health Spending                   (.002)             (.003)             (.003)            (.004)


 Number of Peers                 0.327***           0.029***           0.332***           0.018***
                                   (.002)             (.003)             (.002)             (.004)

 Average Linked Home *                                                 0.036***           0.009***
 Number of Peers                                                         (.002)             (.002)

 Lagged HRR Isolate              0.233***           0.160***           0.210***           0.154***
 Home Health Spending              (.004)             (.003)             (.004)             (.004)


 Lagged Ego Home                                    0.608***                              0.607***
 Health Spending                                      (.003)                                (.003)

 R2                                0.536              0.738              0.538             0.738
 Bayesian Information             159,540            123,133            159,193           123,114
 Criterion (BIC)
All models include HRR fixed-effects and agency (HHA) random-effects and are estimated on N =
126,749 agency-by-year observations involving 14,326 distinct agencies across the 306 HRRs. The R2
measure is computed with the random-effects for agency being part of the error-term; this quantity is
often referred to as marginal R2 for a mixed-effect model. Smaller values of the BIC represent superior
model fit. However, because the BIC increases with the sample-size, it only makes sense to make
comparisons within models (1) and (3) and within models (2) and (4).
Appendix



A.1: Highest-Spending HRRs (2009 or 2010)


                HRR Name               Year        Home Health Expenditures

  1.   |        TX-McAllen              2009               3285.4
  2.   |          FL-Miami              2009               3228.8
  3.   |      TX-Harlingen              2010               2666.6
  4.   |         LA-Monroe              2009               2107.3
  5.   | TX-Corpus Christi              2010               2029.1
  6.   |     LA-Alexandria              2010               1985.6
  7.   |         TX-Dallas              2009               1851.5
  8.   |       TX-Longview              2009               1691.3
  9    |       LA-Metairie              2010               1663.2
 10.   |        IL-Chicago              2010               1623.2
 11.   |       TX-Beaumont              2010               1604.6
 12.   |    LA-Baton Rouge              2010               1592.4
 13.   | TX-Wichita Falls               2009               1561.7
 14.   |    LA-New Orleans              2010               1554.3
 15.   |        LA-Slidell              2009               1503.1


Note: HRR is denoted in italics (and green) if it is designated by the DOJ as one of the strike
force locations. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the adjacent DOJ-designated strike force teams
are prosecuting cases even within the four regions in the top-15 not formally designated (Monroe
LA, Alexandria, LA, Longview TX, and Wichita Falls TX). For example, one doctor from
Alexandria LA was accused of nearly $5 million in falsified medical orders, prosecuted by the
Gulf Coast DOJ law enforcement office (https://www.justice.gov/usao-edla/pr/gulf-coast-health-
care-fraud-law-enforcement-action-results-charges-against-34). In another case, a West Monroe
LA resident's case involving pharmaceutical health care fraud was prosecuted through the New
Orleans field office (https://www.justice.gov/usao-sdms/pr/louisiana-man-sentenced-3-years-
prison-conspiracy-commit-health-care-fraud)
