                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 FAMILY COMPANIONSHIP AND ELDERLY SUICIDE:
                 EVIDENCE FROM THE CHINESE LUNAR NEW YEAR

                                       Hanming Fang
                                         Ziteng Lei
                                         Liguo Lin
                                        Peng Zhang

                                    Working Paper 28566
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w28566


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




We thank Lucas Davis, Shelly Lundberg, Mike Orszag, Eric Zou, and seminar and conference
participants at 2020 CUHK-Shenzhen SME Research Conference, UCSB Applied Research
Group, Penn Chinese Economy Reading Group, and International Pension Research Association
(IPRA) Webinar for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Hanming Fang, Ziteng Lei, Liguo Lin, and Peng Zhang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Family Companionship and Elderly Suicide: Evidence from the Chinese Lunar New Year
Hanming Fang, Ziteng Lei, Liguo Lin, and Peng Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 28566
March 2021
JEL No. I12,J14

                                          ABSTRACT

Mental health problems among the elderly have attracted increasing attention. The most serious
mental health problems may result in suicide, and lack of family companionship is often
speculated to be a major cause. In this paper, we use high-frequency suicide rate data and utilize a
novel temporal variation in the lunisolar calendar to provide evidence on the protective effects of
the Chinese Lunar New Year (when the elderly people receive unusually high level of family
companionship) on elderly suicide. We find that elderly suicide rate decreases by 8.7% during the
Chinese Lunar New Year. In addition, the protective effects are stronger in counties where the
typical level of daily family companionship for the elderly is lower. By contrast, we do not find
similar protective effects for young and middle-age cohorts. We consider a variety of alternative
mechanisms, and conclude that family companionship is an important channel for the protective
effects of the Chinese Lunar New Year. Our study calls for greater attention to the mental health
status and suicide problem of the elderly, especially with the rapid population aging and
increasing prevalence of the "empty-nest" elderly in developing countries.

Hanming Fang                                     Liguo Lin
Department of Economics                          Institute for Advanced Research
Ronald O. Perelman Center                        Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
for Political Science and Economics              Shanghai
133 South 36th Street                            China
Suite 150                                        lin.liguo@mail.shufe.edu.cn
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER                                         Peng Zhang
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu                      School of Management and Economics
                                                 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
Ziteng Lei                                       Longxiang Blvd 2001
Department of Economics                          Shenzhen, Guandong 518172
University of California-Santa Barbara           China
Santa Barbara, CA 93106                          zhangpeng@cuhk.edu.cn
ziteng_lei@umail.ucsb.edu
1 Introduction

    The prevalence of mental health problems and suicide among the elderly has attracted increasing attention.

Approximately 15% of adults age 60 and above suffer from mental disorders, and 6.6% of disability among

this group is attributed to mental and neurological disorders (WHO 2017).1 In the extreme form, these

mental disorder problems lead to suicide. The suicide rate is highest among people age 70 years old and

above (WHO 2014), and suicide and mental disorder are highly correlated among the elderly (Wærn et al.

2002).2 Severe mental disorder and suicide have large economic costs. For example, Shepard et al. (2016)

find that the total cost for all suicides and suicide attempts in the United States in 2013 is around $93.5

billion. The concern about mental health problems and suicide among the elderly is becoming increasingly

important as the population is aging rapidly (Bloom and Luca 2016). Between 2010 and 2050, the

proportion of the world's population over 65 will nearly double, from 8% to 16% (WHO 2011).3 Therefore,

understanding the causes of mental health problems and suicide among the elderly, as well as providing

effective policy assistance, is urgent and crucial.4


    The concern about the mental health among the elderly is especially serious in developing countries.

Between 2010 and 2050, the elderly population in developing countries is projected to increase by more

than 250%, compared with a 71% increase in developed countries (WHO 2011). As a prominent example,

China is experiencing rapid population aging, and the share of elderly in the total population is expected to

increase from 12.6% in 2020 to 27.9% in 2050.5 At the same time, China's national elderly suicide rates

are four to five times higher than the general Chinese population and more than twice the global average

(Li et al. 2009, Chen and Fang 2018). With rapid urbanization and increased internal migration, the

proportion of the "empty-nest" elderly who are left-behind also increases dramatically, from 50% in 2010




1
  https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/mental-health-of-older-adults.
2
  https://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2014/suicide-prevention-report/en/.
3
  https://www.who.int/ageing/publications/global_health/en/.
4
  There is no absolute cutoff for the start age of the elderly people. Throughout the paper, we refer to the elderly people as
individuals age 65 or above.
5
  https://baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=1679779779278495724&wfr=spider&for=pc (in Chinese).

                                                                  1
to nearly 90% in 2030.6 Therefore, the mental disorder and suicide problems for the elderly are extremely

challenging in China.


    Among numerous potential reasons for elderly mental disorder and suicide, lack of family companionship

is hypothesized to be a crucial one. Many news articles suggest the importance of family companionship

for the mental health of the empty-nest elderly in China.7 However, scientific research is lacking to establish

a convincing relationship between family companionship and elderly suicide. Previous studies have mostly

provided correlational evidence (Antman 2010, Chen and Short 2008, Zurlo et al. 2014) or suggested the

relationship between family companionship and the mental health of the elderly (Chen and Fang 2018).8 In

addition, those studies often hypothesize similar effects of family companionship for mental disorder and

for suicide (Chen and Fang 2018).


    In this study, we provide more direct evidence on the relationship between family companionship and

elderly suicide, using the Chinese Lunar New Year (hereinafter referred to as "CLNY") as a social

experiment. The CLNY is one of the most important holidays in China, with family reunion as the most

central customs. Approximately 3 billion trips are being made each year during the "Spring Festival travel

rush" around the CLNY to reunite with families.9 During the CLNY, the elderly people, on average, receive

a considerably higher level of family companionship than normal weeks in the year. Our paper proceeds in

two steps. First, we estimate a causal effect of the CLNY on the elderly suicide rate. Second, we provide

suggestive evidence that increased family companionship during the CLNY is the main channel for the

reduction in elderly suicide rate.



6
  http://www.15lu.com/shijie/6158.html (in Chinese).
7
  For some examples, see https://opinion.huanqiu.com/article/9CaKrnJREXR, http://www.yidianzixun.com/article/0PVg0gE4,
and http://news.sohu.com/20100714/n273498420.shtml (in Chinese).
8
  Chen and Fang (2018) use the family planning policy in China and find that the family planning policy leads to fewer children
and worse mental health of the elderly, suggesting the importance of reduced family companionship for the elderly due to the
family planning policy. Antman (2010) finds that a child's migration to the US is associated with a greater chance that his elderly
parent in Mexico will be in poor physical and mental health, also suggesting the importance of family companionship on the
mental health of the elderly. Chen and Short (2008) find that living alone is associated with lower subjective wellbeing of the
elderly, whereas co-residence with immediate family is associated with positive subjective wellbeing of the elderly in China.
Zurlo et al. (2014) find that family, community, and public support are significantly and negatively associated with depressive
symptoms of the Chinese elderly.
9
  https://baike.baidu.com/item/%E6%98%A5%E8%BF%90/329360#15 (in Chinese).

                                                                2
 We use a uniquely grand new dataset from the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CCDC),

which contains county-week suicide rate data by gender and age cohorts from 2013 to 2017. To distinguish

CLNY effect from a calendar week effect, we utilize a novel exogenous variation in the timing of the CLNY

because of the traditional Chinese lunisolar calendar. For example, during 1991­2020, the CLNY fell 11

times in January and 19 times in February, fell 4 times in the 3rd week, 6 times in the 4th week, 8 times in

the 5th week, 7 times in the 6th week, and 5 times in the 7th week of the year. Our identification strategy is

to compare the elderly suicide rates in otherwise similar weeks whose treatment status differs because of

the Chinese lunisolar calendar conditional on other flexibly temporal controls.


 We find that the elderly suicide rate decreases by 8.7% (or 0.52 cases per 1 million people) during the

CLNY, when the elderly people receive unusually high level of family companionship. We refer to this as

the protective effect of the CLNY. The effects are pronounced and are of similar magnitude for men and

women. By contrast, we do not find similar protective effects of CLNY for young and middle-age cohorts,

indicating that income shocks or underreporting are unlikely to drive all of our results.


 We utilize the geographical variations in the average daily family companionship that the elderly typically

receives throughout the year to provide suggestive evidence on the mechanisms underlying the protective

effect of the CLNY. We construct proxy measures of average daily family companionship for the elderly

based on the living arrangements with their children using two data sources, namely, individual-level data

from the 2010 Census, and 2011 China Health and Retirement Longitudinal Study (CHARLS) survey data.

We find that the protective effects of the CLNY for the elderly are stronger in counties with a lower level

of average daily family companionship, where the elderly people are expected to receive a more dramatic

increase in family companionship during the CLNY. A one standard deviation increase in the average daily

family companionship for the elderly people in typical weeks of the year reduces the protective effects of

the CLNY by 5%­7%. We also show that the alternative mechanisms, including short-term population

flows, symbolic effects of holidays, and self-discipline of the elderly, cannot fully explain our results.




                                                      3
 Next, we investigate the dynamic effects of the CLNY on elderly suicides by directly estimating the

treatment effects of weeks before and after the CLNY. We find that the protective effects start to emerge

two weeks prior to the CLNY weeks, and some weak evidence shows that female elderly suicide rate may

increase in the subsequent 1 to 2 weeks after the CLNY week. However, the average of the treatment effects

within the two-month window is -5.7% and statistically significant. These results suggest that the protective

effects are not fully offset by the temporal displacement and separation anxiety effects, and the extra family

companionship during the CLNY generally reduces elderly suicides, rather than simply postponing them.


 Finally, we use CHARLS data to examine whether children are aware of the importance of the

companionship, and how they respond to the deterioration of their elderly parents' mental health. We find

that children may be aware of the mental health deterioration of their elderly parents and respond by

increasing wealth transfers to their parents. However, they are less likely to adjust their living arrangements

and provide more daily companionship. Overall, our results indicate that public policies calling for the

attention on family companionship for the elderly parents are urgently needed.


 The contributions of this study are two-fold. First, we contribute to the literature on family companionship

and the mental health of the elderly, and to the broad literature on the causes of mental disorder and suicide

(Case and Deaton 2015, Zou 2017, Carleton 2017, Burke et al. 2018, Pierce and Schott, 2020). We suggest

the relationship between family companionship and elderly mental health from a novel perspective, and

extend the previous literature by directly examining the effects on suicide. Second, we contribute to the

literature on the holiday effects on suicide (Jessen and Jensen 1999, Nishi et al. 2000, Beauchamp et al.

2014). We improve the identification by utilizing a novel timing variation of lunisolar calendar holidays

across different years to control for confounding temporal trends and provide convincing causal estimates.


 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we briefly introduce the background of

the Chinese Lunar New Year. In Section 3 we describe the data and the empirical strategy and present our

main results and discusses alternative explanations in Section 4. Finally, in Section 5 we conclude.



                                                      4
2 Background

 The Chinese Lunar New Year (the Spring Festival) is the Chinese festival that celebrates the beginning of

a new year on the traditional Chinese lunisolar calendar. It is one of the most important holidays in China

(also in neighboring countries such as Korea and Vietnam). It is also celebrated worldwide in regions and

countries with significant overseas Chinese population, including Singapore, Indonesia, and Malaysia, as

well as many in North America and Europe.10 In China, the CLNY is a statutory holiday that starts from

the day before the New Year's Day (Lunar New Year's Eve) and lasts for seven consecutive days. The

exact timing of the CLNY varies across different years because of the variation generated by the Chinese

lunisolar calendar.


 The CLNY is associated with many rituals and customs. The most important one is family reunion, similar

to Thanksgiving in the United States. The evening preceding the Chinese New Year's Day is frequently

regarded as an occasion for Chinese families to gather for the annual reunion dinner. Around 3 billion trips

are being made each year during the Spring Festival travel rush around the CLNY to reunite with families.

Other rituals include house cleaning, paper-cutting, and lighting firecrackers, all having the meaning of

welcoming good luck.




3 Data and Empirical Strategy

3.1 Data

 The main dataset used in this study is county­week suicide rate data by gender and age cohorts from the

CCDC. The sample covers 597 counties (if in rural area) or districts (if in urban area) (6-digit administrative

code) under the Disease Surveillance Point (DSP) system from 2013 to 2017.11 The system collects death



10
  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_New_Year.
11
  The administrative division from high to low in China is follows: provinces/municipalities (2-digit administrative code),
prefectures (4-digit administrative code), counties/districts (6-digit administrative code).

                                                                5
records from the surveillance locations and is representative at provincial and national levels. Under the

DSP system, deaths that occurred in hospitals and at homes are reported, and the causes of death are

determined according to a standard protocol by trained staff located in local hospitals or CCDC branches.

The DSP system covers more than 324 million people in China, accounting for 24.3% of the country's

population. Figure 1 shows the geographical distribution of the counties/districts under the DSP system,

which illustrates the representativeness of our sample.


                                                     [Figure 1 About Here]


 We also use two additional datasets to construct the proxy measures of average daily family

companionship for the elderly. The first data source is the microdata of the 2010 Chinese Population Census.

The dataset contains 4,400,367 individual observations, which are randomly drawn from the total

population in 2010. The dataset contains information on the number of people registered in the household,

which we refer to as household size, and we use the average household size of the elderly people at the

prefecture level (4-digit administrative code) as a proxy for the average level of daily family companionship

that the elderly people receive.12


 The second data source is the CHARLS survey data, which contains detailed information on the living

arrangements of children of the elderly. CHARLS aims to collect a high-quality nationally representative

sample of Chinese residents age 45 and older. The baseline national wave of CHARLS was fielded in 2011

and includes about 10,000 households and 17,500 individuals in 150 counties/districts.13 We construct two

measures on daily family companionship. The first is the proportion of children living in the household.

For example, if a household has four children, and two of them live with the elderly parents, we define the

proportion for the household as 50%. We then take the average for all households in the prefecture. The

second is the proportion of the elderly people with at least one child living in the same household; that is,

we define a dummy variable that equals 1 if at least one child lives in the household, and then take the


12
     We do not average at the county level because there are only a few individual observations in the county.
13
     The CHARLS data can be accessed at http://charls.pku.edu.cn/index/en.html.

                                                                  6
average for all households in the prefecture.14 Note that these variables are measured at prefecture level (4-

digit administrative code) because only prefecture codes are publicly available for the CHARLS data, and

then matched with the counties or districts (6-digit administrative code) under that prefecture in our sample.

On average, each prefecture is linked with less than 2 counties in our sample. The underlying assumption

is that prefecture-level measures are good proxies for the characteristics of counties and districts within the

prefecture. These measures may contain classical measurement error, and our estimates may be biased

toward 0. Therefore, our estimates may serve as a lower bound for the true effects. More detailed

discussions are in Section 4.


 Another assumption is that the elderly people receive more family companionship if they have children

living in the same household. Moreover, the variations in these proxy measures are cross sectional and only

capture the geographical variation in the average daily family companionship for the elderly, potentially

due to differences in labor markets, migration tendency, and social security service across different regions.




3.2 Empirical Strategy

 We consider the fact that the timing of the CLNY varies across different years to estimate the causal

effects of the CLNY on suicide. The main specification is as follows:


                           !!"#$ = # + %&'(!"#$ + )! + *" + +# + $ + !"#$ ,


where !!"#$ is the outcome variable of county . in year /, month 0, and week 1. Each observation is a

county­week combination. &'(!"#$ is a binary variable that equals 1 if the week of observation is during

the CLNY. The observation is at the week level that starts on Sunday and ends on Saturday, and the statutory

holidays of the CLNY last for seven days, which usually do not perfectly coincide with a Sunday­Saturday



14
  We use baseline survey (2011) of CHARLS to construct the measures because they are closely comparable to measures
constructed from the microdata of the 2010 Population Census, and the baseline survey is most comprehensive and
representative.

                                                            7
week. Thus, we define the week as in the CLNY if at least part of the week contains the statutory holidays.

Figures A1­A3 provide an illustration. As shown in Figure A1, the CLNY in 2013 was on February 10,

and February 9­15 were statutory holidays. Therefore, the two weeks in red in the calendar (February 3­9

and 10­16) are defined as in the CLNY. Figure A2 illustrates the case for 2016, when the statutory holidays

perfectly coincide with a Sunday­Saturday week (February 7­13), and it is thus the only week defined as

in the CLNY in 2016. The year 2016 is the only year in the sample that shows perfect coincidence and has

only one week defined as in the CLNY, whereas the other years all have two weeks defined to be in the

CLNY. To ensure that our results are not contaminated by week lengths, we conduct a robustness check by

excluding 2016, and our results are robust. Similarly, Figure A3 illustrates the case for 2017, when the

CLNY was in January, and two weeks (January 22­28 and January 29­February 4) are defined as in the

CLNY. It illustrates the temporal variation of the CLNY within our sample period, that is, the CLNY may

happen in different weeks and months across different years.


 The main outcome of interest is suicide rate. We specify the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide cases per

1 million people as the dependent variable. The inverse hyperbolic sine function, 345(7) = 9:;(7 +

1 + 7 % ), is approximate to log function that the marginal effects can be interpreted as percentage changes

for small changes, but the function is well-defined at 0. This measure is commonly used in the literature

(Barreca et al. 2017, Card and Della Vigna 2017). We prefer the inverse hyperbolic sine model because

suicide is a rare event, and around 82% of the county-week observations have zeros in elderly suicide rate.15

Nevertheless, our results are robust if we use raw suicide rate.16


 We include year fixed effects *" , month fixed effects +# , and week-of-month fixed effects >$ to control

for the possible time trends and seasonality of suicide.17 We also control for county fixed effects )! to


15
   Throughout the rest of the paper, we use the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide rate as the dependent variable unless explicitly
specified.
16
   An alternative approach to model suicide events is to use nonlinear count models such as Poisson regression. However, as
discussed in Carleton (2017), modeling the data generating process as Poisson imposes the restriction that the mean and variance
of the suicide rates are identical, which is not the case in our sample, as shown in Table 1. Therefore, we do not report results of
nonlinear count models, but our results are still robust when using Poisson regression.
17
   A strong temporal pattern and seasonality is observed in suicide rate, as shown in Figures 2 and 3.

                                                                 8
control for time-invariant differences across counties. The regression is weighed by county population, and

the standard errors are clustered at the county level.


 Our identification strategy is that the timing of the CLNY is based on the traditional Chinese lunisolar

calendar, which varies across different years and allows us to address the potential confoundedness of

temporal trends by flexibly controlling for temporal fixed effects. Table A1 presents the distribution of the

timing of the CLNY in the past 30 years (1991­2020). The CLNY fell 11 times in January and 19 times in

February. The timing ranges from the 3rd week to the 7th week of the year, and the distribution is more or

less random. The temporal variation allows us to compare otherwise similar weeks whose treatment status

differs because of the Chinese lunisolar calendar. The assumption is that the potential temporal trends in

suicide are absorbed by temporal fixed effects based on the solar calendar.


 One may be concerned that the temporal trends are based on the Chinese lunisolar calendar rather than the

solar calendar. We cannot test this hypothesis because our suicide data are based on the solar calendar.

However, Martin et al. (1992) find little evidence on the relationship between lunar cycles and suicide

attempts and completions. In addition, most individual and social activities are arranged based on the solar

calendar in China; thus, arguably, most time trends are absorbed by time fixed effects based on the solar

calendar. By contrast, most previous studies examining the holiday effects on suicide (Nishi et al. 2000,

Beauchamp et al. 2014) are unable to control for temporal trends as most solar calendar holidays appear on

the same days (or the same week) every year. Therefore, their results may be confounded by temporal trends,

such as seasonality.




                                                         9
4 Results

 We start by presenting a set of descriptive evidence of the overall pattern of the suicide rate in China.

Figure 2 depicts the temporal trends in national-level suicide rate.18 Panel A shows the temporal trends in

total suicide rate. The overall weekly suicide rate is around 1­1.5 cases per 1 million people. The suicide

rate peaks in spring and summer and falls in autumn and winter, exhibiting strong seasonality. The strong

temporal trends in suicide rate further illustrate the advantage of our research design to eliminate the

confounding temporal trends. Panel B shows the temporal trends in suicide rate by gender. The suicide rate

of female and male follows similar temporal trends. Men, on average, have higher suicide rate than women.

Figure 3 shows the temporal trends in suicide rate by age cohort. The elderly (age 65+) have considerably

higher suicide rate than middle-age adults (age 20­64) and children and teenagers (age 0­19). The weekly

suicide rate of the elderly reaches 4­6 per 1 million people, which is 4 to 5 times higher than the general

population. Table 1 shows the summary statistics of weekly suicide rate by gender and age cohorts. The

average suicide rate for the elderly is 4.44 cases per 1 million population per week in our sample, with a

standard deviation of 13.29.


                                               [Figures 2 and 3 About Here]


                                                    [Table 1 About Here]


4.1 Correlational Evidence

 We first present a set of correlational evidence to illustrate the relationship between family companionship

and elderly suicide. If family companionship is effective in preventing elderly suicide, we should observe

a lower level of elderly suicide in counties where the elderly receives a higher level of average daily family

companionship. We construct proxy measures of average daily family companionship that the elderly

people receive in different counties from two data sources. The first data source is the microdata of the



18
   The weekly suicide rate is aggregated at the national level by computing the weighted average of county-level suicide rates,
with county-level population as weights.

                                                               10
2010 Chinese Population Census, which contains information on the number of people registered in the

household.19 Our main measure on average daily family companionship is the average household size of

the elderly people. Our alternative measure is a dummy variable which takes value of 1 if the elderly people

live in households with at least three other people. We then average the two measures at prefecture level to

match with suicide data.


 We also use a separate data source, CHARLS, which collects detailed information on the living

arrangements of the children of the elderly. We calculate the proportion of children that live in the

household, averaged at the prefecture level. We also define an alternative measure as the proportion of the

elderly people with at least one child living in the same household at the prefecture level. Note that these

variables are measured at prefecture level (4-digit administrative code), and then matched with the

counties/districts (6-digit administrative code) that belong to the prefecture in our sample, assuming that

prefecture-level measures are good proxies for the characteristics of counties and districts within the

prefecture. On average, each prefecture is linked with less than 2 counties/districts in our sample.


 These four different proxy measures from two data sources are highly correlated and are expected to

capture the average daily family companionship that the elderly receive in different counties. The

underlying assumption is that the elderly people receive more family companionship if they have children

living in the same household. Note that the variations in these measures are cross sectional only, and capture

the geographical variation in the average daily family companionship for the elderly, potentially due to

differences in labor markets, migration tendency, and social security service across different counties.


 We regress the elderly suicide rate on these average daily family companionship measures, controlling for

temporal fixed effects including year fixed effects, month fixed effects, and week-of-month fixed effects.

Note that we cannot control of county fixed effects in these regressions because the main variables only

have county-level variations. Table 2 presents the results. We exclude observations of all counties/districts


19
   When constructing the proxy measures, observations with household size larger than or equal to 10 are dropped (less than 1%
of total observations).

                                                              11
of direct-controlled municipalities (including Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, and Chongqing), as the

administrative level of these counties/districts are higher than the normal counties/districts of prefectures

and are thus not comparable.20 We control for a set of socioeconomic characteristics of these counties in

the baseline (Columns (1), (3), (5) and (7)). 21 We also include a set of labor market and demographic

characteristics of the elderly people as additional controls to assess the robustness of the results (Columns

(2), (4), (6) and (8)).22 All these control variables and measures of average daily family companionship are

standardized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 to facilitate interpretation.23 In addition, a

dummy indicator for being an urban district rather than a rural county is included in all columns.


                                                    [Table 2 About Here]


 The results in Table 2 provide consistent evidence that elderly suicide rate is negatively associated with

the average daily family companionship. The coefficients are negative and statistically significant in most

specifications. Estimates suggest that a one standard deviation increase in the average daily family

companionship is associated with around 10% decrease in elderly suicide rate. The results are robust to

different proxy measures of average daily family companionship. In addition, we find that the elderly

suicide rate is smaller in urban districts than in rural counties and decreases with regional economic

development (GDP per capita), healthcare access (number of hospital per capita), and educational

attainment of the elderly people. These results are correlational and may not be interpreted as causal

relationships. However, the correlational evidence still suggests that family companionship may have




20
   The administrative levels in China include (from high to low) province­prefecture­county/district. However, the
counties/districts of direct-controlled municipalities (including Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, and Chongqing) are at the prefecture
administrative level and are thus not directly comparable with other counties/districts under prefectures.
21
   These socioeconomic characteristics include regional GDP per capita, average rural income, and number of hospitals per capita
of the prefecture in 2012, retrieved from the China Statistical Yearbook for Regional Economy.
22
   These additional control variables include the rate of employment of the city, the proportion of immigrants among the elderly,
and the average years of schooling of the elderly, calculated from the microdata of the 2010 Chinese Population Census.
23
   Note that all these variables are measured at the prefecture level. Ideally, we would like to directly use county-level
characteristics, but county-level data for all Chinese counties are unavailable. Therefore, we use prefecture-level characteristics
instead and assume that it is a good proxy for the characteristics of counties and districts within the prefecture. In fact, when
excluding all direct-controlled municipalities, there are 565 counties in 315 prefectures; thus, on average, each prefecture is
linked with less than 2 counties in our sample. These characteristics may contain classical measurement error, and our estimates
may be biased toward 0. Therefore, our estimates may serve as a lower bound for the true effects.

                                                                12
important protective effects on elderly suicide, even after controlling for socioeconomic and demographic

characteristics.




4.2 Main Results

 In this section, we illustrate the protective effects of the CLNY on elderly suicide. Table 3 presents the

main results. Columns (1) and (2) show the results with total elderly (65+) suicide rate as the dependent

variable. In the preferred specification (Column (1)), we use the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide rate as

the dependent variable. We also provide results using the level of suicide rate (per 1 million people) as the

dependent variable in Column (2). These results suggest that the elderly suicide rate decreases by 8.7% (or

by 0.52 cases per 1 million people) during the CLNY. Columns (3) to (6) further show the results separately

by gender. During the CLNY, the suicide rate of the female elderly decreases by 6.3% (or 0.44 cases per 1

million people), and the suicide rate of the male elderly decreases by 6.7% (or 0.61 cases per 1 million

people), which are statistically significant.24


                                                     [Table 3 About Here]


 The effects are sizable compared with previous studies on causes of suicide. Zou (2017) shows that wind

farm installation in the United States leads to a 2% increase in suicide rate in the following years. Carleton

(2017) shows that for days above 20 °C in India, a 1 °C increase in a single day's temperature during the

growing season increases annual suicides by 0.008 per 100,000 people, which translates to increase in

suicide rate by 3.5% for a standard deviation increase in temperature. Burke et al. (2018) show that suicide

rate increases by 0.7% in the United States and by 2.1% in Mexico for a 1 °C increase in monthly average




24
   Note that the effect on total elderly suicide rate is out of the convex combination of the effect on female and male elderly
suicide rate, because of the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation. The results in the level form still have the property that the
effect on total elderly suicide rate is in the convex combination of the effect on female elderly suicide rate and the effect on male
elderly suicide rate, and the results are qualitatively similar.

                                                                 13
temperature. Our estimates are of similar magnitude or even more pronounced compared with previous

studies.


                                           [Table 4 About Here]


 In Table 4, we further examine the effects of the CLNY on suicide rate by gender and age cohort, no

longer restricted to the elderly (65+) group. Columns (1)­(3) present the results for age cohorts 0­19, 20­

64, and 65+, respectively; and Columns (4)­(6) further divide the 20­64 group into three subgroups (i.e.,

20­34, 35­49, and 50­64, respectively). Panel A presents the results for total suicide rate, and Panels B and

C present the results for female and male, respectively. We find no evidence to suggest that the suicide rate

decreases for teenagers or middle-age people during the CLNY. The estimates are all small in magnitude

and statistically insignificant.


                                           [Table 5 About Here]


 To assess the robustness of the results, Table 5 presents the estimation results of a few variants of the

baseline specification reported in Table 3. Panels A­C present the results for total, female, and male elderly

suicide rate, respectively. We report the baseline estimates in Column (1) as a comparison. First, we test

the robustness of our treatment definition. In Column (2), instead of defining treatment status as a dummy

variable in our baseline, we define the treatment as the proportion of days in the week that are during

statutory holidays for the CLNY. The proportion variable changing from 0 to 1 indicates changing from the

case that no day in the week is during statutory holidays to the case that all seven days in the week are

during statutory holidays. The results are qualitatively similar, suggesting that the elderly suicide rate

decreases by 9.8% if the whole week is during the statutory holidays of the CLNY.


 Second, we test the robustness of temporal fixed effects. One may be concerned that month fixed effects

and week-of-the-month fixed effects cannot sufficiently capture the temporal trends in suicide rate, as the

first week of the month may have different effects in different months. Therefore, in Column (3), we

consider a more conservative specification and replace week-of-the-month fixed effects with week-of-the-


                                                     14
year fixed effects, which fully captures the temporal trends across weeks in a year. The results are generally

smaller and less precisely estimated, because the residual variation is smaller in the more saturated model.25

However, we still find a 5.7% decrease in total elderly suicide rate during the CLNY, and it is statistically

significant at the 5% level.


 Third, we test the robustness of weighing the regression. Our baseline weighs the regression by county-

level population. In Column (4), we do not weigh the regression. We expect to find similar results because

the variation in treatment does not change at the county level; thus, weighing should matter less as we

already control for county fixed effects. The results are consistent with our expectation.


 Fourth, we test the robustness of clustering of standard errors. Our baseline model clusters standard errors

at the county level, which controls for autocorrelation within each county. In Column (5), we cluster the

standard errors at the province level to control for both auto and spatial correlation within each province,

and we obtain similar results because the treatment does not vary across geographical units. In Column (6),

we use two-way clustering at the county and week levels to control for autocorrelation within each county

and spatial correlation within each week. Our results are generally robust.


 Lastly, we test the robustness of sample construction. In Column (7), we exclude observations of year

2016, because this is the only year that the statutory holidays perfectly coincide with a Sunday­Saturday

week, such that only one week in the year is defined to be during the CLNY. The results are highly similar.

In Column (8), we exclude observations of all counties/districts of direct-controlled municipalities, because

the administrative level of these counties/districts are higher than the normal counties/districts of

prefectures. We lose approximately 5% of observations, but the results are similar. Finally, as shown in

Table A1, the CLNY mostly happen during January and February, and one may be concerned that weeks

in other months are incomparable. Thus, we restrict the sample to only weeks in January to February in

Column (9), and the results are similar.



25
     Thus, we do not choose this model as the baseline model.

                                                                15
4.3 Heterogenous Effects and Mechanisms

 As family reunion is the most important custom of the CLNY, increase in family companionship and

emotional support from family members is the largest change for the elderly people during the CLNY. To

reunite with families, around 3 billion trips are being made each year during the Spring Festival travel rush

around the CLNY. Survey evidence suggests that 80% of people go back home to reunite with their families,

and 70% agree that family reunion during the CLNY is a traditional custom and they keep celebrating with

families every year.26 Therefore, we can hypothesize that family companionship is one important channel

for the protective effects of the CLNY on elderly suicide documented in Tables 3 and 5. However, many

other contemporaneous changes also occur during the CLNY, which makes it difficult to precisely pinpoint

the family companionship as the only driver for the protective effects of the CLNY for the reduction in the

elderly suicides. Indeed, our intention is not to argue that family companionship is the only channel for the

protective effects of CLNY on the elderly. In this section, we examine heterogeneous effects across

geographical regions and provide suggestive evidence that at least the family companionship mechanism is

one of the key channels. The other competing mechanisms may also be operating, but they alone cannot

explain the set of facts we documented in this paper.


 The key fact we consider is that change in family companionship during the CLNY is not homogeneous

for all the elderly people. For the elderly who do not live with children in the same household and receive

low level of daily family companionship, the change in family companionship during the CLNY is

considerably more dramatic. Therefore, in counties where the elderly people receive a lower level of daily

family companionship, on average, the aggregate protective effects should be larger.27




26
   http://finance.sina.com.cn/consume/xiaofei/2018-02-13/doc-ifyrpeie1483601.shtml (in Chinese).
27
   Ideally, we would like to investigate whether the protective effects of CLNY are different for individuals living in households
with different sizes, but no such individual-level data are available in the Chinese context. Therefore, we can only investigate the
relationship at the aggregate (i.e. county) level.

                                                                16
                                                    [Table 6 About Here]


 We examine the hypothesis in Tables 6 and 7. We regress elderly suicide rate on the interaction term of

the CLNY dummy and proxy measures of average daily family companionship, and we hypothesize that

the coefficient of the interaction term should be positive (i.e., the protective effect of the CLNY is less

pronounced in counties with more daily family companionship). In this part of the analysis, again, we

exclude observations of all counties/districts of direct-controlled municipalities. In Columns (1) to (4) of

Table 6, we use the average household size as the proxy measure. In Columns (5) to (8), we measure daily

family companionship using the proportion of the elderly people living in household with at least three

other people. In all regressions, we include the proxy measure itself, the interaction, the CLNY dummy, a

dummy variable for whether the unit is rural county or urban district, and the interaction between the CLNY

dummy and the urban-rural dummy.28 We also control for the year, month, and week-of-month fixed effects.


We start with omitting county fixed effects and economic controls in Column (1). We find that the

interaction term is indeed positive and statistically significant, which agrees with our hypothesis. In Column

(2), we control for the county fixed effects, and thus the cross-sectional measure of average daily family

companionship is omitted. The results are highly stable. In Columns (3) and (4), we further include

interaction terms of the CLNY dummy and other county characteristics, including regional GDP per capita,

average rural income, number of hospitals per capita, employment rate, the proportion of immigrants among

the elderly, and the average years of schooling of the elderly, to allow for heterogeneous effects. The results

on the interaction term of the CLNY dummy and proxy measures of average daily family companionship

are robust to the inclusion of these additional interaction controls. More importantly, the estimates on the

other additional interactions controlling themselves are insignificant, thereby suggesting that heterogeneity

in daily family companionship plays a dominant role.




28
     Our results are robust if we drop the urban dummy and the urban-CLNY interaction.

                                                               17
 In Columns (5) to (8), we repeat the same analysis but use the proportion of the elderly people living in

household with at least three other people as the proxy measure. The results are robust to this alternative

measure. Overall, the results in Table 6 suggest that a one standard deviation increase in the proxy measure

of the average daily family companionship for the elderly reduces the protective effects of the CLNY by

5%­7%.


                                           [Table 7 About Here]


 One may be concerned that the household size constructed from the census data is not a good measure on

daily family companionship. Here, we repeat the analysis using a more direct measure, which is the

proportion of children living in the household, from CHARLS. Note that CHARLS only covers around 100

prefectures; thus, the sample size is reduced by more than a half. In Column (1) of Table 7, we first repeat

the main regression using the subsample. We find a significant yet considerably larger effect than the full-

sample estimate. In Columns (2) to (5), we repeat the same analysis as in Table 6, and we find significantly

positive estimates on the interaction terms between the CLNY dummy and the proxy measure. Through

Columns (6) to (9), we use a dummy variable on whether having children living in the household as the

proxy measure and find similar effects. These results suggest that a one standard deviation increase in the

measure of the average daily family companionship for the elderly people reduces the protective effects of

the CLNY by 6%­9% in this subsample. We also repeat these analyses by gender and report them in Tables

A2­A5. The results are qualitatively similar, and the effects are more pronounced for elderly men.


 Although there may exist alternative explanations for the protective effects of the CLNY, the alternative

explanations should be able to explain several important aspects of our main finding as follows:


 (1) The suicide rate of the elderly is reduced during the CLNY.


 (2) No change is observed in the suicide rate of other age groups.


 (3) The protective effects decline as the average daily family companionship for the elderly increases.



                                                    18
 Now, we discuss several competing explanations as follows.


 Short-run population flows and Spring Festival travel rush


 One potential explanation for the reduction of the elderly suicide rate during the CLNY is short-term

travels. Billions of individuals in China travel during the CLNY season to reunite with their families.29 The

reduction of suicide rate may simply reflect that individuals travel out of counties and will not be recorded

as committing suicide in the county. However, this hypothesis is unlikely to explain the results for several

reasons. First, the protective effects are only for the elderly group, which is the least likely group to

participate in the Spring Festival travel rush. Children of the elderly are more likely to travel to visit the

elderly, instead of the other way around. Second, as shown in Tables 6 and 7, the protective effects do not

change with the proportion of the elderly immigrants (as a proxy for the intensity of potential outflows

during the Spring Festival travel rush). Therefore, short-term population flows are unlikely to explain the

results.


 Changes in income during the CLNY


 Another competing explanation is that the income of the elderly may change during the seven-day

statutory holiday. However, most of the elderly group has already retired and is unlikely to face income

shocks or other labor market shocks during the CLNY.30 In addition, we find no effects for the middle-age

group who is more likely to face labor market shocks. Therefore, labor market shocks cannot explain the

results. Another potential source of income shock is the custom of giving "red-envelope money" and gift

giving during the CLNY.31 The elderly people may give out red-envelope money to their children and their

grandchildren or may also receive red-envelope money from their children who have jobs, and the net

wealth change due to the exchange of red-envelope money may depend on local customs. Nevertheless,

despite the possibility that the elderly may receive positive income shocks from red-envelope money and


29
   http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2015-03/16/content_2835003.htm (in Chinese).
30
   The retirement age in China is 60 for men, and is either 55 or 50 for women depending on her occupations.
31
   A red envelope (also known as hongbao) is a monetary gift usually given during the CLNY, which has the symbol of good
luck. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_envelope for more introduction on the custom of red envelope.

                                                            19
gifts during the CLNY, this does not invalidate the mechanism of family companionship. That is, red-

envelope money and gifts are often from family members, usually given in person, and may be perceived

as a particular form of family companionship. It is worthwhile to point out that generally the potential

income shocks from red-envelope money and gifts should be independent of the level of daily family

companionship received by the elderly, thus the red-envelope money and gift alone cannot explain the

results of heterogeneous effects by itself.


 Changes in healthcare institution access during the CLNY


 Another explanation is that access to healthcare institutions may change during the seven-day statutory

holiday. However, even during the seven-day statutory holidays, many public hospitals remain open and

provide emergency services. Moreover, even if such effects are observed, they should lead to more, not

less, attempted suicides resulting in deaths. Thus, it should only bias the results downward. In addition, we

do not find evidence that the protective effects depend on healthcare institution access, measured by number

of hospitals per capita (Tables 6 and 7).


 Underreporting of suicide during the CLNY


 Another concern is that suicide cases may be underreported during the CLNY, potentially due to lack of

officials to record the suicide deaths during statutory holidays. However, if the reduction of suicide rate is

due to underreporting, we should observe similar effects for all age cohorts, which is not the case.


 Symbolic effects of holidays


 Another potential explanation of the protective effects is that holidays may represent a good symbol that

improves mental health. However, it cannot explain why the protective effects depend on daily family

companionship. In addition, we directly examine this hypothesis by investigating the effects of other

Chinese lunisolar calendar holidays, including Dragon Boat Festival and Mid-Autumn Festival, on elderly

suicide rate. Note that the timing of these lunisolar calendar holidays also varies across different years,

which enables us to control for temporal trends. The specifications are similar to our baseline specification

                                                     20
for the CLNY. Different from the CLNY, Dragon Boat Festival and Mid-Autumn Festival are only a one-

day holiday, and the day off is sometimes adjusted.32 Young and middle-age people are considerably less

likely to return home to visit their parents during these statutory holidays.


                                                [Figures 4 and 5 About Here]


 Figures 4 and 5 show the effects of Dragon Boat Festival and Mid-Autumn Festival on suicide rate by

gender and age cohort. Little evidence supports the protective effects of Dragon Boat Festival and Mid-

Autumn Festival on elderly suicide, thus casting doubt on the symbolic effects as a mechanism.


 Here, we further discuss why strong protective effects exist for the CLNY, but not for the Dragon Boat

Festival and Mid-Autumn Festival. The potential explanation is still the family companionship story.

Family reunion is the core value of the CLNY. To reunite with families, around 3 billion trips are being

made each year during the Spring Festival travel rush around the CLNY. Survey evidence suggests that 80%

of people go back home to reunite with their families, and 70% agree that family reunion during the CLNY

is a traditional custom and they keep practicing celebrating with families every year (see Footnote 26). The

seven-day statutory holiday enables most people to travel and reunite with families.


 By contrast, although other traditional Chinese lunisolar calendar holidays, such as Dragon Boat Festival

and Mid-Autumn Festival, also have symbols of family reunion, the statutory holidays last for only three

days, which impedes many people from going back home. For example, survey evidence suggests that 58%

of people cannot go back home and visit their parents during the Mid-Autumn Festival.33 In addition, survey

evidence suggests that 53% of young and middle-age people living outside of hometown are only able to




32
   For example, if the day of the holiday is next to a weekend, then that day will usually be specified as the day off. If the day of
the holiday is far from weekends, then it may be adjusted that people work on the holiday and have a three-day long weekend. As
our data are at the week level, we specify the week that has the actual additional day off as the treatment week for Dragon Boat
Festival and the Mid-Autumn Festival.

33
     https://news.qq.com/a/20110912/000360.htm (in Chinese).

                                                                 21
pay visitation to their parents for 3­10 days a year, which also suggests that people are less able to reunite

with their families in holidays other than the CLNY.34


 Self-discipline of the elderly to avoid suicide during happy events


 Another alternative explanation is that the elderly people may have self-discipline to avoid committing

suicide during happy events, which may create additional sadness for their family. However, as previously

discussed, no similar evidence shows the protective effects for other Chinese lunisolar calendar holidays.

In addition, this mechanism cannot explain why the protective effects differ across different levels of daily

family companionship. If self-discipline is driving the results, then the effects should be similar regardless

of whether children are living in the households.


 Social companionship during the CLNY


 Another potential confounding mechanism is the increased social companionship during the CLNY. Some

local communities may visit the elderly people in poverty or living alone, and help them prepare for the

CLNY, and the additional social companionship may also contribute to the reduction of elderly suicide

rate. 35 We cannot acquire measures of social companionship and cannot directly test the hypothesis.

However, the increased social companionship only covers a small proportion of elderly people, whereas

the increased family companionship covers most of the elderly people during the CLNY. In addition, this

explanation alone cannot explain the heterogeneous effects results. Even if the protective effects come

through additional social companionship during the CLNY, it still suggests the importance of

companionship and highlights the concern of aging population and increasing proportion of the empty-nest

elderly.




34
   https://cj.sina.com.cn/articles/view/1704103183/65928d0f020017mno (in Chinese).
35
   See https://baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=1623729898423645282&wfr=spider&for=pc (in Chinese) and
https://www.sohu.com/a/222845573_100014930 (in Chinese) for examples of news reports on social companionship activities.

                                                           22
 To conclude, most contemporaneous changes during the CLNY and alternative mechanisms cannot fully

explain our results. Therefore, the results suggest family companionship as a crucial mechanism of the

protective effects of the CLNY on elderly suicide.




4.4 Dynamic Effects

 In this section, we explore the dynamic effects of the CLNY. There could be several reasons for why there

are changes in elderly suicide rate in the weeks before and after the CLNY. First, there may exist an

anticipation effect, that is, anticipating the family companionship in the upcoming CLNY weeks may

improve the mental health of the elderly people. Previous studies (Rutledge et al. 2014) have found that

expectations for happy events can contribute to individuals' happiness before they even occur.36 Similar

effects may exist for the anticipation of family companionship, and in that case, we expect to observe a

decrease in elderly suicide rate before the CLNY. Second, there may exist a temporal displacement of

suicide, that is, the elderly may simply postpone their suicides to later weeks. In that case, we expect to

observe an increase in elderly suicide rate after the CLNY. Testing temporal displacement is important in

the sense that if all the protective effects are driven by temporal displacement, the social benefit of these

protective effects will be considerably smaller. Third, there may exist separation anxiety (Wijeratne and

Manicavasagar 2003) for the elderly people after the CLNY, and separating with children after the CLNY

may worsen the mental health of the elderly people. In that case, we also expect to observe an increase in

elderly suicide rate after the CLNY. Finally, there may exist a long-lasting effect of companionship, that is,

the companionship during the CLNY may improve the mental health of the elderly people even after the

holiday. In that case, we expect a decrease in elderly suicide rate after the CLNY.


 Therefore, the direction of dynamic effects is ex-ante unclear. We investigate the dynamic effects by

directly estimating the treatment effects of weeks before and after the CLNY. We exclude year 2016


36
     https://psychcentral.com/blog/expecting-to-be-happy-makes-you-happier/.

                                                               23
throughout this analysis, such that two weeks will be defined as in the CLNY for every year in the sample.37

Then, we define dummy variables indicating 1 to 4 weeks prior to the first week defined as in the CLNY

and dummy variables indicating 1 to 4 weeks after the last week defined as in the CLNY, and we include

all of them into the regression.38


                                                  [Figure 6 About Here]


 Figure 6 shows the results. We find that the protective effects of the CLNY start to exhibit 2 weeks prior

to the CLNY weeks, and there is some evidence that elderly suicide rate increases in the following 1 to 2

weeks after the CLNY weeks, especially for female. By contrast, we do not find evidence that suicide rate

of the male elderly increases after the CLNY.


 These results strongly support the anticipation effect, and some evidence supports temporal displacement

and separation anxiety, especially for female. Note that we cannot separately identify these mechanisms.

However, we are able to estimate the average of the treatment effects of the CLNY weeks and other weeks

within the two-month window to examine the overall effects.39 The average effect is a 5.7% decline (p-

value of 0.025) in elderly suicide rate, and a 6.0% decline (p-value of 0.022) in suicide rate of the male

elderly. However, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the overall effect is 0 for the female elderly

(average effect of -0.9%, p-value of 0.675). Therefore, even with the existence of temporal displacement

and separation anxiety, the protective effects are not fully offset, especially for male, and the CLNY is

effective at preventing elderly suicide. In addition, gender difference in dynamic effects suggests that the

male elderly may be more sensitive to family companionship than the female elderly, which is consistent

with the findings in previous studies (Stokes and Levin 1986) that the loneliness of men is more sensitive

to social network density than women.



37
   Year 2016 is excluded because it is the only year in our sample that only one week is defined to be during the CNLY, and the
results are hard to interpret when year 2016 is included as the weeks before and after the CNLY weeks are not comparable in
year 2016 and in other years. Nevertheless, the results are overall very similar when year 2016 is included in the analysis.
38
   There are in general no effects for weeks beyond the scope of this two-month time window.
39
   The average of effects is defined as 1/10  (&!" + &!# + &!$ + &!% + 2  && + &% + &$ + &# + &" ), because two weeks will
take the value of 1 for the CLNY dummy.

                                                              24
4.5 Children's Response

 If family companionship is crucial to the mental health of the elderly, are children aware of the importance

of family companionship, and do they respond to the mental health deterioration of their elderly parents?

In this section, we use CHARLS data (2011, 2013, and 2015) to construct a panel data of the elderly and

provide evidence on children's response to the elderly's mental health deterioration.


 We estimate the following model:


                                      !&," = # + %@ABCADD&,"() + F&," + &," ,


where the dependent variable is the change in children's behavior, including changes in living arrangements

and wealth transfers. The independent variable is the change in depression of the elderly i.40 To avoid

reverse causality and simultaneity bias, we estimate the effect of lagged change of depression of the elderly

(in period / - 1) on the change in children's response in period /. Specifically, we estimate the effect of

the change of depression of the elderly during 2011­2013 on the change in children's behavior during

2013­2015. Age fixed effects (age at the baseline survey in 2011), prefecture fixed effects, and the gender

of the elderly respondent are included as controls. The regressions are weighed by sample weights. Standard

errors are clustered at the prefecture level. Note that the coefficient of interest % still needs to be interpreted

with caution. That is, we cannot exclude the possibility that confounders correlated with change in

depression of the elderly and change in children's later behavior still exist, such that the effects may not be

interpreted as causal relationships.


                                                    [Table 8 About Here]




40
   CHARLS survey contains 10 questions about the severity of depression symptoms based on CES-D scale. The severity is rated
from 0 to 3. There are 8 questions about negative behavior and 2 questions about positive behavior, and the severity is reversely
ordered for the 2 questions about positive behavior. The depression index is defined as the mean of the severity points for the 10
questions. Results are similar using an alternative measure based on factor analysis.

                                                               25
 The results are presented in Table 8. In the odd columns, we present the baseline estimates. In the even

columns, we also control for the change in self-reported health, the change in instrumental limitations in

activities of daily living (IADL), the change in activities of daily living (ADL), and the change in marital

status.41 These additional covariates control for the changes in physical health, disabilities, daily living

limitations, and marital status in the same period that may confound the effects of changes in mental health.

Some additional baseline controls, including non-agricultural hukou status, years of schooling, and marital

status at the baseline survey (year 2011), are also included in the even columns.


 In Columns (1) and (2), we present the effects of the elderly's mental health deterioration on the change

in whether at least one child lives in the household. No evidence shows that children respond to the elderly's

mental health deterioration by living with their elderly parents, as the estimates are insignificant and

negative. In Columns (3) and (4), we instead define the dependent variable as the change in whether at least

one child lives in the same county as the elderly parents and, again, find small and statistically insignificant

estimates. The results are robust to the inclusion of baseline controls and covariates on the changes in

physical health daily living limitations and are highly similar if we alternatively define the dependent

variables as the changes in the proportion of children living in the household/same county. Therefore, we

find no evidence that children respond to the elderly's mental health deterioration by adjusting their living

arrangements.


 By contrast, we find some evidence that children increase intergenerational wealth transfers to their elderly

parents. Columns (5) and (6) present the effects on the change in net wealth transfer from the children to

the elderly parents. Column (5) suggests that if the change in the depression index of the elderly increases

by 1 unit, then children will increase the total net wealth transfer by CNY 1,365 (0.08 standard deviation).42


41
   These change variables are all measured at the same period (2011­2013) as the change of depression. Self-reported health
ranges from 1 (poor) to 5 (excellent). IADL measures people's difficulty in doing the following daily activities: doing household
chores, preparing meals, shopping for groceries, making phone calls, and taking medications. ADL measures people's difficulty
in doing the following daily activities: dressing, bathing and showing, self-feeding, getting into or out of bed, toilet hygiene, and
controlling urination and defecation. The respondent is defined to have limitations if reporting "have difficulty and need help" or
"cannot do it," following Chen and Fang (2018).
42
   Note that the net wealth transfer can be both positive and negative, so we use the level of net wealth transfer as the dependent
variable and are unable to use the log transformation.

                                                                 26
When including additional baseline controls and covariates on the changes in physical health and daily

living limitations, the point estimate loses precision but still remains economically pronounced. Note that

changes in daily living limitations also lead to an increase in total net wealth transfer from children at

similar magnitude, as shown in Column (6). These results suggest that children may be aware of the

deterioration of the mental health of their elder parents and respond by increasing wealth transfer to their

parents.


 To conclude, the results in Table 8 indicate that children in China may be aware of the mental health status

of their elderly parents; however, they seem not to be responding by adjusting living arrangements and

providing more daily companionship to their parents. By contrast, they may respond by increasing wealth

transfers to their elderly parents. However, as also discussed in Chen and Fang (2018), monetary transfers

may not be as helpful for the mental health of the elderly as for physical health and living limitations.


 Several potential explanations can describe why children are not responding by adjusting living

arrangements and providing more daily companionship to their parents. First, they may not correctly

perceive the influence of daily family companionship on the mental health of the elderly and underestimate

the benefits of adjusting living arrangements. Second, they may be aware of the benefits, but are constrained

to adjust living arrangements by other concerns, such as their career and the schooling of their children.

This explanation is especially plausible for people working in a different city. Third, the family planning

policy in China has reduced the number of children per household and thus reduced the likelihood that the

elderly have children who are able to adjust their living arrangements (Chen and Fang 2018). In conclusion,

policy interventions are needed to remove the barriers to children's response.




5 Conclusion

 In this study, we document a novel finding that elderly suicide rate decreases by 8.7% during the CLNY,

when the elderly people receive unusually high level of family companionship. In addition, the protective


                                                     27
effects for the elderly are stronger in counties where the level of the average daily family companionship

for the elderly is lower. We do not find any evidence of similar protective effects for young and middle-

age cohorts. These results suggest that family companionship is an important mechanism for the protective

effects of the CLNY, indicating the importance of family companionship on the mental health of the elderly.


 The finding in this study is especially policy-relevant in China, given the rapidly growing population of

empty-nest elderly and other countries with similar demographic structures. In fact, the revision of the Law

of the People's Republic of China on Protection of the Rights and Interests of the Elderly has been passed

in 2012, which legally requires that family members should care for the mental need of the elderly, and

family members who do not live with the elderly should regularly contact and visit the elderly.43 However,

the enforcement of the law has not been highly effective because the legal responsibilities are not clearly

specified, and the pressure on career and daily life also impedes the children of the elderly people from

providing more daily companionship to their elderly parents. 44 Therefore, public policies calling for

attention on the importance of the family companionship for the elderly parents, or facilitating alternative

types of companionship for the elderly, such as charitable visit and community care, may also be effective

in preventing elderly suicide.


 There are at least two limitations in our study. First, due to data constraints, we can only use proxy

measures of daily family companionship at the aggregated level, and thus preventing us from exploringwhat

types of the elderly people are most at risk and how individual characteristics interact with the protective

effects of the CLNY. Second, although we are confident on the causal effect of the CLNY on elderly suicide

rate because of the exogenous variation in the lunisolar calendar, we are less confident on the underlying

mechanisms for the protective effects since the geographic variation in daily family companionship may be

confounded with other factors related to elderly mental health. We leave these questions for future research.




43
  http://www.gov.cn/flfg/2012-12/28/content_2305570.htm (in Chinese).
44
  http://opinion.people.com.cn/n1/2017/0118/c1003-29031862.html and http://www.xinhuanet.com/2017-
06/19/c_1121165931.htm (in Chinese).

                                                          28
29
References
Antman, Francisca M. "Adult Child Migration and the Health of Elderly Parents Left Behind in Mexico."
The American Economic Review 100, no. 2 (2010): 205-208.
Barreca, Alan I., Matthew Neidell, and Nicholas J. Sanders. Long-run pollution exposure and adult
mortality: Evidence from the acid rain program. No. w23524. National Bureau of Economic Research,
2017.
Beauchamp, Gillian A., Mona L. Ho, and Shan Yin. "Variation in suicide occurrence by day and during
major American holidays." The Journal of emergency medicine 46, no. 6 (2014): 776-781.
Bloom, D.E. and D.L. Luca. "The Global Demography of Aging: Facts, Explanations, Future." In
Handbook of the Economics of Population Aging, Volume 1, 2016, Pages 3-56, edited by John Piggott
and Alan Woodland.
Burke, Marshall, Felipe González, Patrick Baylis, Sam Heft-Neal, Ceren Baysan, Sanjay Basu, and
Solomon Hsiang. "Higher temperatures increase suicide rates in the United States and Mexico." Nature
climate change 8, no. 8 (2018): 723-729.
Card, David, and Stefano DellaVigna. What do editors maximize? Evidence from four leading economics
journals. No. w23282. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.
Carleton, Tamma A. "Crop-damaging temperatures increase suicide rates in India." Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 114, no. 33 (2017): 8746-8751.
Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton. Suicide, age, and wellbeing: an empirical investigation. No. w21279.
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.
Chen, Yi, and Hanming Fang. The long-term consequences of having fewer children in old age: evidence
from China's "later, longer, fewer" campaign. No. w25041. National Bureau of Economic Research,
2018.
Chen, Yi, and Hanming Fang. The State of Mental Health Among the Elderly Chinese. No. w26690.
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
Chen, Feinian, and Susan E. Short. "Household context and subjective well-being among the oldest old in
China." Journal of family issues 29, no. 10 (2008): 1379-1403.
Jessen, Gert, and Børge F. Jensen. "Postponed suicide death? Suicides around birthdays and major public
holidays." Suicide and LifeThreatening Behavior 29, no. 3 (1999): 272-283.
Li, Xia, Zeping Xiao, and Shifu Xiao. "Suicide among the elderly in mainland China." Psychogeriatrics 9,
no. 2 (2009): 62-66.
Martin, S. J., I. W. Kelly, and D. H. Saklofske. "Suicide and lunar cycles: a critical review over 28 years."
Psychological reports 71, no. 3 (1992): 787-795.
Nishi, Motoi, Hirotsugu Miyake, Hiroyuki Okamoto, Youhei Goto, and Toshirou Sakai. "Relationship
between suicide and holidays." Journal of Epidemiology 10, no. 5 (2000): 317-320.
Pierce, Justin R., and Peter K. Schott. "Trade liberalization and mortality: evidence from US
counties." American Economic Review: Insights 2, no. 1 (2020): 47-64.


                                                     30
Rutledge, Robb B., Nikolina Skandali, Peter Dayan, and Raymond J. Dolan. "A computational and neural
model of momentary subjective well-being." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, no.
33 (2014): 12252-12257.
Shepard, Donald S., Deborah Gurewich, Aung K. Lwin, Gerald A. Reed Jr, and Morton M. Silverman.
"Suicide and suicidal attempts in the United States: costs and policy implications." Suicide and Life -
Threatening Behavior 46, no. 3 (2016): 352-362.
Stokes, Joseph P., and Ira Levin. "Gender differences in predicting loneliness from social network
characteristics." Journal of personality and social psychology 51, no. 5 (1986): 1069.
Wærn, Margda, Bo S. Runeson, Peter Allebeck, Jan Beskow, Eva Rubenowitz, Ingmar Skoog, and
Katarina Wilhelmsson. "Mental disorder in elderly suicides: a case-control study." American Journal of
Psychiatry 159, no. 3 (2002): 450-455.
Wijeratne, Chanaka, and Vijaya Manicavasagar. "Separation anxiety in the elderly." Journal of anxiety
disorders 17, no. 6 (2003): 695-702.
Zou, Eric. Wind Turbine Syndrome: The Impact of Wind Farms on Suicide. Working Paper, 2017.
Zurlo, Karen A., Hongwei Hu, and C. Huang. "The effects of family, community, and public policy on
depressive symptoms among elderly Chinese." J Sociol Soc Work 2, no. 2 (2014): 01-23.




                                                    31
Figures and Tables


                                              Figure 1: Geographical Distribution of Counties under the DSP System




Notes: This figure plots the geographical distribution of counties under the DSP system in the sample.




                                                                                        32
                                                           Figure 2: Temporal Trends in National Suicide Rate




Notes: This figure plots the temporal trends in weekly national-level suicide rate. Panel A plots the total suicide rate. Panel B plots the suicide rate by gender. The weekly suicide
rate is aggregated at national level by computing the weighted average of county-level suicide rates, with county population as weights.




                                                                                          33
                                                Figure 3: Temporal Trends in National Suicide Rate by Age Cohort




Notes: This figure plots the temporal trends in weekly national-level suicide rate by age cohort. The weekly suicide rate is aggregated at national level by computing the weighted
average of county-level suicide rates, with county population as weights.




                                                                                        34
                                      Figure 4: Effects of Dragon Boat Festival on Suicide Rate: by Gender and Age Cohort




Notes: This figure plots the effects of Dragon Boat Festival on suicide rate by gender and age cohort. The dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide cases per 1
million people. County fixed effects, year fixed effects, month fixed effects and week-of-month fixed effects are included as controls. The regression is weighted by county population.
Standard errors are clustered at county level. "x" markers represent bounds of 90% confidence interval. "-" markers represent bounds of 95% confidence interval.




                                                                                          35
                                     Figure 5: Effects of Mid-Autumn Festival on Suicide Rate: by Gender and Age Cohort




Notes: This figure plots the effects of Mid-Autumn Festival on suicide rate by gender and age cohort. The dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide cases per 1
million people. County fixed effects, year fixed effects, month fixed effects and week-of-month fixed effects are included as controls. The regression is weighted by county population.
Standard errors are clustered at county level. "x" markers represent bounds of 90% confidence interval. "-" markers represent bounds of 95% confidence interval.




                                                                                          36
                                               Figure 6: Dynamic Effects of Chinese Lunar New Year on Suicide Rate




Notes: This figure plots the effects of weeks before and after Chinese lunar new year on elderly suicide. The dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide cases per 1
million people. County fixed effects, year fixed effects, month fixed effects and week-of-month fixed effects are included as controls. The regression is weighted by county population.
Standard errors are clustered at county level. "x" markers represent bounds of 90% confidence interval. "-" markers represent bounds of 95% confidence interval. The average
dynamic effect is the average of the treatment effects of Chinese lunar new year weeks and weeks within the two-month window. The p-value is the test p-value for whether the
average dynamic effect is statistically different from 0.




                                                                                          37
                                                       Table 1: Summary Statistics for Weekly Suicide Rate
                                                                                 Mean                S.D.               Min     Max
 Panel A Total Suicide Rate
                        All age cohorts                                                1.158                    2.198    0    95.815
                           Age 0-19                                                    0.179                    1.752    0    87.441
                          Age 20-64                                                    1.074                    2.524    0    143.057
                            Age 65+                                                    4.437                   13.291    0    571.646
 Panel B Female Suicide Rate
                        All age cohorts                                                0.967                    2.721    0    196.321
                           Age 0-19                                                    0.154                    2.351    0    164.907
                          Age 20-64                                                    0.864                    3.159    0    290.731
                            Age 65+                                                    3.674                   15.785    0    1101.466
 Panel C Male Suicide Rate
                        All age cohorts                                                1.341                    3.144    0    95.320
                           Age 0-19                                                    0.200                    2.558    0    163.583
                          Age 20-64                                                    1.278                    3.739    0    143.441
                            Age 65+                                                    5.260                   19.974    0    998.942
Notes: Number of observations=151,253. The suicide rate is measured by number of cases per 1 million people.




                                                                                     38
                              Table 2: Correlational Evidence on the Effects of Daily Family Companionship on Elderly Suicide
                                                                                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
VARIABLES                                                                                                                 Total Suicide Rate, Age 65+
Average Household Size, Age 65+                                               -0.0883**      -0.1144***
                                                                               (0.0395)        (0.0437)
% Household Size >=4, Age 65+                                                                                -0.0615        -0.0789*
                                                                                                             (0.0395)       (0.0443)
Average Proportion of Children Living in the Household, Age 65+                                                                           -0.1435***     -0.1166***
                                                                                                                                            (0.0417)       (0.0412)
% Having Children Living in the Household, Age 65+                                                                                                                        -0.0904*         -0.0797
                                                                                                                                                                          (0.0542)        (0.0527)
Urban District                                                                  -0.2919***     -0.2613***    -0.2963***      -0.2628***        -0.2915**      -0.2954**  -0.2910**       -0.2953**
                                                                                  (0.0779)       (0.0767)      (0.0778)        (0.0766)         (0.1279)       (0.1273)   (0.1288)        (0.1275)
GDP Per Capita                                                                   -0.0962**        -0.0149      -0.0847*          0.0007          -0.2199        0.1020    -0.2427*          0.0981
                                                                                  (0.0479)       (0.0535)      (0.0476)        (0.0539)         (0.1349)       (0.1504)   (0.1369)        (0.1522)
Average Rural Income                                                               0.0055          0.0230        0.0083          0.0295           0.1258       -0.0585     0.1372          -0.0568
                                                                                  (0.0429)       (0.0522)      (0.0421)        (0.0524)         (0.1076)       (0.1155)   (0.1085)        (0.1166)
Number of Hospital Per Capita                                                   -0.2039***      -0.0939**    -0.2013***       -0.0913**       -0.2704***      -0.1388** -0.2655***        -0.1298*
                                                                                  (0.0415)       (0.0391)      (0.0414)        (0.0394)         (0.0664)       (0.0651)   (0.0682)        (0.0667)
Employment Rate                                                                                  0.1061**                      0.0997**                         0.0115                     -0.0016
                                                                                                 (0.0474)                      (0.0484)                        (0.0677)                   (0.0665)
Proportion of Immigrants, Age 65+                                                                 -0.0149                       -0.0312                         0.0447                      0.0503
                                                                                                 (0.0379)                      (0.0383)                        (0.0888)                   (0.0872)
Average Years of Schooling, Age 65+                                                            -0.1907***                    -0.1883***                      -0.3291***                 -0.3546***
                                                                                                 (0.0545)                      (0.0546)                        (0.0941)                   (0.0921)
Observations                                                                      122,960         122,960       122,960         122,960           57,878        54,219     57,878           54,219
R-squared                                                                           0.035           0.053         0.034           0.051           0.056         0.078       0.051           0.075
Population Weight                                                                    Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes        Yes             Yes
County FE                                                                            No              No            No              No               No            No         No               No
Year FE                                                                              Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes        Yes             Yes
Month FE                                                                             Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes        Yes             Yes
Week-of-Month FE                                                                     Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes        Yes             Yes
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide cases per 1 million people. Year fixed effects, month fixed
effects and week-of-month fixed effects are included as controls. The regression is weighted by county population. Standard errors are clustered at county level.




                                                                                               39
                                          Table 3: Effects of Chinese Lunar New Year on Elderly Suicide Rate
                                                (1)                       (2)                  (3)                (4)                (5)                 (6)
                                             Suicide Rate: Total, Age 65+               Suicide Rate: Female, Age 65+          Suicide Rate: Male, Age 65+
                                              Inverse                                        Inverse                               Inverse
VARIABLES                               Hyperbolic Sine                 Level           Hyperbolic Sine         Level        Hyperbolic Sine           Level
CLNY                                       -0.0867***                -0.5212***           -0.0632***          -0.4374**         -0.0666***          -0.6117***
                                             (0.0221)                  (0.1509)             (0.0216)           (0.2029)           (0.0238)            (0.2323)
Observations                                 151,253                   151,253              151,253            151,253            151,253             151,253
R-squared                                      0.258                    0.294                 0.199             0.194               0.204              0.170
Population Weight                               Yes                      Yes                   Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes
County FE                                       Yes                      Yes                   Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes
Year FE                                         Yes                      Yes                   Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes
Month FE                                        Yes                      Yes                   Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes
Week-of-Month FE                                Yes                      Yes                   Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide cases per 1 million
people in columns (1), (3) and (5), and is the level of suicide cases per 1 million people in columns (2), (4) and (6). County fixed effects, year fixed effects,
month fixed effects and week-of-month fixed effects are included as controls. The regression is weighted by county population. Standard errors are clustered at
county level.




                                                                               40
                             Table 4: Effects of Chinese Lunar New Year on Suicide Rate: By Gender and Age Cohort
                                                (1)                   (2)                  (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
                                           Suicide Rate          Suicide Rate         Suicide Rate      Suicide Rate       Suicide Rate       Suicide Rate
VARIABLES                                   Age 0-19              Age 20-64            Age 65+           Age 20-34          Age 35-49          Age 50-64
Panel A Total Suicide Rate
CLNY                                         -0.0079               -0.0148            -0.0867***          -0.0095            -0.0101            -0.0087
                                             (0.0070)              (0.0141)             (0.0221)          (0.0137)           (0.0157)           (0.0180)
Observations                                 151,253               151,253              151,253           151,253            151,253            151,253
R-squared                                     0.012                 0.150                0.258             0.034              0.065              0.129
Panel B Female Suicide Rate
CLNY                                         -0.0042               -0.0228            -0.0632***          -0.0115             0.0023            -0.0265
                                             (0.0072)              (0.0148)             (0.0216)          (0.0120)           (0.0141)           (0.0170)
Observations                                 151,253               151,253              151,253           151,253            151,253            151,253
R-squared                                     0.008                 0.095                0.199             0.019               0.036             0.087
Panel C Male Suicide Rate
CLNY                                           -0.0049                0.0037          -0.0666***            -0.0017            -0.0166             0.0171
                                              (0.0065)               (0.0168)           (0.0238)            (0.0145)           (0.0153)           (0.0204)
Observations                                  151,253                151,253            151,253             151,253            151,253            151,253
R-squared                                       0.010                  0.103             0.204               0.023              0.045               0.086
Population Weight                                Yes                    Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
County FE                                        Yes                    Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
Year FE                                          Yes                    Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
Month FE                                         Yes                    Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
Week-of-Month FE                                 Yes                    Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide cases per 1 million
people. County fixed effects, year fixed effects, month fixed effects and week-of-month fixed effects are included as controls. The regression is weighted by
county population. Standard errors are clustered at county level.




                                                                              41
                                                                                 Table 5: Robustness Checks
                                                          (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)                (7)              (8)               (9)
VARIABLES                                                                                                     Dependent Variables: Suicide Rate
Panel A Total Suicide Rate, Age 65+
CLNY                                                  -0.0867***                     -0.0568**      -0.0784***      -0.0867***       -0.0867***         -0.0680***       -0.0970***        -0.0970***
                                                        (0.0221)                      (0.0251)        (0.0192)        (0.0278)         (0.0302)           (0.0242)         (0.0228)          (0.0246)
Proportion of Weekdays During CLNY                                    -0.0977***
                                                                        (0.0356)
Panel B Female Suicide Rate, Age 65+
CLNY                                                  -0.0632***                      -0.0362       -0.0570***      -0.0632***        -0.0632**         -0.0589**        -0.0690***        -0.0723***
                                                        (0.0216)                      (0.0242)        (0.0165)        (0.0213)         (0.0283)          (0.0230)          (0.0228)          (0.0230)
Proportion of Weekdays During CLNY                                     -0.0562*
                                                                       (0.0335)
Panel C Male Suicide Rate, Age 65+
CLNY                                                  -0.0666***                      -0.0494*      -0.0599***      -0.0666**        -0.0666***          -0.0501*        -0.0743***        -0.0781***
                                                        (0.0238)                      (0.0257)        (0.0195)       (0.0271)          (0.0241)          (0.0259)          (0.0248)          (0.0262)
Proportion of Weekdays During CLNY                                     -0.0822**
                                                                        (0.0386)
                                                                                                                                    County-Week
Cluster                                                 County          County         County         County         Province        Two-way                County           County            County
Population Weight                                        Yes             Yes            Yes            No              Yes              Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes
                                                                                                                                                            Exclude         Exclude
Sample                                                       Full           Full            Full         Full           Full              Full               2016        Municipalities       Jan-Feb
County FE                                                    Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes                 Yes              Yes              Yes
Year FE                                                      Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes                 Yes              Yes              Yes
Month FE                                                     Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes                 Yes              Yes              Yes
Week-of-Month FE                                             Yes            Yes             No           Yes            Yes               Yes                 Yes              Yes              Yes
Week-of-Year FE                                              No              No             Yes           No            No                No                  No               No                No
Observations                                               151,253        151,253         151,253      151,253        151,253           151,253             121,063         143,361            23,438
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide cases per 1 million people. County fixed effects, year fixed
effects, month fixed effects and week-of-month fixed effects are included as controls in all columns except for column (3). In column (3), week-of-month fixed effects are replaced by week-of-year
fixed effects. The regression is weighted by county population in all columns except for column (4). Standard errors are clustered at county level in all columns except for columns (5)-(6). In column
(5), standard errors are clustered at province level. In column (6), standard errors are two-way clustered by county and week. Full sample is used in columns (1)-(6). Year 2016 is excluded from the
sample in column (7). All direct-controlled municipalities are excluded from the sample in column (8). All months other than January and February are excluded from the sample in column (9).




                                                                                                 42
                                         Table 6: Heterogeneous Effects by Daily Family Companionship, Census Measures
                                                                    (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)               (5)              (6)             (7)              (8)
                                                                                                                     Total Suicide Rate, Age 65+
                                                                         Proxy Measure for Daily Family Companionship:                        Proxy Measure for Daily Family Companionship:
VARIABLES                                                                       Average Household Size, Age 65+                                       % Household Size >=4, Age 65+
CLNY                                                              -0.0875***        -0.0879***     -0.0874***        -0.0932***       -0.0879***        -0.0883***      -0.0879***      -0.0930***
                                                                    (0.0298)          (0.0298)       (0.0311)          (0.0307)         (0.0298)          (0.0298)        (0.0312)        (0.0308)
CLNY*Average Household Size, Age 65+                               0.0529**          0.0527**       0.0581**          0.0709**
                                                                    (0.0220)          (0.0220)       (0.0249)          (0.0276)
Average Household Size, Age 65+                                     -0.0156
                                                                    (0.0456)
CLNY*% Household Size >=4, Age 65+                                                                                                      0.0507**         0.0503**        0.0510**        0.0635**
                                                                                                                                        (0.0223)          (0.0223)        (0.0240)        (0.0266)
% Household Size >=4, Age 65+                                                                                                            -0.0001
                                                                                                                                        (0.0501)
CLNY*Urban District                                                 -0.0513            -0.0501       -0.0679           -0.0543           -0.0523          -0.0511         -0.0656          -0.0528
                                                                    (0.0455)          (0.0456)       (0.0457)          (0.0460)         (0.0455)          (0.0456)        (0.0457)        (0.0461)
CLNY*GDP Per Capita                                                                                  -0.0068            0.0087                                            -0.0105          0.0044
                                                                                                     (0.0391)          (0.0377)                                           (0.0392)        (0.0380)
CLNY*Average Rural Income                                                                             0.0172            0.0328                                             0.0144          0.0294
                                                                                                     (0.0332)          (0.0315)                                           (0.0332)        (0.0316)
CLNY*Number of Hospital Per Capita                                                                   -0.0021            0.0097                                            -0.0035          0.0082
                                                                                                     (0.0219)          (0.0238)                                           (0.0218)        (0.0238)
CLNY*Employment Rate                                                                                                   -0.0258                                                             -0.0275
                                                                                                                       (0.0311)                                                           (0.0316)
CLNY*Proportion of Immigrants, Age 65+                                                                                 -0.0460                                                             -0.0415
                                                                                                                       (0.0300)                                                           (0.0295)
CLNY*Average Years of Schooling, Age 65+                                                                               -0.0351                                                             -0.0390
                                                                                                                       (0.0271)                                                           (0.0273)
Observations                                                        126,561           126,561        122,960           122,960          126,561           126,561         122,960         122,960
R-squared                                                            0.017              0.266          0.244             0.244            0.017             0.266          0.244            0.244
Population Weight                                                     Yes                Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes
County FE                                                              No                Yes            Yes               Yes              No                Yes            Yes              Yes
Year FE                                                               Yes                Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes
Month FE                                                              Yes                Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes
Week-of-Month FE                                                      Yes                Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide cases per 1 million people. Year fixed effects, month fixed
effects and week-of-month fixed effects are included as controls. The regression is weighted by county population. Standard errors are clustered at county level.




                                                                                               43
                                       Table 7: Heterogeneous Effects by Daily Family Companionship, CHARLS Measures
                                                               (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)          (6)              (7)            (8)            (9)
                                                                                                                  Total Suicide Rate, Age 65+
                                                                                Proxy Measure for Daily Family Companionship:                  Proxy Measure for Daily Family Companionship:
VARIABLES                                                                Average Proportion of Children Living in the Household, Age 65+      % Having Children Living in the Household, Age 65+
CLNY                                                      -0.1486***        -0.1485***       -0.1490***     -0.1808***      -0.1918***     -0.1495***     -0.1501***      -0.1809***     -0.1949***
                                                            (0.0358)          (0.0447)         (0.0448)       (0.0442)        (0.0458)       (0.0446)       (0.0447)        (0.0440)       (0.0454)
CLNY*Average Proportion of Children Living in the
Household, Age 65+                                                           0.0597*           0.0601*       0.0719**        0.0739**
                                                                             (0.0328)          (0.0328)      (0.0319)        (0.0334)
Average Proportion of Children Living in the
Household, Age 65+                                                          -0.1340***
                                                                              (0.0431)
CLNY*% Having Children Living in the Household,
Age 65+                                                                                                                                      0.0742*        0.0745*        0.0853**       0.0936**
                                                                                                                                             (0.0394)       (0.0394)       (0.0381)       (0.0394)
% Having Children Living in the Household, Age 65+                                                                                           -0.0694
                                                                                                                                             (0.0519)
CLNY*Urban District                                                          -0.0060           -0.0044         -0.0027          0.0011        0.0007           0.0024           0.0010         0.0048
                                                                             (0.0705)          (0.0706)       (0.0674)         (0.0704)      (0.0701)         (0.0702)         (0.0675)      (0.0701)
CLNY*GDP Per Capita                                                                                          -0.1929**        -0.1961*                                       -0.1846**       -0.2031*
                                                                                                              (0.0831)         (0.1069)                                        (0.0823)      (0.1060)
CLNY*Average Rural Income                                                                                     0.1637**        0.1801**                                        0.1615**       0.1845**
                                                                                                              (0.0699)         (0.0798)                                        (0.0692)      (0.0788)
CLNY*Number of Hospital Per Capita                                                                              0.0101          0.0137                                          0.0117         0.0149
                                                                                                              (0.0347)         (0.0381)                                        (0.0344)      (0.0374)
CLNY*Employment Rate                                                                                                           -0.0033                                                         0.0101
                                                                                                                               (0.0492)                                                      (0.0477)
CLNY*Proportion of Immigrants, Age 65+                                                                                         -0.0339                                                        -0.0219
                                                                                                                               (0.0765)                                                      (0.0776)
CLNY*Average Years of Schooling, Age 65+                                                                                        0.0001                                                         0.0122
                                                                                                                               (0.0513)                                                      (0.0500)
Observations                                                 58,394            58,394            58,394          57,878         54,219         58,394          58,394           57,878         54,219
R-squared                                                     0.267             0.027             0.267           0.270          0.271          0.022           0.267           0.270          0.271
Population Weight                                              Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
County FE                                                      Yes               No                Yes             Yes            Yes            No              Yes             Yes            Yes
Year FE                                                        Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
Month FE                                                       Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
Week-of-Month FE                                               Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide cases per 1 million people. County fixed effects, year
fixed effects, month fixed effects and week-of-month fixed effects are included as controls. The regression is weighted by county population. Standard errors are clustered at county level.




                                                                                                44
                                    Table 8: Children's Response to Mental Health Deterioration of Elderly Parents
                                                        (1)                  (2)               (3)                 (4)                 (5)                 (6)
                                                      Having Children Living                 Having Children Living                         Total Net
VARIABLES                                                 in the Household                       in the Same County                 Transfer from Children
 Depression Index                                    -0.0268              -0.0225            0.0088              0.0068             1,365**              1,044
                                                     (0.0224)            (0.0230)          (0.0107)             (0.0106)              (665)              (680)
 Self-reported Health                                                    0.0257**                                0.0016                                   -477
                                                                         (0.0127)                               (0.0041)                                 (312)
 IADL                                                                     -0.0092                               -0.0057                                1,362**
                                                                         (0.0362)                               (0.0153)                                 (633)
 ADL                                                                      0.0371                                 0.0158                                  2,186
                                                                         (0.0524)                               (0.0172)                                (1,439)
Observations                                          1,272                1,268              1,272               1,268              1,272               1,268
R-squared                                             0.151                0.157              0.133               0.139              0.117               0.130
Age FE                                                 Yes                  Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes
Prefecture FE                                          Yes                  Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes
Baseline Control                                        No                  Yes                No                  Yes                 No                 Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors are clustered at prefecture level. The regressions are weighted by
sample weights. Age fixed effects (age at baseline survey in 2011), prefecture fixed effects and the gender of the elderly respondent are always included as
controls. The dependent variables are the change in children's behavior during 2013-2015. The independent variable is the change in depression index of the
elderly respondent during 2011-2013. The depression index is constructed from 10 questions about the severity of depression symptoms based on CES-D scale.
In the even columns, the change in self-reported health, the change in instrumental limitations in activities of daily living (IADL), the change in activities of
daily living (ADL), and the change in marital status (all during 2011-2013), as well as non-agricultural hukou status, years of schooling and marital status at the
baseline survey (year 2011), are all included as additional covariates. Self-reported health ranges from 1 (poor) to 5 (excellent). IADL measures people's
difficulty in doing the following daily activities: doing household chores, preparing meals, shopping for groceries, making phone calls, and taking medications.
ADL measures people's difficulty in doing the following daily activities: dressing, bathing and showing, self-feeding, getting into or out of bed, toilet hygiene,
controlling urination and defecation.




                                                                                45
                                          Figure A1: Definition of Chinese Lunar New Year Variable, February 2013




Notes: This figure depicts the calendar in February 2013. The CLNY is on Feb 10th, and the statutory holidays are during Feb 9th-15th. We define the CLNY treatment as 1 from
Feb 3rd to 16th.




                                                                                      46
                                          Figure A2: Definition of Chinese Lunar New Year Variable, February 2016




Notes: This figure depicts the calendar in February 2016. The CLNY is on Feb 8th, and the statutory holidays are during Feb 7th-13th. We define the CLNY treatment as 1 from Feb
7th to 13th.




                                                                                      47
                                           Figure A3: Definition of Chinese Lunar New Year Variable, January 2017




Notes: This figure depicts the calendar in January 2017. The CLNY is on Jan 28th, and the statutory holidays are during Jan 27th-Feb 2nd. We define the CLNY from Jan 22nd to Feb
4th.




                                                                                       48
                                              Table A1: Distribution of the Chinese Lunar New Year, 1991-2020
 Panel A By Month
                                              Chinese Lunar New Year in                                                                      Frequency
                                                       January                                                                                   11
                                                       February                                                                                  19
 Panel B By Week
                                              Chinese Lunar New Year in                                                                      Frequency
                                                       Week 3                                                                                    4
                                                       Week 4                                                                                    6
                                                       Week 5                                                                                    8
                                                       Week 6                                                                                    7
                                                       Week 7                                                                                    5
Notes: This table presents the distribution of the Chinese Lunar New Year during 1991-2020. The weeks are counted from Sunday to Saturday.




                                                                                     49
                                  Table A2: Heterogeneous Effects by Daily Family Companionship, Census Measures, Female
                                                                 (1)              (2)               (3)                 (4)               (5)               (6)             (7)             (8)
                                                                                                                  Female Suicide Rate, Age 65+
                                                                      Proxy Measure for Daily Family Companionship:                           Proxy Measure for Daily Family Companionship:
VARIABLES                                                                     Average Household Size, Age 65+                                         % Household Size >=4, Age 65+
CLNY                                                           -0.0640**         -0.0642**         -0.0614**        -0.0634**         -0.0643**         -0.0645**       -0.0613**       -0.0633**
                                                                (0.0297)          (0.0297)          (0.0301)         (0.0302)          (0.0297)          (0.0297)        (0.0301)        (0.0302)
CLNY*Average Household Size, Age 65+                            0.0323*            0.0321*           0.0235           0.0334
                                                                (0.0194)          (0.0194)          (0.0211)         (0.0236)
Average Household Size, Age 65+                                  0.0086
                                                                (0.0394)
CLNY*% Household Size >=4, Age 65+                                                                                                     0.0357*           0.0354*          0.0270          0.0372
                                                                                                                                       (0.0203)          (0.0203)        (0.0212)        (0.0238)
% Household Size >=4, Age 65+                                                                                                           0.0218
                                                                                                                                       (0.0445)
CLNY*Urban District                                              -0.0351           -0.0345          -0.0406          -0.0352           -0.0352           -0.0346         -0.0401         -0.0343
                                                                (0.0433)          (0.0433)          (0.0424)         (0.0433)          (0.0432)          (0.0433)        (0.0424)        (0.0432)
CLNY*GDP Per Capita                                                                                 -0.0076          -0.0063                                             -0.0068         -0.0057
                                                                                                    (0.0326)         (0.0328)                                            (0.0328)        (0.0331)
CLNY*Average Rural Income                                                                           -0.0120          -0.0051                                             -0.0137         -0.0064
                                                                                                    (0.0294)         (0.0289)                                            (0.0297)        (0.0290)
CLNY*Number of Hospital Per Capita                                                                  -0.0075          -0.0115                                             -0.0079         -0.0121
                                                                                                    (0.0202)         (0.0207)                                            (0.0201)        (0.0208)
CLNY*Employment Rate                                                                                                 -0.0233                                                             -0.0269
                                                                                                                     (0.0263)                                                            (0.0271)
CLNY*Proportion of Immigrants, Age 65+                                                                               -0.0271                                                             -0.0278
                                                                                                                     (0.0242)                                                            (0.0238)
CLNY*Average Years of Schooling, Age 65+                                                                              0.0008                                                             -0.0022
                                                                                                                     (0.0256)                                                            (0.0259)
Observations                                                    126,561            126,561          122,960          122,960           126,561           126,561         122,960         122,960
R-squared                                                         0.010             0.208             0.172            0.172            0.010             0.208           0.172           0.172
Population Weight                                                  Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes
County FE                                                          No                Yes               Yes              Yes               No               Yes             Yes             Yes
Year FE                                                            Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes
Month FE                                                           Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes
Week-of-Month FE                                                   Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide cases per 1 million people. Year fixed effects, month fixed
effects, and week-of-month fixed effects are included as controls. The regression is weighted by county population. Standard errors are clustered at county level.




                                                                                               50
                                   Table A3: Heterogeneous Effects by Daily Family Companionship, Census Measures, Male
                                                                (1)              (2)              (3)                   (4)              (5)               (6)             (7)               (8)
                                                                                                                   Male Suicide Rate, Age 65+
                                                                     Proxy Measure for Daily Family Companionship:                           Proxy Measure for Daily Family Companionship:
VARIABLES                                                                   Average Household Size, Age 65+                                          % Household Size >=4, Age 65+
CLNY                                                          -0.0767**         -0.0771**        -0.0805**        -0.0843***         -0.0770**         -0.0773**       -0.0810**       -0.0840***
                                                               (0.0323)          (0.0323)         (0.0329)          (0.0321)          (0.0323)          (0.0323)        (0.0330)         (0.0322)
CLNY*Average Household Size, Age 65+                           0.0430*           0.0428*          0.0533**          0.0619**
                                                               (0.0222)          (0.0223)         (0.0241)          (0.0261)
Average Household Size, Age 65+                                -0.0177
                                                               (0.0413)
CLNY*% Household Size >=4, Age 65+                                                                                                    0.0374*            0.0371         0.0420*          0.0508**
                                                                                                                                      (0.0225)          (0.0226)        (0.0237)         (0.0258)
% Household Size >=4, Age 65+                                                                                                         -0.0074
                                                                                                                                      (0.0460)
CLNY*Urban District                                            -0.0042           -0.0031           -0.0168           -0.0066          -0.0054           -0.0044         -0.0144           -0.0055
                                                               (0.0463)          (0.0464)         (0.0493)          (0.0494)          (0.0463)          (0.0464)        (0.0492)         (0.0495)
CLNY*GDP Per Capita                                                                                -0.0203           -0.0032                                            -0.0254           -0.0087
                                                                                                  (0.0349)          (0.0331)                                            (0.0348)         (0.0330)
CLNY*Average Rural Income                                                                           0.0413           0.0576*                                             0.0391          0.0544*
                                                                                                  (0.0308)          (0.0311)                                            (0.0308)         (0.0311)
CLNY*Number of Hospital Per Capita                                                                  0.0097            0.0274                                             0.0082            0.0260
                                                                                                  (0.0255)          (0.0271)                                            (0.0254)         (0.0270)
CLNY*Employment Rate                                                                                                 -0.0249                                                              -0.0246
                                                                                                                    (0.0298)                                                             (0.0304)
CLNY*Proportion of Immigrants, Age 65+                                                                               -0.0273                                                              -0.0216
                                                                                                                    (0.0296)                                                             (0.0292)
CLNY*Average Years of Schooling, Age 65+                                                                           -0.0576**                                                            -0.0602**
                                                                                                                    (0.0273)                                                             (0.0274)
Observations                                                   126,561           126,561           122,960           122,960          126,561           126,561         122,960          122,960
R-squared                                                       0.014             0.212              0.188             0.188            0.014            0.212           0.188             0.188
Population Weight                                                 Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
County FE                                                         No                Yes               Yes               Yes              No               Yes             Yes               Yes
Year FE                                                           Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
Month FE                                                          Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
Week-of-Month FE                                                  Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide cases per 1 million people. Year fixed effects, month fixed
effects and week-of-month fixed effects are included as controls. The regression is weighted by county population. Standard errors are clustered at county level.




                                                                                               51
                                Table A4: Heterogeneous Effects by Daily Family Companionship, CHARLS Measures, Female
                                                               (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)             (7)           (8)              (9)
                                                                                                                 Female Suicide Rate, Age 65+
                                                                                Proxy Measure for Daily Family Companionship:                  Proxy Measure for Daily Family Companionship:
VARIABLES                                                                Average Proportion of Children Living in the Household, Age 65+      % Having Children Living in the Household, Age 65+
CLNY                                                       -0.0865**         -0.0878*          -0.0879*       -0.0935**       -0.1007*      -0.0894*       -0.0896*      -0.0948**        -0.1030**
                                                            (0.0391)         (0.0488)          (0.0488)        (0.0472)       (0.0520)      (0.0483)       (0.0483)       (0.0469)         (0.0511)
CLNY*Average Proportion of Children Living in the
Household, Age 65+                                                            0.0165             0.0166         0.0281         0.0319
                                                                             (0.0330)           (0.0330)       (0.0324)       (0.0347)
Average Proportion of Children Living in the
Household, Age 65+                                                          -0.0883***
                                                                              (0.0320)
CLNY*% Having Children Living in the Household,
Age 65+                                                                                                                                      0.0444          0.0445       0.0553            0.0656
                                                                                                                                            (0.0461)        (0.0461)     (0.0449)          (0.0474)
% Having Children Living in the Household, Age 65+                                                                                          -0.0412
                                                                                                                                            (0.0394)
CLNY*Urban District                                                           0.0019             0.0023         -0.0148          0.0033      0.0068             0.0074   -0.0112            0.0071
                                                                             (0.0694)           (0.0695)       (0.0677)        (0.0710)     (0.0689)           (0.0690)  (0.0678)          (0.0709)
CLNY*GDP Per Capita                                                                                             -0.0549         -0.0776                                  -0.0534           -0.0862
                                                                                                               (0.0743)        (0.0877)                                  (0.0734)          (0.0870)
CLNY*Average Rural Income                                                                                        0.0297          0.0332                                   0.0307            0.0382
                                                                                                               (0.0628)        (0.0679)                                  (0.0617)          (0.0667)
CLNY*Number of Hospital Per Capita                                                                               0.0044         -0.0080                                   0.0073           -0.0035
                                                                                                               (0.0315)        (0.0325)                                  (0.0310)          (0.0325)
CLNY*Employment Rate                                                                                                             0.0048                                                     0.0136
                                                                                                                               (0.0484)                                                    (0.0457)
CLNY*Proportion of Immigrants, Age 65+                                                                                          -0.0003                                                     0.0140
                                                                                                                               (0.0590)                                                    (0.0622)
CLNY*Average Years of Schooling, Age 65+                                                                                         0.0316                                                     0.0345
                                                                                                                               (0.0635)                                                    (0.0609)
Observations                                                  58,394            58,394            58,394         57,878          54,219         58,394          58,394    57,878            54,219
R-squared                                                      0.176             0.015             0.176          0.178           0.178          0.011           0.176     0.178            0.178
Population Weight                                               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes       Yes              Yes
County FE                                                       Yes               No                Yes            Yes             Yes            No              Yes       Yes              Yes
Year FE                                                         Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes       Yes              Yes
Month FE                                                        Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes       Yes              Yes
Week-of-Month FE                                                Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes       Yes              Yes
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide cases per 1 million people. Year fixed effects,   month fixed
effects and week-of-month fixed effects are included as controls. The regression is weighted by county population. Standard errors are clustered at county level.




                                                                                                52
                                 Table A5: Heterogeneous Effects by Daily Family Companionship, CHARLS Measures, Male
                                                             (1)              (2)               (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)              (7)             (8)              (9)
                                                                                                                Male Suicide Rate, Age 65+
                                                                               Proxy Measure for Daily Family Companionship:                  Proxy Measure for Daily Family Companionship:
VARIABLES                                                               Average Proportion of Children Living in the Household, Age 65+      % Having Children Living in the Household, Age 65+
CLNY                                                     -0.1347***       -0.1500***        -0.1506***     -0.1941***      -0.2046***     -0.1487***    -0.1494***     -0.1920***         -0.2054***
                                                           (0.0362)         (0.0454)          (0.0454)       (0.0454)        (0.0472)       (0.0456)      (0.0456)       (0.0455)           (0.0472)
CLNY*Average Proportion of Children Living in the
Household, Age 65+                                                         0.0499*           0.0503*        0.0592**        0.0591**
                                                                           (0.0291)          (0.0291)       (0.0284)        (0.0289)
Average Proportion of Children Living in the
Household, Age 65+                                                        -0.1120***
                                                                            (0.0386)
CLNY*% Having Children Living in the Household,
Age 65+                                                                                                                                     0.0250         0.0252         0.0317            0.0325
                                                                                                                                           (0.0334)       (0.0334)       (0.0331)          (0.0339)
% Having Children Living in the Household, Age
65+                                                                                                                                        -0.0605
                                                                                                                                           (0.0459)
CLNY*Urban District                                                         0.0367            0.0384          0.0669          0.0532        0.0373            0.0391     0.0662              0.0525
                                                                           (0.0673)          (0.0673)        (0.0700)        (0.0721)      (0.0681)          (0.0681)   (0.0709)            (0.0729)
CLNY*GDP Per Capita                                                                                        -0.2717***      -0.2924***                                 -0.2618***          -0.2888***
                                                                                                             (0.0863)        (0.1056)                                   (0.0869)            (0.1070)
CLNY*Average Rural Income                                                                                   0.2319***       0.2705***                                  0.2267***           0.2686***
                                                                                                             (0.0734)        (0.0818)                                   (0.0740)            (0.0825)
CLNY*Number of Hospital Per Capita                                                                            0.0284          0.0400                                     0.0258              0.0343
                                                                                                             (0.0376)        (0.0383)                                   (0.0380)            (0.0389)
CLNY*Employment Rate                                                                                                         -0.0150                                                        -0.0093
                                                                                                                             (0.0425)                                                       (0.0420)
CLNY*Proportion of Immigrants, Age 65+                                                                                       -0.0134                                                        -0.0190
                                                                                                                             (0.0746)                                                       (0.0760)
CLNY*Average Years of Schooling, Age 65+                                                                                     -0.0233                                                        -0.0097
                                                                                                                             (0.0504)                                                       (0.0508)
Observations                                                58,394            58,394           58,394         57,878          54,219          58,394          58,394     57,878              54,219
R-squared                                                    0.208             0.020            0.208          0.209           0.210           0.017          0.208       0.209               0.210
Population Weight                                             Yes               Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes                 Yes
County FE                                                     Yes               No               Yes            Yes             Yes             No             Yes         Yes                 Yes
Year FE                                                       Yes               Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes                 Yes
Month FE                                                      Yes               Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes                 Yes
Week-of-Month FE                                              Yes               Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes                 Yes
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of suicide cases per 1 million people. Year fixed effects,   month fixed
effects and week-of-month fixed effects are included as controls. The regression is weighted by county population. Standard errors are clustered at county level.




                                                                                                53
