                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   TRADING SPACES: MEDICARE'S REGULATORY SPILLOVERS ON TREATMENT
                 SETTING FOR NON-MEDICARE PATIENTS

                                        Michael Geruso
                                       Michael R. Richards

                                       Working Paper 28576
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28576


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




We are grateful to Leila Agha, Lindsey Bullinger, Marika Cabral, Colleen Carey, Alice Chen,
Atul Gupta, Bart Hamilton, Matt Harris, Neale Mahoney, Beth Munnich, Maria Polyakova,
David Powell, Steve Ryan, Seth Richards-Shubik, Adam Sacarny, and seminar participants at the
University of Houston and Washington University in St. Louis for many helpful comments on
earlier versions of this work. We are also grateful to the participants and organizers of the 2019
ASHEcon meeting, the 2019 Southeastern Health Economics Study Group, and the 2020 Junior
Health Economics Summit for opportunities to present this research. We thank the Florida
Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA) for providing the data for this project and note
that AHCA was not responsible for any data analyses or interpretations belonging to this work.
We have no conflicts of interest to disclose, and all views and errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28576.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Michael Geruso and Michael R. Richards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trading Spaces: Medicare's Regulatory Spillovers on Treatment Setting for Non-Medicare
Patients
Michael Geruso and Michael R. Richards
NBER Working Paper No. 28576
March 2021
JEL No. H23,H42,H51,I11,I13,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

Medicare pricing is known to indirectly influence provider prices and care provision for non-
Medicare patients; however, Medicare's regulatory externalities beyond fee-setting are less well
understood. We study how physicians' outpatient surgery choices for non-Medicare patients
responded to Medicare removing a ban on ambulatory surgery center (ASC) use for a specific
procedure. Following the rule change, surgeons began reallocating both Medicare and
commercially insured patients to ASCs. Specifically, physicians became 70% more likely to use
ASCs for the policy-targeted procedure among their non-Medicare patients. These novel findings
demonstrate that Medicare rulemaking affects physician behavior beyond the program's statutory
scope.


Michael Geruso
University of Texas at Austin
Department of Economics
1 University Station C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
mike.geruso@austin.utexas.edu

Michael R. Richards
Baylor University
Department of Economics
One Bear Place #98003
Waco, TX 76798
michael_richards@baylor.edu
Medicare covers nearly 60 million individuals and directs roughly a fifth of the United States'

more than $3 trillion in annual healthcare spending.1 Traditional, or fee-for-service (FFS),

Medicare's enrollment also eclipses that of most other public or private health insurers. As a

dominant payer, Medicare looms large in the US healthcare landscape, with the potential to

influence contracting and treatment decisions beyond its insured population and statutory bounds.

Indeed, prior research has documented spillover effects from Medicare fee schedules on price

negotiations between private insurers and providers as well as on provider behavior toward non-

Medicare patient populations.2

        What is less well studied is how Medicare's nonprice regulatory decisions impact the

behavior of providers outside of the Medicare market. By nonprice, we mean Medicare rulemaking

that is separate from service fee-setting and includes decisions such as which procedures and

equipment are covered for Medicare patients, which facilities or providers can administer certain

services, whether providers can balance bill, and so on. Recognizing and measuring externalities

from such rules is important for formulating optimal Medicare policy and other healthcare

regulation. In addition, studying whether and how Medicare's nonprice regulatory decisions spill

over onto physicians' non-Medicare treatment decisions has the potential to shed new light on the

formation and evolution of physician treatment styles, which is an area of longstanding interest

(Phelps 2000; Grytten and Sørensen 2003; Epstein and Nicholson 2009; Currie, MacLeod, and

Van Parys 2016; Molitor 2018; Cutler et al. 2019)­­including how a given physician's treatment


1
  These and related statistics from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services can be found here:
https://www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-systems/statistics-trends-and-
reports/nationalhealthexpenddata/nhe-fact-sheet.html.
2
 More specifically, the former characterizes the linkage between the Medicare fee schedule and negotiated service
prices in the commercially insured market--e.g., White (2013), Clemens and Gottlieb (2017), Clemens, Gottlieb,
and Molnár (2017), Trish et al. (2017), and Cooper et al. (2019). The latter examines the influence of Medicare
payment changes on providers' treatment approaches for the rest of their patient panel--e.g., Sloan, Morrisey, and
Valvona (1988), Yip (1998), He and Mellor (2012), and White (2014).


                                                                                                                     2
style converges or diverges across patients with different insurance (Newhouse and Marquis 1978;

Glied and Graff Zivin 2002; Frank and Zeckhauser 2007).

       In this paper, we investigate Medicare's regulatory externalities on physicians' medical

decision-making for their non-Medicare (i.e., commercially insured) patients. In January 2008,

Medicare reversed a prior regulatory stance that banned a specific surgical procedure from taking

place within an ambulatory surgery center (ASC) for FFS Medicare patients. ASCs, also known

as outpatient surgery centers or same-day surgery centers, are stand-alone, non-hospital facilities

that are typically lower cost treatment setting options for procedures not requiring an inpatient

stay. Prior to 2008, Medicare would only pay for laparoscopic cholecystectomy surgeries (i.e.,

minimally invasive gallbladder removals) if these were administered within a hospital outpatient

or inpatient department--effectively prohibiting Medicare cases within ASC settings.

       The 2008 policy change by Medicare provides an ideal quasi-experiment to investigate

spillovers from Medicare's (nonprice) regulation. As we describe below, the roll-back of

Medicare's ban was purely an administrative change. It was not a response to changes in medical

technology, perceived patient clinical benefits, or physician preferences. The original Medicare

ban existed without a clear evidence-base and did not necessarily align with care delivery

parameters stipulated by other payers. The narrow application of the ban (laparoscopic

cholecystectomy surgeries) also meant that only surgeons performing this specific operation were

plausibly affected by its removal, which generates well-defined treatment and control physician

groups. These features of the quasi-experiment, along with the sharp timing of the deregulation

event, are useful in disentangling policy effects from underlying trends and allow us to ask whether

a change to the permissible service delivery setting for Medicare patients ultimately impacts




                                                                                                  3
physicians' choice of setting for non-Medicare, commercially insured patients receiving the same

procedure.

         As we describe in more detail below, there are several reasons to expect that a physician's

decision to use ASCs for her Medicare patients might be jointly made with her decision to use

ASCs for some patients with other insurance coverage.3 This is especially relevant for procedures

with moderate complexity where the key physician decision margin is whether to assign any of

her lower risk patients to an ASC setting and consequently rely on both ASCs and HOPDs when

performing the same procedure for different patients.4 To help illustrate this possibility, we note

an empirical regularity: a physician's pattern of facility utilization for her Medicare outpatient

procedures is highly correlated with her pattern of facility utilization for her commercially insured

outpatient procedures. In our data (described below) and across all unique physician-procedure

combinations in 2007, we observe that 34% of commercial outpatient procedures are performed

in both HOPD and ASC settings, and importantly, we see that such a treatment style has a close

correspondence within-physician (Figure 1).5 Conditional on a physician using both delivery

setting options for a given Medicare procedure (i.e., `splitting' her Medicare volume between

HOPDs and ASCs), the probability that the same physician also divides her corresponding

commercial procedure volume between HOPDs and ASCs is high (88%).6 Conditional on a


3
 For instance, block scheduling different patients within the same facility (i.e., performing Medicare and non-
Medicare surgeries back-to-back) could minimize travel costs between facilities.
4
 In other words, as we detail in the next section, a physician would be highly unlikely to shift all of her patients into
an ASC since some portion of her patients would be too high-risk.
5
 Authors' cross-sectional calculation from the universe of outpatient procedure records in Florida during 2007. Full
data details are provided in Section III. This subset of outpatient procedures is most likely to be comprised of
procedures (e.g., surgeries) that can be safely performed in an ASC for lower risk patients but not for patients with
higher risk factors for complications and/or expected greater operative and post-operative resource needs.
6
 We also note that physician decision-making with respect to outpatient procedure facility utilization as well as
physicians' behavior as a "splitter" for outpatient procedures and surgeries have been the focus of other recent
economics research (e.g., see David and Neuman (2011) and Munnich and Parente (2018)).


                                                                                                                        4
physician not using both delivery setting options for a given Medicare procedure, the probability

that she nonetheless does so for the same procedure when reimbursed by commercial insurers is

low (16%). In principle, this within-physician, cross-payer correlation in surgical practice style

could entirely reflect physician and patient preferences or the underlying complexity of the

procedures with no feedback or spillovers to or from the Medicare program. Yet, in this paper, we

show that this is not the case. We find that Medicare rules have a large causal impact on the care

delivery setting chosen for non-Medicare patients, holding physicians and procedures fixed.

         We establish the spillover effects of Medicare's deregulation change in the universe of

outpatient procedure discharge records from Florida from 2005 through 2011. Our analysis focuses

on the physician's decision to perform the policy-targeted procedure at both available treatment

settings. We first show a sharp uptick in the likelihood of allocating some FFS Medicare

laparoscopic cholecystectomy surgeries to ASCs once Medicare removes the ASC ban for these

surgeries.7 The impact is clearly visible in a simple difference-in-differences plot that compares

surgeons who perform the procedure to other physicians over the relevant timeframe. This

tendency to begin splitting the targeted Medicare surgeries between outpatient delivery settings

(i.e., HOPDs and ASCs) is a direct and expected first-order policy effect and is consistent with

physicians reoptimizing their choice of setting for Medicare patients after Medicare permits a new

procedure-location combination. The physicians responding to the 2008 deregulation decision

move roughly a quarter of their total Medicare surgical volume for the targeted procedure into an

ASC setting over the following four years.



7
  Throughout, we use Medicare to denote fee-for-service Medicare. The Medicare Advantage (MA) market is also of
interest within our conceptual and analytic framework and the MA source of insurance is identifiable in the
discharge records. However, on a practical level, the volume of relevant procedures for this group in the early years
of our data is low, and especially at the individual physician level. We therefore lack the ability to credibly estimate
spillover effects for MA patients in this specific context.



                                                                                                                      5
       After establishing the direct policy effect, we investigate our spillover effect of interest:

physician-level treatment setting choices for non-Medicare patients requiring the same surgical

procedure. We do so by restricting to non-elderly commercially insured outpatient procedures and

again capturing the main result in a simple difference-in-differences plot over time between

physicians who perform the surgical procedure targeted by the regulation and physicians who do

not. We show a 25% increase over pre-policy levels in the probability of a physician performing

some of her commercially insured laparoscopic cholecystectomy surgeries at ASCs during the first

year of the Medicare rule change. The effect grows and stabilizes to a 70% increase by the third

post-policy year. The estimate of Medicare's spillover effect is precise and robust to alternative

methods for defining the control group. Within supplementary analyses, we examine whether the

Medicare deregulation spills over to untargeted procedures performed by affected physicians

within the Medicare and commercial markets. We are unable to detect a causal impact along these

margins, though some ancillary patterns among a subset of physicians suggest the possibility of

more diffuse externalities tied to the narrow Medicare rule change.

       Our paper directly contributes to an active literature on the externalities from public health

insurance programs for the wider healthcare economy. This includes work on public insurance

payments influencing private insurer payments (e.g., White (2013), Clemens and Gottlieb (2017),

Clemens, Gottlieb, and Molnár (2017), Trish et al. (2017), and Cooper et al. (2019)), public

insurance payments influencing physician behavior toward other patient groups (Sloan, Morrisey,

and Valvona (1988), Yip (1998), He and Mellor (2012), and White (2014)), and public payer

reimbursements influencing drug development (Yurukoglu et al. 2017), among other outcomes. In




                                                                                                   6
contrast with prior work that has largely focused on administrative pricing,8 we provide novel

evidence of Medicare's own- and cross-market effects from nonprice regulation.

        We also view our results as complementing a long literature on physician behavior and

decision-making in a multi-payer environment (McGuire and Pauly 1991). These works include

within-Medicare spillovers from greater Medicare Advantage penetration (Chernew, DeCicca, and

Town 2008; Baicker, Chernew, and Robbins 2013; Baicker and Robbins 2015; Callison 2016) as

well as studies of public and private payer demand shocks within the mixed economy for physician

services (Garthwaite 2012; Bond and White 2013; Joynt et al. 2013, 2015; He, McInerney, and

Mellor 2015; McInerney, Mellor, and Sabik 2017; Glied and Hong 2018; Richards and Tello-Trillo

2019; Carey, Miller, and Wherry 2020). Some of this research has documented physician

tendencies toward similar treatment styles for patients, regardless of payer (Glied and Graff Zivin

2002), as well as the use of behavioral heuristics and norm following in physician decision-making

(Frank and Zeckhauser 2007). Extending this prior literature, our findings indicate that the

regulatory environment interacts with physician decision-making even when the regulations do

not directly bind. Our work consequently reveals the long reach of Medicare rulemaking and its

ability to shape physician behavior and healthcare delivery beyond the statutory scope of the

regulation.




8
  Barnett, Olenski, and Sacarny (2020) is a notable exception. This recent study offers evidence on non-price
externalities by showing how letters from Medicare warning physicians against overuse of antipsychotic drugs also
reduced prescribing to privately insured patients for these same drugs.


                                                                                                                    7
                                                  I. Background

                                A. Physicians and Outpatient Surgery Care

Absent a regulatory constraint, ASCs directly compete with hospitals for a variety of outpatient

procedures (Bian and Morrisey 2007; Courtemanche and Plotzke 2010; Carey, Burgess, and

Young 2011; Carey 2017; Whaley and Brown 2018; Baker, Bundorf, and Kessler 2019). Hospitals

are medically appropriate for higher risk patients and procedures, but physicians may prefer using

ASCs for at least some patients and procedures.9

         A key institutional feature in this context is that, when permitted by the relevant payer,

physicians often divide their patients receiving the same outpatient surgical service between

HOPD and ASC delivery settings, rather than operate solely within one. Physicians' decisions to

make use of both treatment setting options is likely to be less common for low complexity

outpatient procedures (e.g., diagnostic tests like colonoscopies or endoscopies), for which there

may be little or no need for the higher intensity and higher resourced HOPD facilities. Likewise,

physicians may be less likely to rely on ASCs for certain high-complexity procedures that carry

greater risk of adverse events and are therefore best suited for hospital-based delivery. For

surgeries of moderate complexity, such as the laparoscopic cholecystectomy procedure we

examine, only a subset of patients is likely to be medically appropriate for the lower-intensity ASC

setting­­making the choice to utilize both treatment settings (i.e., `split' patients between HOPDs

and ASCs) the relevant physician decision-making margin.




9
  Empirical research also supports that ASCs offer equivalent care to HOPDs that is often more convenient and
lower cost for patients (Paquette, Smink, and Finlayson 2008; Grisel et al. 2009; Munnich and Parente 2014; Weber
2014; Carey 2015; Munnich and Parente 2018; Aouad, Brown, and Whaley 2019; Sood and Whaley 2019), which
gives physicians' choice of setting welfare implications for patients as well as earnings implications for these rival
outpatient facilities.



                                                                                                                     8
       The factors that lead physicians to schedule some of their patients at ASCs for a given

outpatient surgery are also likely to be common across payers, within the same physician. For

example, the ASC might provide physician amenities (such as specialized staffing and

administrative support services) as well as preferential scheduling. Physicians may also have

heterogeneous beliefs about or concern for how the treatment setting impacts patient convenience

and clinical outcomes. Financial incentives could apply as well, at least for the minority of

physicians with direct ownership stakes in the ASC industry (Lynk and Longley 2002; David and

Neuman 2011; Plotzke and Courtemanche 2011; Dyrda 2017; Munnich et al. 2020). Such

considerations, along with other idiosyncratic physician factors, might drive a cross-sectional

correlation between ASC use for a given procedure type inside and outside of Medicare (as in

Figure 1) without any causal spillover from Medicare policy.

       However, other factors would imply a joint decision process for physicians, across their

Medicare and non-Medicare patients­­and hence the possibility of cross-payer spillovers. For

example, opportunities to block-schedule patients within the same facility (i.e., perform Medicare

and non-Medicare surgeries back-to-back) could minimize travel costs between facilities and

perhaps promote more efficient care delivery (e.g., minimize operating room turnover time

between patients and/or facilitate better surgical team performance through consistent staffing over

the course of the day). Effects could, in principle, operate in the opposite direction as well, via

capacity constraints. More specifically, as Medicare patients begin receiving treatment at ASCs,

commercially insured patients could be crowded out. With these factors in mind, it is plausible

that physicians would consider both payer types (i.e., Medicare and non-Medicare) when deciding

to use the ASC option for either. We formalize this potential cross-payer influence in Section II.




                                                                                                     9
                                        B. Medicare's Rule Change

Medicare has reimbursed physicians and facilities for procedures performed within ASCs for over

three decades. More than 5,000 ASCs are currently operational and Medicare certified across the

US, and the ASC industry has annually collected over $4 billion in Medicare revenue during recent

years (MedPAC 2019). The associated fee schedule has evolved at different times--see He and

Mellor (2012, 2013) and Munnich and Parente (2018) for detailed histories--but importantly,

Medicare patients and their physicians are accustomed to care delivered within ASC settings.

However, not all procedures for Medicare patients are allowed to take place within an ASC, which

provides an opportunity to exploit a targeted Medicare rule change concerning ASCs for our

identification strategy.

        Effective January 1 2008, Medicare amended its rules to allow laparoscopic

cholecystectomy surgeries to be performed at ASCs for Medicare FFS patients for the first time.10

The decision followed a Government Accountability Office (GAO) study of ASCs mandated by

the Medicare Modernization Act (MMA) of 2003 that was completed in November 2006 and laid

the basis for the subsequent reforms to the Medicare ASC facility fee schedule. The finalized

changes were published in the Federal Register the following November (2007) so that they could

be implemented at the start of 2008.11 Importantly, the pre-2008 refusal to reimburse for this

specific procedure performed within an ASC is typically characterized as an administrative


10
   Recall, this surgery is a minimally invasive gallbladder removal. The laparoscopic cholecystectomy technique
globally entered mainstream medicine in the mid- to late-1980s and soon became the norm. Its popularity stems
from its many advantages over open cholecystectomy surgery, including less postoperative pain, shorter hospital
stays, and more rapid recovery. The development and spread of the laparoscopic cholecystectomy technique has
even been described as a watershed moment for minimally invasive surgery applied to many other human organs
(Polychronidis et al. 2008).
11
  Detailed historical information can be found here: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-
Payment/ASCPayment/downloads/ASC_QAs_03072008.pdf as well as here: https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-
and-Guidance/Regulations-and-Policies/QuarterlyProviderUpdates/downloads/cms1392fc.pdf



                                                                                                                  10
oversight, rather than a prudent concern for beneficiaries' safety (Meredith 2008; OR Manager

2007).12 For example, among non-Medicare patient populations, laparoscopic cholecystectomy

surgeries performed within ASCs had been shown to be equally safe and successful as HOPDs and

were associated with lower charges (Paquette et al. 2008). In short, the nature and timing of this

nationwide policy change was plausibly the result of a GAO study (mandated by Congressional

action), rather than changes in the underlying technology, medical science, or physician and patient

preferences. We are also able to examine this exogeneity argument empirically below by analyzing

how surgeons' ASC use for non-Medicare, commercially insured patients requiring this specific

surgery was evolving in the years leading up to the targeted Medicare regulatory change. If

treatment setting choices among non-targeted patients were trending toward greater ASC use, this

could indicate that Medicare administrators were responding to changing preferences among the

relevant physicians or patients, rather than introducing an unanticipated, narrow regulatory change

that was independent of broader trends. We show the absence of any such differential pre-trends

below.

         Table 1 briefly describes the case characteristics for this specific surgery, compared to all

other outpatient procedures in our data. Across payer types (i.e., commercially insured and

traditional Medicare), laparoscopic cholecystectomy surgery patients tend to be younger, on

average, and are more likely to be female. This specific surgery is also more common among non-

Medicare populations, with commercial cases outnumbering Medicare cases in our data by

250%.13 We also note that while commercial insurers may adopt Medicare regulatory positions,



12
  For example, the 2008 decision was not based on recent clinical trial data or technological breakthrough
pertaining to the LC technique within ASC settings.
13
  Authors' calculations based on the universe of ambulatory procedure data from Florida (fully described within
Section III).



                                                                                                                  11
they are not required to. In fact, we observe commercially insured laparoscopic cholecystectomy

surgeries taking place within ASCs prior to 2008.14



                 II. Conceptual Model for Public Payer Regulatory Externalities

In order to guide our empirical investigations, we first model how physicians decide whether to

perform a given procedure at an ASC for at least some of their patients, with exclusive use of the

HOPD setting serving as the outside option. Surgeons are typically multiproduct firms that supply

a variety of services (i.e., procedures) to patients. For example, a general surgeon that performs

laparoscopic cholecystectomies also typically performs many other procedures--e.g., surgical

excisions, colonoscopies, upper endoscopies, hernia repairs, etc. These surgeons also tend to sell

the same service to multiple payers (e.g., Medicare, Medicare Advantage, Medicaid, and non-

elderly commercial (private) insurers).

        We begin by indexing procedure-by-payer combinations as j  J ­­e.g., spinal injections

paid by Medicare or colonoscopies paid by commercial insurance. For the purpose of the model

(and aligning with the empirical implementation below), we combine all non-Medicare Advantage

and non-Medicaid commercial insurance payers into a single payer grouping.15

        Next, let R j indicate whether the payer-procedure combination is permitted in the ASC

setting. More precisely, R j indicates whether the payer will reimburse the facility fee portion of

the associated claim if the procedure is performed within an ASC. As previously remarked,

Medicare would not pay facility fees for ASC-delivered laparoscopic cholecystectomy (hereafter


14
  As described in Section V, roughly one out of five our analytic sample's policy-exposed surgeons uses ASC
settings for commercially insured patients needing this specific surgery prior to the Medicare rule change.
15
  Among ASC firms during our study period, the vast majority of cases belong to two payer types: nonelderly
commercial and traditional (FFS) Medicare. Other payers, such as Medicaid, receive vanishingly small shares of
ASC output. This is also true outside of Florida and across the US­­see Hall et al. (2017).


                                                                                                                 12
`LC') surgeries prior to 2008, which amounted to a de facto ASC ban for this surgical procedure

for FFS Medicare patients.

       Consider a procedure, like LC surgeries, for which some patients or patient types will

always receive care in a HOPD setting, so that a physician's decision to use an ASC for some other

patients is equivalent to the decision to divide her caseload across the two treatment settings. We

model a physician's discrete choice to perform a procedure at an ASC for at least some of her

patients as a function of the reimbursement rule for the payer-procedure combination ( R j ),

physician preferences, patient preferences, and the physician's extensive margin use of ASC's for

other payer-procedure combinations:




                                               (       {
                                    ASCij = f R j , ij , ASCi- j   })                            (1)




Here, ASC j is an indicator for whether the physician delivers any of her j-type services at an ASC,

and i indexes individual physicians. The term  ij combines all information on the physician's

preferences and her patients' characteristics as these relate to providing service j at an ASC.

Examples of such considerations include the distribution of medical appropriateness for ASC use

among the physician's patients, the physician's beliefs about patient convenience of ASCs versus

HOPDs, idiosyncratic physician treatment preferences, and so on. We do not further decompose

or specify this composite term as it will ultimately be held constant (i.e., differenced out) in the

quasi-experiment that we exploit below in the empirical analysis.

       Importantly, for explaining the possibility of spillovers from Medicare rulemaking onto the

commercially insured patient population, we allow ASCi- j --the physician's' decision to use




                                                                                                 13
ASCs at all for other payer-procedure combinations (denoted via ­j)--to enter the discrete choice

for procedure j. This term allows for spillovers across procedure types and/or payers. For example,

it could be that scheduling a given surgery for commercially insured patients at an ASC becomes

more attractive once the physician can schedule Medicare patients for the exact same surgery at

an ASC. Such interactions, which depend on the physician's choices over ­j, are distinct from

underlying physician preferences over ASC use for procedure j, which is captured in  ij .

           Because we ultimately investigate what fraction of physicians change behavior by

beginning to divide their place of service between ASCs and HOPDs in response to a Medicare

policy change, it is useful to aggregate Equation (1) over the population of physicians. We denote

                                                                j
the across-physician mean of the ASC indicator function with ASC , where the physician

subscript i has been removed. This aligns with the empirical exercise below and smooths the

discrete choice function, making it differentiable for the purpose of considering comparative

statics.

           Consider the simple case of just two payer-procedure combinations: j denoting a particular

procedure paid for by a commercial insurer, and -j denoting the same procedure paid for by

                                                                               j
Medicare. The impact of changing R - j (the Medicare reimbursement rule) on ASC (the

provision of the procedure for commercially insured patients) can be expressed as:




                                       ASC j  ASC j  ASC - j
                                            =          ×                                          (2)
                                       R- j    ASC - j    R- j




                                                                                                  14
       In practice, with an appropriate exogenous shock that manipulates R - j , we can estimate

 ASC j      ASC - j
       and          , where j = Commercial × LC and - j = Medicare × LC . We do so below.
 R- j        R- j

                                       ASC j                                                      ASC j
Conditional on these estimates,                  is pinned down by Equation (2). Recovering
                                       ASC - j                                                   ASC - j

reveals the extent to which Medicare's regulatory prohibition against ASCs for a certain type of

surgery affects the treatment of non-Medicare patients receiving the same procedure. If

  ASC j
           > 0 , then Medicare newly allowing ASC facilities for service delivery crowds in privately
 ASC - j

                                         ASC j
insured (commercial) patients. If                  < 0 , the opposite would prove true--i.e., Medicare's
                                         ASC - j

regulatory decision ultimately crowds out privately insured (commercial) patients. More broadly,

                          ASC j
a non-zero result for               indicates that there are linkages that operate across payers to impact
                          ASC - j

physician decision-making for non-targeted payer-procedure combinations.

       As previously remarked, quasi-experimental manipulation of R - j is required to identify

such spillover effects because observed values of ASCi j and ASCi- j could be correlated within

physicians for many reasons, including physician preferences or sorting of patient types across

physicians. Given quasi-experimental manipulation of R - j , the key underlying assumption for

               ASC j                                                      j
identifying              is that there is no direct effect of R - j on ASC . We return to this possibility
               ASC - j

and assess available empirical evidence related to it in Section VI.

       Because both payers and procedures vary across the index j, Equation (2) implies the

possibility of within-physician spillovers across surgery types (within a payer) as well as across


                                                                                                       15
payers (within a surgery type). For example, the expanded ability to schedule a Medicare surgery

at an ASC could generate new take-up of ASC use for other Medicare-reimbursed procedure types

at ASCs, even without a change in Medicare policy that directly affects these other procedures.

This means that a narrow Medicare regulatory change targeting LCs could in theory influence

physicians' treatment setting decisions for three broad categories of payer-procedure

combinations: 1) non-Medicare LCs 2) Medicare non-LCs and/or 3) non-Medicare non-LCs. For

the purposes of the model, we have been assuming that each physician performs every j  J

payer-procedure combination, though in what follows, we use physicians who are not exposed to

the regulatory change (i.e., who never perform the Medicare policy-targeted LC surgery) as a

                                                                                         ASC j
control group for measuring the size of spillovers. Additionally, the magnitude of                 may
                                                                                         ASC - j

vary across the specific j and ­j being considered. Our subsequent empirics investigate each of

these possibilities and hence the size and reach of the spillover effect from the 2008 Medicare

policy change.

                                                   ASC j
       Finally, we note that the possibility of              being nonzero is consistent with a family
                                                   ASC - j

of explanations for the spillover mechanism. For instance, it subsumes the possibility that the

physician's cost of ASC treatment setting scheduling is falling in the variety of procedures

available to be performed at ASCs. It also subsumes a kind of "norms hypothesis" for physician

behavior, which argues that tangible and cognitive costs can lead physicians to adopt similar

treatment styles for different patients­­i.e., limit treatment customization for a given medical

problem (Newhouse and Marquis 1978; Glied and Graff Zivin 2002; Frank and Zeckhauser 2007).

Applied to our context, forces related to physician norms or coordination costs do not affect the




                                                                                                    16
choice of treatment (i.e., the procedure to be performed) but instead influence where treatment

takes place.



         III. Empirical Strategy for Own and Spillover Medicare Deregulation Effects

                                                      A. Data

Our set of analyses leverages the universe of ambulatory (i.e., outpatient) procedure discharge

records from the state of Florida, which we obtained from the Florida Agency for Health Care

Administration (AHCA). Florida is home to a large share of the nation's Medicare population--3

to 4 million beneficiaries in recent years, which is second only to California.16

         Although discharge records lack the kind of reimbursement information typically found in

claims data­­meaning we cannot observe whether and how commercial reimbursement amounts

evolve following the Medicare rule change­­the discharge records possess the key advantage (for

our purposes) of complete and consistent physician longitudinal identifiers across records, payers,

and treatment settings. Specifically, the discharge records clearly indicate whether a given

ambulatory case was performed within a HOPD or ASC setting and contain the Florida medical

license belonging to the physician performing the case.17 These features, coupled with the ability

to observe cases among all payers within the state, allow us to completely track physicians'

allocations of procedures across these two treatment settings for our two payer groups of interest:




16
  State-specific Medicare population sizes are available here: https://www.kff.org/medicare/state-indicator/total-
medicare-
beneficiaries/?currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Location%22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%
7D).
17
  We intentionally ignore cases belonging to highly specialized points of care (e.g., lithotripsy centers and cardiac
catheterization centers) that are not relevant to our analytic context and research questions. These cases also account
for less than 1% of discharges in a typical year.



                                                                                                                    17
traditional Medicare and the (non-Medicare) commercially insured.18 Having these multiple and

comprehensive pieces of information--which would typically be unavailable in claims data--is

critical to addressing our research question.19

         Our administrative data span the first quarter of 2005 through the fourth quarter of 2011,

which consequently captures ambulatory procedure market activity several years before the

Medicare rule change as well as several years after the policy's debut. These detailed records

include a rich set of variables, such as patient demographic information and associated diagnosis

and procedure codes.20 The discharge record procedure codes, specifically, are Current Procedure

Terminology (CPT) or Health Care Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) codes.

         In what follows, we exploit these data features to construct a time series of physician

behavior that reflects the use of ASC and HOPD treatment settings. In most cases, the unit of

analysis is at the physician by procedure by payer by time period level.



                                           B. Estimation Procedure

We begin by estimating the first-order (direct) effect of the Medicare ASC regulatory policy

change. This is both an important policy response to document in itself and a natural precondition



18
  These are the two payers that makeup the overwhelming majority of outpatient procedure cases, especially for
ASCs in our data. Other specific payers (e.g., Medicaid) are vanishingly small components of the typical Florida
ASC's payer mix. We also note that nationally more than 80% of ambulatory (outpatient) surgeries are estimated to
have either commercial insurance or Medicare as the main payer (Hall et al. 2017).
19
   No all-payer claims database exists that covers our period of study (2005-2011) and contains consistent physician
identifiers over time. Having this latter element as well as having it available across public and private payers are
critical to tracking the physician response that we study.
20
  We also note that 2.9% of the 113,524 commercially insured laparoscopic cholecystectomy surgeries taking place
over this time period in Florida report an age of 65 or higher on the discharge record. These could be age reporting
errors or reflect the small subset of individuals that either opt to delay Medicare benefits as they continue to work
and receive employer-sponsored coverage and/or is ineligible for Medicare benefits. The mean and median age for
these specific surgical patients is 45, however. Additionally, Medicare Advantage coverage is separately indicated
on the discharge records--making these patients distinct from those with commercial (non-Medicare) coverage.


                                                                                                                   18
for certain types of spillover channels from Medicare onto commercial patients--e.g., via

convenience complementarities or capacity-constraint-driven crowd out. We then use an

analogous approach (fully described next) to estimate the indirect effect of the Medicare

deregulation change on treatment setting choices for commercially insured patients.

        When estimating the policy's direct and indirect effects, we rely on a difference-in-

differences (DD) design. The narrowly targeted nature of the Medicare rule change lends itself to

a well-defined treatment versus control group setup. Specifically, we define the treatment group

as LC surgeons--that is, surgeons who perform LC procedures­­and their LC procedures.21 We

classify a physician as an LC surgeon if she performs at least one LC case for the relevant payer

type (i.e., Medicare or commercial insurance) within each half year. We aggregate the quarterly

data to the half-year level because procedures can have few or no cases for a given physician-payer

combination in a given quarter. For instance, even among our treatment group of LC surgeons, the

share of their outpatient procedures made up of LC surgeries is only around 10%.22 Following

these steps, we are left with 165 unique LC surgeons for the Medicare market analyses (i.e., the

direct policy effect) and 387 unique LC surgeons for the commercial market analyses (i.e., the

indirect or spillover effect) that are observed in each of our 14 half-year periods spanning our

2005-2011 time frame.23




21
  Recall, we are using the `LC' abbreviation as convenient shorthand for laparoscopic cholecystectomy surgeries.
We maintain this abbreviation in Sections IV and V as well to clearly demarcate affected and unaffected physicians
as well as targeted and untargeted outpatient procedures.
22
   The typical LC surgeon most likely trained as a "general surgeon" during the required post-medical school
residency program; therefore, it would be rare to exclusively perform LC surgeries among this group of physicians.
23
  Balance here means that the LC surgeon is performing LC procedures in every single half year increment of the
sample period. Physicians inconsistently performing LC procedures are dropped from the analytic sample­­i.e.,
neither included as a treatment or control group observation.



                                                                                                                19
           We are interested in whether the Medicare policy change causes some physicians to begin

using ASCs for the relevant procedure. We define a surgeon as adopting the "splitter" treatment

style in a given half-year if she divides her LC patients between ASC and HOPD settings for a

given payer in that half-year. The variable is therefore binary in its construction and is virtually

synonymous with extensive margin ASC use for this specific surgery among our treatment group

physicians.24

           We rely on non-LC physicians--that is, physicians who never perform the policy-targeted

procedure at any point for any payer in our data­­to provide our DD control group. Importantly,

it would be inappropriate to include the non-LC procedures of treatment group physicians in our

control group because our conceptual framework from Section II suggests that the Medicare policy

targeting LCs could affect how LC physicians organize care for their other procedures. We

explicitly examine this possibility in Section V. We then use all possible remaining physician-

procedure combinations within a payer (i.e., Medicare or commercially insured) to construct

analogous time series tuples (physician × procedure × payer × period) that capture the presence

or absence of combined ASC and HOPD use at a given point in time. Including all procedures by

all non-LC physicians is a natural way to form the control group, given the targeted nature of the

Medicare policy change, and has the added benefit of avoiding any arbitrary selection of a specific

procedure to serve as the comparison group.

           To classify what constitutes a control procedure, we include only the "principle CPT code"

(i.e., the primary service the patient is receiving as an outpatient procedure) within the discharge




24
     Only a few (and very low volume) LC surgeons transition from 0% to 100% ASC use for LC patients.



                                                                                                        20
records.25 This step deliberately avoids including in our estimation any ancillary procedures (e.g.,

blood tests, imaging tests, or transfusions) that are merely incident to the main outpatient services

delivered to patients. Because observations are at the physician × procedure × payer × period

level, a control group physician may comprise multiple physician-procedure tuples, if they

consistently supply more than one unique procedure for the relevant payer over the 2005 to 2011

period. This is likely since most physicians are multiproduct firms for a given payer. We end up

with roughly 7,000 unique physician-procedure combinations (q) within our control group for our

analysis of the direct effects within Medicare and approximately 11,000 unique combinations for

our analysis of spillover effects on commercially insured patients.

         We first estimate a simple pre-/post- DD equation separately for our two main analytic

samples (i.e., the Medicare and commercial markets):




                                                  (               (               ))
                        Splitterqt =  Postt +  1 ( Postt ) × 1 LCSurgeonq +  q +  qt                                (4)




The Splitter outcome variable captures our physician treatment style behavior of interest and is

binary and payer specific. It is set equal to one when the physician performs a given procedure

type within the two treatment setting options (i.e., ASCs and HOPDs) in a given half-year interval.

It is otherwise zero. The Post variable is equal to one for all half-years after and including the

beginning of 2008 (when Medicare removes the ASC ban for LC surgeries). LCSurgeon is time-

invariant and equal to one for LC surgeons--those directly exposed to the Medicare policy change.



25
  The set of principle CPT code candidates is drawn from the 2007 discharge data. The principle CPT is also a
distinct data field in the discharge records (i.e., it is separate from additional CPT code variable columns, which can
be used for recording ancillary services incident to the principle procedure performed during the encounter).



                                                                                                                     21
We also include a full vector of physician-procedure pair fixed effects (  ), which subsume the

LCSurgeon main effect.26 The  parameter generates the standard two-by-two DD estimate,

which summarizes the overall post-period effect from the policy change.

         To enhance the flexibility of the model and to allow for examination of pre-trends, we

adapt our DD analytic setup to an event study framework:




                                (1(t + m)) +                   (1( LCSurgeon ) × 1(t + n)) +  + 
                               7                     7
               Splitterqt =           m                    n                q                   q    qt             (5)
                              m= -6                n= -6
                              m-1                  n-1




Equation (5) introduces a vector of half-year indicator variables (  m ) for our full study period

(2005-2011). The omitted, reference time point is the second half of 2007 (t ­ 1), which

immediately precedes the Medicare regulatory change. The series of (  n ) coefficients allows us

to examine the pre-policy (t ­ 6 through t ­ 1) trends of LC surgeons relative to the control group.

Non-parallel differential pre-trends would suggest a possible violation of the identifying

assumption that the treatment and control group outcomes would have evolved similarly in the

absence of the regulatory shock to the treatment group. The set of  t -  t +7  coefficients flexibly

allows for dynamics in the policy response over the subsequent 4-year period for the direct

(Medicare) and indirect (commercial) analyses.

         Finally, our standard errors are clustered at the physician-procedure (q) level throughout

the main DD and sensitivity analyses (described in Section IVB). The choice of clustering level is

motivated over concerns about standard error under-estimation due to uneven cluster group sizes


26
 Note, for the treatment group (LC surgeons), it is ultimately a physician fixed effect since all of their other (non-
LC) procedure activity is deliberately excluded from the analytic sample.


                                                                                                                     22
(e.g., see MacKinnon and Webb 2017) that would result from clustering at the higher, physician

level. For completeness, we have re-estimated our core DD models clustering at the physician

level, rather than the physician-procedure level, and found that the standard error estimates do not

depart from our preferred approach until the fourth decimal place. See Appendix Table A1 and

Appendix Table A2.



                    IV. Results for Own and Spillover Deregulation Effects

                                          A. Main Results

We begin with the DD results for Medicare's policy effect on care delivery for its own enrollees,

where the post-policy differential effect is summarized in a single coefficient (see Equation (4) in

Section III). In column 1 of Table 2, we identify a large and highly significant 11-percentage point

uptick in the likelihood of surgeons relying on both treatment settings (i.e., ASCs and HOPDs) for

their Medicare LC patients. This DD result is the direct effect of the policy change whereby

Medicare rulemaking affects the provision of the Medicare-reimbursed service targeted by the

regulation (in the expected direction).

       Column 2 of Table 2 and Figure 2 display the corresponding event study results using

Equation (5), which more flexibly fits the data and allows for examination of pre-trends. For the

Medicare (direct) effect of deregulation, the pre-policy coefficients are close to zero in magnitude

and never statistically different from it. This is consistent with the pre-2008 Medicare policy

amounting to a ban on LCs being performed for its beneficiaries in the ASC setting. With the

introduction of the Medicare rule change, however, there is a sharp and precisely estimated 6-8

percentage point uptick in the probability that LC surgeons splitting their Medicare LC patients




                                                                                                 23
across treatment settings within the first post-policy year (i.e., time t and t + 1).27 The policy

response grows throughout the post-implementation period, with the effect size nearly twice as

large (i.e., a roughly 14 percentage point differential increase) at its peak when compared to the

initial year after the deregulation intervention. We therefore interpret the DD result from Table 2

and the corresponding event study results (Table 2 and Figure 2) as offering strong evidence of a

direct and presumably intended policy effect: surgeons exposed to the deregulatory change took

advantage of the new delivery setting opportunity after the Medicare administrators approved the

use of ASC treatment settings.

         We now turn to spillover effects. Recall that the samples used in this spillover analysis

include only observations for procedures paid for in the non-Medicare (and non-Medicaid)

commercially insured market. The treatment group is composed of all LC surgeons consistently

observed over our 2005-2011 period. Their non-LC procedures are omitted (and investigated

separately below). The control group includes the commercial market procedure × physician

observations for physicians never performing an LC surgery. Note that there can be no "direct"

effect of the policy in the spillover sample because there is no statutory connection between

Medicare's payment policy and the treatment setting choices for non-Medicare patients.

         Within column 1 of Table 3, we find a 6.5-percentage point increase in the likelihood of

LC physicians using ASCs for some of their commercial payer LC patients­­indicative of a

spillover effect from the Medicare policy change. The estimate is also precise and translates to a

52% increase over the pre-period propensity to use both surgical setting options for these patients.

         Column 2 of Table 3 and Figure 3 display the corresponding flexible, event-study

difference-in-differences version of the spillover result, following Equation (5). The figure also


27
  Recall, this difference-in-differences effect is relative to any changes in splitter status among non-LC physicians
performing non-LC Medicare procedures.


                                                                                                                    24
parallels the direct effect analysis reported in Figure 2. We see no evidence of a differential trend

toward adopting a splitter treatment style between our treatment and control groups during the

three years we can observe prior to the Medicare rule change (t ­ 6 through t ­ 1). The pre-policy

coefficients are close to zero and nowhere near statistically different from zero at conventional

levels. The absence of a differential pre-trend prior to the Medicare policy change is consistent

with the identifying assumption that the probability of allocating patients to both ASCs and

HOPDs for a specific procedure would have continued to evolve in parallel across our treatment

and control groups had it not been for the Medicare regulatory intervention in 2008. The

differential behavior change for the policy-exposed surgeons begins only in the first post-

implementation year, which then stabilizes at an elevated level by t + 4 (i.e., the start of 2010).

       More specifically, the event-time estimates in Table 3 and Figure 3 reveal that lifting the

Medicare ASC prohibition for LC surgeries induced an approximately 3-percentage point increase

in the probability that LC surgeons used ASCs and HOPDs for their commercial LC patients by

the end of the first deregulation year (t + 1), which more than doubled over the next two post-

policy years to an 8-9 percentage point positive spillover effect. Compared to the pre-policy

prevalence (12.4%) of a splitter treatment style for policy-exposed (treatment group) physicians,

the peak effect translates to an approximately 70% relative increase attributable to the Medicare

rule change.

       In Appendix Figure A1, we decompose the event study results from Figures 2 and 3 by

separately estimating a version of Equation (5) for the treatment and control groups in isolation

for each payer. Doing so reveals the time series for the outcomes for each of the respective DD

groups. Figure A1 shows that the differential changes captured in Figures 2 and 3 are

overwhelmingly driven by level changes among our policy exposed surgeons (i.e., the treatment




                                                                                                      25
group). In particular, with respect to the direct effect, Appendix Figure A1 shows event study

estimates that are close to zero for the Medicare control group over our full analytic window, and

the coefficients are typically a small fraction of the magnitudes found among the Medicare

treatment group during the post-policy period. Therefore, the control group, while important in

principle, is not in this case differencing-out strong underlying trends. With respect to the spillover

effect, the commercial payer control group likewise demonstrates limited trending from 2005-

2009, with slight declines in splitter prevalence during 2010 and 2011. Taken together, the time

patterns of Figures 2 and 3 mirror each other, consistent with a direct effect of the Medicare policy

spilling over onto the commercial market.



                                            B. Robustness

Our DD estimation applies relatively few restrictions to the analytic sample, especially with

respect to which observations are included in the physician-procedure pairs that make up the

control group. However, if an underlying trend in a particular control group procedure were driving

the difference-in-differences result, this could be a cause for concern with the strategy. The flat

pre- and post-trends in the pooled control group procedures in Appendix Figure A1 indicate that

this is unlikely. Nonetheless, for completeness, we evaluate the possibility more systematically

here.

        To do so, we first repeat our DD estimation for the direct (Medicare) and spillover

(commercial) effects by systematically leaving out one of the non-LC procedures from the control

group at a time and then re-estimating Equation (4). This process leads to 358 unique DD estimates

for our coefficient of interest for the direct Medicare effects and 540 unique DD estimates for our

coefficient of interest for the indirect, spillover effects onto the commercial payer market. We also




                                                                                                    26
perform a variant on this re-estimation approach with a randomly drawn set of control observations

for each of our payer groups. Specifically, we implement bootstrap draws of a 50% sample

(without replacement) of the available non-LC procedures belonging to the relevant payer group

and then estimate Equation (4) using this subsample of non-LC control procedures. We repeat this

sampling process for 1,000 iterations each for the direct and spillover results.

       Figures 4 and 5 display the resulting DD estimate distributions for each exercise stratified

by payer type. For Medicare (Figure 4), systematically excluding a control group procedure leaves

the DD coefficients largely unchanged­­even when the analytic sample sizes change by as much

as 10,000 observations in some re-estimations (see Appendix Figure A2). The mass of the

distribution in panel (a) of Figure 4 is almost entirely contained within [0.108, 0.112], a tight range

around our 11-percentage point estimate (column 1 in Table 2). Likewise, using a randomly drawn

subset of control group procedures (panel (b), Figure 4) creates a unimodal distribution of DD

estimates around the observed effect from column 1 in Table 2. The analogous robustness exercises

for the commercially insured offer an identical pattern in Figure 5. When excluding non-LC

procedures one-by-one (panel (a)) or bootstrapping random samples of control procedures (panel

(b)), the DD estimates are tightly centered on the estimate from column 1 in Table 3 (i.e., a 6.5-

percentage point effect).

       The results displayed in Figures 4 and 5 therefore do not suggest that the presence or

absence of any particular non-LC procedure in the control group has any meaningful impact on

our main findings.




                                                                                                    27
                                        V. Secondary Spillover Effects

                                           A. Estimation Procedure

Tables 2 and 3, along with Figures 2 and 3, provide strong evidence that Medicare's 2008 policy

change targeting LC surgeries affected the behavior of physicians performing the same surgery for

non-Medicare (i.e., commercially insured) patients. However, Section II raised the possibility that

the complementarities for physicians could extend beyond the focal (i.e., policy-targeted)

procedure. For example, the convenience of scheduling a slate of procedures to be performed at a

given ASC (e.g., over the course of an afternoon or entire day), rather than traveling between

multiple facilities could influence physicians' willingness to newly allocate some of their

untargeted procedures (e.g., tissues biopsies, colonoscopies, endoscopies, hernia repairs, etc.) to

ASC treatment settings. Here we empirically test the possibility of "secondary spillovers" from

removing the narrow Medicare ban on ASC-delivery for LC surgeries.

       To do so, we turn our attention to all non-targeted outpatient procedures--i.e., everything

other than LC surgeries. We maintain the same treatment-control designations of physicians as

before, and we estimate specifications that parallel Equations (4) and (5) in structure and notation:




                                                 (                            )
                                 Yit =  Posti +  1 ( Postt ) × 1 ( LCSurgeoni ) + i +  it            (6)


                              (1(t + m)) +   (1( LCSurgeon ) × 1(t + n)) +  + 
                             7                       7
                    Yit =           m                     n             i                   i   it   (7)
                            m= -6                 n= -6
                            m-1                   n-1




The key difference here is that rather than examining the LC surgeries of LC physicians and

excluding their non-LC procedures, we examine their non-LC procedures and exclude their LC

procedures. The sample restriction in terms of physicians is exactly the same as above (i.e., the



                                                                                                     28
main spillover analysis in Table 3). To construct the dependent variable, we group together all

non-LC procedures within a physician. If a given physician (i) in a given half-year (t) has a positive

case volume for the relevant payer's non-LC procedures within both ASC and HOPD settings,

then the physician-by-time period observation is coded as a one and is zero otherwise. Given this

construction, observations are at the physician-by-time level, and we use physician fixed effects (

i ) rather than procedure-physician pair fixed effects (  p ). Standard errors are clustered at the

physician, and regressions are run separately for the two payer types.

        We also construct an alternative formulation motivated by the recognition that not all ASCs

have the technical capacity to perform laparoscopic surgeries. It is therefore possible that the

Medicare policy affected the type of ASC used (in terms of available surgical technology) by

encouraging the policy exposed physicians to migrate their non-LC procedures to facilities where

LCs can be performed­­even if they had already adopted a splitter treatment style for their non-

LC procedures prior to 2008. For example, they might have started doing tissue biopsies at a

laparoscopy-equipped ASC in place of a different ASC, even though that procedure would not

require such equipment. We investigate this possibility by constructing an additional variant on

the binary outcome. Specifically, we set this variable equal to one only if the physician performs

any non-LC procedures within an ASC that has laparoscopic surgery technology.28 This second

outcome could show secondary spillover effects even if the other outcome does not. The treatment

group surgeons could alter the type of ASC that they use for non-LC procedures without changing




28
  We are able to identify ASCs with this technology by leveraging our all-payer universe of outpatient procedures
and a list of CPT codes for laparoscopic surgeries (all types) to determine if a given ASC in a given year has the
technology. Of note, only 26% of Florida ASCs perform any laparoscopic surgery cases (of any type for any payer)
during the 2005-2011 period.


                                                                                                                29
their underlying propensity to simultaneously use ASCs and HOPDs for their Medicare and

commercially insured patients.



                                  B. Secondary Spillover Results

Table 4 displays the estimates for secondary spillover effects, by payer type. Looking across all

four columns in Table 4, we find no evidence that Medicare's targeted policy alters the treatment

setting choices for affected physicians' untargeted procedures. The DD estimates are uniformly

small in magnitude (less than a percentage point), statistically insignificant, and negatively signed.

To put these magnitudes in context of the size of the baseline mean, during the pre-period years

(2005-2007) 46% and 57% of LC surgeons divided their non-LC patients' procedures between

both outpatient treatment settings for the Medicare and commercial markets, respectively.

Similarly, just under half of LC surgeons performed non-LC procedures within ASCs that had

laparoscopic surgical capabilities prior to 2008 Medicare rule change.

       Appendix Figure A3 offers the corresponding event study difference-in-differences results.

There is no clear differential behavior by the policy-exposed (i.e., treatment group) physicians

before or after the 2008 policy shock. Coupled with our findings from Section IV, our research

design demonstrates a clear direct effect on Medicare utilization of ASCs for the regulation

targeted surgery, a clear within-procedure and across-payer (primary) spillover effect from

Medicare rulemaking on commercially insured patients needing the same surgery, but no

detectable (secondary) spillover effect that extends to other (non-LC) procedures.




                                                                                                   30
                              C. Supplementary Descriptive Results

Before concluding Section V, we produce a more nuanced but necessarily descriptive set of facts

for the same outcomes examined in Section VB. Specifically, we plot trends in the two outcomes

(per payer type) for three mutually exclusive subsets of the treatment group surgeons: those who

began splitting commercial LC procedures across HOPD and ASC settings before the Medicare

policy change, those who began doing so only after the policy change, and those who never relied

on both treatment settings for commercial LC patients during our sample period. The "never"

group captures the largest share (60%) of our treatment group physicians in the data. The remaining

40% is nearly evenly divided between the other two classifications. Having this mutually exclusive

categorization of LC surgeons subsequently allows us to narrow our attention to the minority of

these physicians who plausibly changed their behavior due to the policy.

       With these definitions, we can ask whether the physicians who appear to have responded

to the Medicare policy in terms of ASC use for commercial LCs also respond in other ways.

Examining the behavior of this subgroup more precisely may be informative but requires more

subtle attention to interpretation because we are essentially conditioning on the dependent variable

from our primary spillover analysis.

       Figures 6 and 7 plot the trends in the outcomes reported in Table 4 for each of these three

physician subgroups according to payer type. In each panel of Figure 6, surgeons splitting their

commercial LC provision in the pre-period have high rates of doing likewise for their non-LC

procedures, and this remains level across the 2008 policy change. Similarly, surgeons who never

split their commercial LCs consistently tend to not do so for other (non-LC) commercial and

Medicare procedures. Unremarkable trends (with similar level differences) are also seen for these

two treated physician subgroups when examining their propensity to have a non-zero amount of




                                                                                                 31
non-LC procedures performed in ASCs equipped with laparoscopic surgical technology (Figure

7).

        The more interesting patterns in Figures 6 and 7 belong to the subgroup of surgeons that

are newly using both HOPD and ASC treatment settings for their commercial LC patients once

the Medicare deregulation event has taken place. Their probability of using both ASCs and HOPDs

for non-LC procedures increases over time, with the most dramatic increases following the

Medicare rule change (Figure 6). A similar trend change is evident for the proportion using ASCs

with laparoscopic technology for their non-LC procedures (Figure 7). These descriptive patterns

could be because the rule change altered their decision making on treatment setting for non-LC

procedures as a secondary spillover effect, or it could be because the physicians who ultimately

responded to the rule change (reflected in our causal estimates in Tables 2 and 3) were

disproportionately drawn from physicians who were closer to the threshold for initiating ASC use

for many of their services. It is not possible to distinguish between explanations in these data, but

it does raise the possibility of more diffuse spillovers beyond the procedure narrowly targeted by

Medicare's regulatory change.29



                                                 VI. Discussion

It is well-established that the Medicare public insurance program is an influential force within the

US healthcare system, affecting private medical markets in a variety of ways. Empirical attention

to Medicare spillover effects has largely been devoted to provider responses to changes in

Medicare financial incentives and to commercial plan price schedules for provider services. We


29
  For example, it is possible that a regulatory shock that applied to a more common procedure and/or a larger share
of physicians could generate a detectable effect along these lines­­something future, related research may wish to
consider.



                                                                                                                 32
examine a related but distinct question, regarding the capability of Medicare rulemaking (in this

case, a prohibition) to distort care delivery for non-Medicare patients.

           We show that surgeons performing laparoscopic cholecystectomy procedures are sharply

more likely to divide their relevant Medicare patients between ASCs and HOPDs once the ASC-

delivery ban is lifted in 2008, with a growing effect over the subsequent three years. The adoption

of this treatment style is indicative of physicians being aware of the Medicare regulatory reversal

and altering their treatment setting choices for beneficiaries in response to it. When examining the

total number of policy-targeted procedures performed within ASCs by physicians responding to

the Medicare rule change in our analytic sample, we find that they shift 25% of their surgical

volume into an ASC over the 2008-2011 period.30 Importantly, each outpatient procedure

treatment setting substitution made for Medicare beneficiaries (i.e., exchanging the HOPD option

for ASC delivery) reduces financial outlays for the public insurer since, by statute, Medicare caps

ASC facility payments at 59% of the HOPD rate for an identical procedure.31

           Our key contribution, however, is demonstrating a Medicare regulation externality for the

commercially insured market. The Medicare rule change crowds in (rather than crowds out)

commercial laparoscopic cholecystectomy surgeries performed in ASCs, with affected physicians

becoming up to 70% more likely to simultaneously use both treatment setting options for their

commercial patients needing the procedure shortly after the procedure-specific Medicare policy is

implemented. The descriptive data in Section VC further suggest that the subset of our treatment



30
  A similar calculation is not possible for the commercial laparoscopic cholecystectomy case allocations since we
cannot cleanly separate `policy compliers'­­meaning the specific surgeons that began dividing their commercial
procedures between settings because of the Medicare policy change­­from individual surgeons that eventually
would have adopted this behavior even in the absence of the Medicare policy shock. In other words, Table 3 and
Figure 3 are identifying aggregate, intent-to-treat effects for the relevant physician population (i.e., LC surgeons).
31
     Physicians are paid the same amount for performing the procedure, irrespective of using a HOPD or ASC setting.



                                                                                                                     33
group physicians newly adopting ASC use for some patients during the post-policy period may

have altered their treatment setting decisions for untargeted procedures in conjunction. These

physician behavior changes align with the cross-payer complementarity interpretation and reveal

restrained ASC use for non-Medicare patients when Medicare imposes targeted restrictions on

these facilities.32

        That said, another plausible and not mutually exclusive explanation for our findings is that

commercial insurers voluntarily adopt the regulatory stance of Medicare, first disallowing

reimbursement for the relevant procedure at ASCs and then allowing it after January 2008.

Complementarities and convenience explanations rely on physician agency; however, `rule

following' would be under the control of private insurers. Adapting the rule following concept to

the notation of our physician discrete choice model (Section II), the binary decision to begin

dividing a specific commercial surgery between HOPDs and ASCs for physician (i) could be

                   j     j -j
                             ( ( ) {
represented as ASCi = f R R , i , ASCi
                               j      -j
                                                       }) , where R ( R ) applied to our context would
                                                                      j    -j




allow for the possibility that the commercial payer sets its rules in response to Medicare's rules.

This is in contrast to the earlier formulation, in which the rule ( R - j )adopted by Medicare entered

only indirectly, via its effects on the physician's treatment style for the other payer-procedure

combination (­j). Such rule following could be driven by contracting efficiencies (i.e., simply

borrowing from the Medicare regulatory apparatus) and/or perceived increased liability risk from

steering enrollees to treatment settings explicitly forbidden by a dominant payer. In either

circumstance, a reversal of the targeted ASC ban by Medicare in 2008 would then be the impetus



32
   We also note that there is no market expansion within any payer group for laparoscopic cholecystectomy surgeries
following the Medicare policy change (Appendix Figure A4). This is not surprising since this is an invasive
treatment for an acute medical condition.



                                                                                                                34
for a contemporaneous, similar rule change among commercial insurers­­akin to Medicare price

following documented elsewhere (White 2013; Clemens and Gottlieb 2017; Clemens, Gottlieb,

and Molnár 2017; Trish et al. 2017; Cooper et al. 2019).33 For these reasons, coverage­­and hence

noncoverage­­alignment between public and private insurers with respect to where a given

surgery can be performed seems plausible a priori.

        In principle, a test of whether policy-exposed physicians who never treat Medicare patients

with the targeted procedure still change behavior for their commercial patients could help

differentiate between physician-driven complementarities versus insurer-driven rule following

explanations. Complementarities between Medicare and non-Medicare treatment decisions cannot

exist among surgeons that do not participate in the Medicare market. In practice, none of our

treatment group physicians in our analytic sample have zero Medicare business for the affected

procedure, rendering such a falsification exercise infeasible.34

        In Appendix B, we take a different approach. We leverage a supplementary claims-level

database (Marketscan) of more than 640,000 laparoscopic cholecystectomy surgeries paid for by

employer-sponsored health insurers across the US from 2005 to 2012. These data, in which

individual carriers and plans are separately identifiable, offer no indication that carriers or plans

newly permit ASC delivery for this specific surgery after Medicare's 2008 rule change. Further

physician-level analyses using the Florida discharge data and focusing on post-policy


33
   Related evidence exists for commercial and public insurer interdependence tied to evaluations and coverage
determinations for advancements in care delivery and medical technology (e.g., see Garber 2001; Chambers et al.
2015). Examples also exist of patient advocacy efforts centered around securing Medicare coverage for a specific
treatment in order to spur commercial coverage of the same treatment for the nonelderly population (e.g., see Kaiser
Health News 2019), and previous research even posited that commercial payers might eschew ASC-delivery for
laparoscopic cholecystectomies, specifically, due to Medicare's pre-2008 regulatory stance and the implied safety
concerns (see Paquette et al. 2008).
34
  In other words, 100% of the surgeons in our analytic sample pertaining to the spillover (commercial payer)
analyses have non-zero Medicare laparoscopic cholecystectomy surgeries at some point during our study period.



                                                                                                                 35
concordance/discordance in ASC use within the same physician performing the surgery for

Medicare and commercial patients also reinforces the complementarities interpretation (Appendix

B). In short, we fail to find any empirical evidence supporting a rule-following interpretation; the

evidence instead suggests that the direct result (Figure 2) and the spillover result (Figure 3) are

driven by the same physicians.35

           Irrespective of the underlying mechanism or mechanisms in play, we offer novel evidence

of substantive spillover effects on physician behavior from regulatory decisions made by the

Medicare program. Restrictions imposed by the public insurer are capable of limiting treatment

setting options for Medicare and non-Medicare patients alike, which may be at odds with non-

Medicare patients and payers underlying preferences. Our findings also shed light on an important,

but underexplored determinant of physician practice patterns and treatment styles: nonprice public

insurer regulations. Such externalities deserve greater attention as future Medicare policy debates

unfold and are likely to become more prevalent as the Medicare program continues to adjust

regulatory parameters tied to a variety of outpatient care delivery contexts in order to promote

more convenient and lower cost treatment options for Medicare beneficiaries­­e.g., proposed

changes to the Medicare "inpatient only" (IPO) list and related ASC permissions.36 While

Medicare rulemaking does not explicitly account for externalities on non-Medicare patients, our

findings suggest that effects on other payer groups are significant and could influence the overall

costs and benefits of such contemporary policy decisions.




35
     However, we acknowledge that we cannot definitively exclude the possibility of a rule-following mechanism.
36
   See Meyer (2017) and Brady (2020), for example. Related and additional information from the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) on the CY 2021 Medicare Hospital Outpatient Prospective Payment System
and Ambulatory Surgical Center Payment System Final Rule (CMS-1736-FC) can be found here:
https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/fact-sheets/cy-2021-medicare-hospital-outpatient-prospective-payment-system-
and-ambulatory-surgical-center-0.


                                                                                                                  36
                                       REFERENCES

Aouad, Marion, Timothy T. Brown, and Christopher M. Whaley. 2019. "Reference Pricing: The
      Case of Screening Colonoscopies." Journal of Health Economics, 65, 246-259.

Baicker, Katherine, Michael E. Chernew, and Jacob A. Robbins. 2013. "The Spillover Effects of
       Medicare Managed Care: Medicare Advantage and Hospital Utilization." Journal of
       Health Economics, 32 (6): 1289-1300.

Baicker, Katherine, and Jacob A Robbins. 2015. "Medicare Payments and System-Level Health
       Care Use: The Spillover Effects of Medicare Managed Care." American Journal of
       Health Economics, 1 (4): 399-431.

Baker, Laurence C., M. Kate Bundorf, and Daniel P. Kessler. 2019. "Competition in Outpatient
       Procedure Markets." Medical Care, 57 (1): 36-41.

Barnett, Michael L., Andrew Olenski, and Adam Sacarny. 2020. "Common Practice: Spillovers
       from Medicare on Private Health Care." NBER Working Paper Series, w27270,
       http://www.nber.org/papers/w27270.

Bian, John, and Michael A. Morrisey. 2007. "Free-Standing Ambulatory Surgery Centers and
       Hospital Surgery Volume." Inquiry, 44: 200-210.

Bond, Amelia M., and Chapin White. 2013. "Massachusetts Coverage Expansion Associated
      with Reduction in Primary Care Utilization among Medicare Beneficiaries." Health
      Services Research, 48 (6): 1826-1839.

Brady, Michael. 2020. "CMS' Plan to End Inpatient-Only List Worries Providers." Modern
       Healthcare, October, 6, 2020, Crain Communications Inc. Available here:
       https://www.modernhealthcare.com/payment/cms-plan-end-inpatient-only-list-worries-
       providers.

Callison, Kevin. 2016. "Medicare Managed Care Spillovers and Treatment Intensity." Health
       Economics, 25: 873-887.

Carey, Colleen M., Sarah Miller, and Laura R. Wherry. 2020. "The Impact of Insurance
       Expansions on the Already Insured: The Affordable Care Act and Medicare." NBER
       Working Paper Series, w25153, http://www.nber.org/papers/w25153.

Carey, Kathleen. 2015. "Price Increases Were Much Lower in Ambulatory Surgery Centers than
       Hospital Outpatient Departments in 2007-12." Health Affairs, 34 (10): 1738-1744.


                                                                                            37
Carey, Kathleen. 2017. "Ambulatory Surgery Centers and Prices in Hospital Outpatient
       Departments." Medical Care Research and Review, 74 (2): 236-248.

Carey, Kathleen, James F. Burgess Jr., and Gary J. Young. 2011. "Hospital Competition and
       Financial Performance: The Effects of Ambulatory Surgery Centers." Health Economics,
       20: 571-581.

Chambers, James D., Matthew Chenoweth, Teja Thorat, and Peter J. Neumann. 2015. "Private
     Payers Disagree with Medicare over Medical Device Coverage about Half the Time."
     Health Affairs, 34 (8): 1376-1382.

Chernew, Michael, Philip DeCicca, and Robert Town. 2008. "Managed Care and Medical
      Expenditures of Medicare Beneficiaries." Journal of Health Economics, 27 (6): 1451-
      1461.

Clemens, Jeffrey, and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2017. "In the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare's Influence
      on Private Physician Payments." Journal of Political Economy, 125 (1): 1-39.

Clemens, Jeffrey, Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Tímea Laura Molnár. 2017. "Do Health Insurers
      Innovate? Evidence from the Anatomy of Physician Payments." Journal of Health
      Economics, 55: 153-167.

Cooper, Zack, Stuart V. Craig, Martin Gaynor, and John Van Reenen. 2019. "The Price Ain't
      Right? Hospital Prices and Health Spending on the Privately Insured." Quarterly Journal
      of Economics, advanced access September 2018: 51-107.

Courtemanche, Charles and Michael Plotzke. 2010. "Does Competition from Ambulatory
      Surgical Centers Affect Hospital Surgical Output?" Journal of Health Economics, 29:
      765-773.

Currie, Janet, W. Bentley MacLeod, and Jessica Van Parys. 2016. "Provider Practice Style and
        Patient Health Outcomes: The Case of Heart Attacks." Journal of Health Economics, 47:
        64-80.

Cutler, David, Jonathan Skinner, Ariel Dora Stern, and David Wennberg. 2019. "Physician
        Beliefs and Patient Preferences: A New Look at Regional Variation in Health Care
        Spending." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11 (1): 192-221.




                                                                                            38
David, Guy and Mark D. Neuman. 2011. "Physician Division of Labor and Patient Selection for
       Outpatient Procedures." Journal of Health Economics, 30(2): 381­391.

Dyrda, Laura. 2017. "39% of ASCs are 15+ years old, 92% have physician ownership: 14
       statistics on ASCs." Becker's ASC Review, October 9. Available at
       https://www.beckersasc.com/benchmarking/39-of-ascs-are-15-years-old-92-have-
       physician-ownership-14-statistics-on-ascs.html.

Epstein, Andrew J. and Sean Nicholson. 2009. "The Formation and Evolution of Physician
       Treatment Styles: An Application to Cesarean Sections." Journal of Health Economics,
       28 (6): 1126-1140.

Frank, Richard G. and Richard Z. Zeckhauser. 2007. "Custom-Made versus Ready-to-Wear
       Treatments: Behavioral Propensities in Physicians' Choices." Journal of Health
       Economics, 26: 1101-1127.

Garber, Alan M. 2001. "Evidence-Based Coverage Policy." Health Affairs, 20 (5): 62-82.

Garthwaite, Craig L. 2012. "The Doctor Might See You Now: The Supply Side Effects of Public
      Health Insurance Expansions." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4 (3):
      190-215.

Glied, Sherry and Joshua Graff Zivin. 2002. "How Do Doctors Behave When Some (But Not
        All) of Their Patients Are in Managed Care?" Journal of Health Economics, 21: 337-353.

Glied, Sherry, and Kai Hong. 2018. "Health Care in a Multi-Payer System: Spillovers of Health
        Care Service Demand among Adults under 65 on Utilization and Outcomes in Medicare."
        Journal of Health Economics, 60: 165-176.

Grisel, Jedidiah and Ellis Arjmand. 2009. "Comparing Quality at an Ambulatory Surgery Center
        and a Hospital-Based Facility." Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, 141 (6): 701-
        709.

Grytten, Jostein, and Rune Sørensen. 2003. "Practice Variation and Physician-Specific Effects."
       Journal of Health Economics, 22 (3): 403-418.

Hall, Margaret J., Alexander Schwartzman, Jin Zhang, Xiang Liu, and Division of Health Care
       Statistics. 2017. "Ambulatory Surgery Data from Hospitals and Ambulatory Surgery
       Centers: United States, 2010." National Health Statistics Reports, No. 102, 28 February




                                                                                             39
       2017, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; US Department of Health and Human
       Services.

He, Daifeng, and Jennifer M. Mellor. 2012. "Hospital Volume Responses to Medicare's
       Outpatient Prospective Payment System: Evidence from Florida." Journal of Health
       Economics, 31 (5): 730-743.

He, Daifeng, and Jennifer M. Mellor. 2013. "Do Changes in Hospital Outpatient Payments
       Affect the Setting of Care?" Health Services Research, 48 (5): 1593-1616.

He, Daifeng, Melissa McInerney, and Jennifer M. Mellor. 2015. "Physician Responses to Rising
       Local Unemployment Rates: Healthcare Provision to Medicare and Privately Insured
       Patients." Journal of Health Economics, 40: 97-108.

Joynt, Karen E., David Chan, E. John Orav, and Ashish K. Jha. 2013. "Insurance Expansion in
       Massachusetts Did Not Reduce Access among Previously Insured Medicare Patients."
       Health Affairs, 32 (3): 571-578.

Joynt, Karen E., David C. Chan, Jie Zheng, E. John Orav, and Ashish Jha. 2015. "The Impact of
       Massachusetts Health Care Reform on Access, Quality, and Costs of Care for the
       Already-Insured." Health Services Research, 50 (2): 599-613.

Kaiser Health News (KHN), reporting by Carmen Heredia Rodriguez. Compression Garments
       Can Ease Lymphedema. Covering Costs? Not So Easy. October 23, 2019. Available here:
       https://khn.org/news/compression-garments-lymphadema-insurance-coverage-costs/

Lynk, William J. and Carina S. Longley. 2002. "The Effect of Physician-Owned Surgicenters on
      Hospital Outpatient Surgery." Health Affairs, 21 (4): 215-221.

MacKinnon, James G. and Matthew D. Webb. 2017. "Wild Bootstrap Inference for Wildly
     Different Cluster Sizes." Journal of Applied Econometrics, 32: 233-254.

McGuire, Thomas G., and Mark V. Pauly. 1991. "Physician Response to Fee Changes with
      Multiple Payers." Journal of Health Economics, 10 (4): 385-410.

McInerney, Melissa, Jennifer M. Mellor, and Lindsay M. Sabik. 2017. "The Effects of State
      Medicaid Expansions for Working-Age Adults on Senior Medicare Beneficiaries."
      American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9 (3): 408-438.




                                                                                              40
MedPAC. 2019. Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy. Chapter 5 (Ambulatory
     Surgical Center Services). March 2019. Available here:
     http://www.medpac.gov/docs/default-
     source/reports/mar19_medpac_ch5_sec.pdf?sfvrsn=0.

Meredith, Catherine. 2008. "General Surgery's Promise." Outpatient Surgery, February 2008,
      Herrin Publishing Partners LP.

Meyer, Harris. 2017. "Hospitals Leery of CMS Proposal to Pay for Joint Replacements in
       ASCs." Modern Healthcare, August, 5, 2017, Crain Communications Inc. Available here:
       https://www.modernhealthcare.com/article/20170805/NEWS/170809931/hospitals-leery-
       of-cms-proposal-to-pay-for-joint-replacements-in-ascs.

Molitor, David. 2018. "The Evolution of Physician Practice Style: Evidence from Cardiologist
       Migration." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10 (1): 326-356.

Munnich, Elizabeth L. and Stephen T. Parente. 2014. "Procedures Take Less Time at
      Ambulatory Surgery Centers, Keeping Costs Down and Ability to Meet Demand Up."
      Health Affairs, 33 (5): 764-769.

Munnich, Elizabeth L., and Stephen T. Parente. 2018. "Returns to Specialization: Evidence from
      the Outpatient Surgery Market." Journal of Health Economics, 57: 147-167.

Munnich, Elizabeth L., Michael R. Richards, Christopher M. Whaley, and Xiaoxi Zhao. 2020.
      "Raising the Stakes: Physician Facility Investments and Provider Agency." RAND
      Working Paper Series, WR-A621-4, DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/WRA621-4.

Newhouse, Joseph P. and M. Susan Marquis. 1978. "The Norms Hypothesis and the Demand for
     Medical Care." Journal of Human Resources, 13 Supplement: 159-182.

OR Manager. 2007. "CMS Sets Final 2008 ASC Payment Rates." OR Manager Inc. 23 (12): 1-3.
     https://www.ormanager.com/wp-
     content/uploads/2012/06/ORMVol23No12ASCcmsPaymentRates.pdf

Paquette, Ian M., Douglas Smink, and Samuel R.G. Finlayson. 2008. "Outpatient
       Cholecystectomy at Hospitals Versus Freestanding Ambulatory Surgical Centers."
       Journal of the American College of Surgeons, 206 (2): 301-305.




                                                                                               41
Phelps, Charels E. 2000. "Information Diffusion and Best Practice Adoption." In Handbook of
       Health Economics, Vol. 1A, edited by Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse, 223-
       64. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Plotzke, Michael and Charles Courtemanche. 2011. "Does Procedure Profitability Impact
       Whether an Outpatient Surgery is Performed at an Ambulatory Surgery Center or
       Hospital?" Health Economics, 20 (7): 817-830.

Polychronidis, Alexandros, Prodromos Laftsidis, Anastasios Bounovas, and Constantinos
       Simopoulos. 2008. "Twenty Years of Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy: Philippe Mouret--
       March 17, 1987." Journal of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons, 12: 109-111.

Richards, Michael R., and Sebastian Tello-Trillo. 2019. "Public Spillovers from Private
       Insurance Contracting: Physician Responses to Managed Care." American Economic
       Journal: Economic Policy, 11 (4): 375-403.

Sloan, Frank A., Michael A. Morrisey, and Joseph Valvona. 1988. "Effects of the Medicare
       Prospective Payment System on Hospital Cost Containment: An Early Appraisal."
       Milbank Quarterly, 66 (2): 191-220.

Sood, Neeraj and Chistopher M. Whaley. 2019. "Reverse Reference Pricing: Rewarding Patients
       for Reducing Medicare Costs." Health Affairs Blog, June 7, 2019.
       https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hblog20190604.509495/full/.

Trish, Erin, Paul Ginsburg, Laura Gascue, and Geoffrey Joyce. 2017. "Physician Reimbursement
        in Medicare Advantage Compared with Traditional Medicare and Commercial Health
        Insurance." JAMA Internal Medicine, 177 (9): 1287-1295.

Weber, Ellerie. 2014. "Measuring Welfare from Ambulatory Surgery Centers: A Spatial
      Analysis of Demand for Healthcare Facilities." The Journal of Industrial
      Economics, 62(4): 591-631.

Whaley, Christopher M., and Timothy T. Brown. 2018. "Firm Responses to Targeted Consumer
      Incentives: Evidence from Reference Pricing for Surgical Services." Journal of Health
      Economics, 61: 111-133.

White, Chapin. 2013. "Contrary to Cost-Shift Theory, Lower Medicare Hospital Payment Rates
       for Inpatient Care Lead to Lower Private Payment Rates." Health Affairs, 32 (5): 935-
       943.




                                                                                           42
White, Chapin. 2014. "Cutting Medicare Hospital Prices Leads to a Spillover Reduction in
       Hospital Discharges for the Nonelderly." Health Services Research, 49 (5): 1578-1595.

Yip, Winnie. 1998. "Physician Response to Medicare Fee Reductions: Changes in the Volume of
      Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) Surgeries in the Medicare and Private Sectors."
      Journal of Health Economics, 17 (6): 675-699.

Yurukoglu, Ali, Eli Liebman, and David B. Ridley. 2017. "The Role of Government
      Reimbursement in Drug Shortages." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9
      (2): 348-382.




                                                                                               43
MAIN RESULTS
                                                                           100
                            % of Physicians that Split the Corresponding




                                                                                             88.4
                                                                           90

                                                                           80

                                                                           70
                                        Commercial Cases




                                                                           60

                                                                           50

                                                                           40

                                                                           30

                                                                           20                                                16.1

                                                                           10

                                                                            0
                                                                                 Physicians that Split Medicare   Physicians that Do Not Split
                                                                                             Cases                     Medicare Cases


    FIGURE 1. CROSS-SECTIONAL CORRESPONDENCE IN SPLITTING CASES BETWEEN ASCs and HOPDs WITHIN-
                    PHYSICIANS, ACROSS THEIR MEDICARE AND COMMERCIAL PATIENTS

Notes: The data are from the universe of ambulatory procedure discharge records in Florida, and observations are at the physician-by-
procedure level. Splitting is defined as having positive volume at both ASC and HOPD treatment settings for the physician-procedure
                   pair. The data are restricted to 2007 and principle procedures recorded in the discharge records.
     TABLE 1­­SUMMARY STATS BY PROCEDURE AND PAYER TYPE



                  Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy             All Other Procedures

                   Commercial         Medicare         Commercial         Medicare

                   Mean (SD)         Mean (SD)         Mean (SD)         Mean (SD)
Age                44.8 (12.6)       69.3 (10.8)       48.8 (16.7)       72.8 (10.2)
Number of           2.1 (2.2)         4.1 (2.8)         1.6 (1.9)         2.0 (2.5)
Comorbidities

                       (%)               (%)               (%)               (%)
Female                 77.5              66.4              57.6              55.0
White                  77.3              85.8              76.3              85.8

N                     113,524            32,201           9,242,328        7,200,586
Notes: Summary statistics include all ambulatory (outpatient) procedural discharge
records from Florida during the 2005-2011 period. The data are stratified by payer type
(i.e., Commercial versus Medicare) but not setting type (i.e., ASC versus HOPD). The
commercial payer group excludes Medicare Advantage, and the Medicare payer group
is restricted to traditional (fee-for-service) Medicare patients. Examples of highly
common, non-LC outpatient procedures include: cataract removals, colonoscopies,
endoscopies, hernia repairs, skin biopsies, and spinal injections.
 TABLE 2­­DIFF-IN-DIFF ESTIMATES FOR THE DIRECT
    EFFECT OF MEDICARE REGULATION ON THE
    LIKELIHOOD OF USING BOTH ASC AND HOPD
  TREATMENT SETTINGS FOR MEDICARE PATIENTS


                                Pr(Splitter)         Pr(Splitter)

                                    (1)                   (2)
Post   ×   LC Surgeon              0.110***
                                  (0.019)
(t ­ 6)    ×   LC Surgeon                              ­0.024
                                                       (0.014)
(t ­ 5)    ×   LC Surgeon                              ­0.006
                                                       (0.015)
(t ­ 4)    ×   LC Surgeon                              ­0.013
                                                       (0.015)
(t ­ 3)    ×   LC Surgeon                              ­0.002
                                                       (0.014)
(t ­ 2)    ×   LC Surgeon                               0.001
                                                       (0.013)

(t + 0)    ×   LC Surgeon                               0.057**
                                                       (0.023)
(t + 1)    ×   LC Surgeon                               0.077***
                                                       (0.025)
(t + 2)    ×   LC Surgeon                               0.100***
                                                       (0.026)
(t + 3)    ×   LC Surgeon                               0.094***
                                                       (0.029)
(t + 4)    ×   LC Surgeon                               0.119***
                                                       (0.026)
(t + 5)    ×   LC Surgeon                               0.143***
                                                       (0.029)
(t + 6)    ×   LC Surgeon                               0.094***
                                                       (0.025)
(t + 7)    ×   LC Surgeon                               0.144***
                                                       (0.029)
Physician-Procedure FE                Yes                Yes
Half-Year FE                          No                 Yes
Unique Physician-                    7,512              7,512
Procedure Pairs
Observations (N)                   105,168              105,168
Notes: "Splitter" indicates that the physician provides at least some
of the relevant procedure cases at both ASC and HOPD settings to
their Medicare patients. It is effectively synonymous with the
extensive margin ASC use for the LC surgeons in our context.
"LC Surgeon" is our treatment group (i.e., laparoscopic
cholecystectomy surgeons). The control group is composed of all
provider-procedure combinations among non-LC physicians
observed over our analytic window.
** P value at 0.05 *** P value at 0.01, standard errors clustered at
the physician-procedure level
                                                                            Pr(Splitter)
                                            0.2



                                           0.15
                Event Study Coefficients




                                            0.1



                                           0.05



                                              0



                                           -0.05



                                            -0.1
                                                   t-6   t-5   t-4   t-3   t-2   t-1   t   t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t+6 t+7



FIGURE 2. DIRECT EFFECT OF MEDICARE POLICY CHANGE THAT ALLOWED LC SURGERIES IN ASC
                                      SETTINGS

Notes: The treatment group is all LC surgeons consistently observed over our 2005-2011 period. "Splitter" indicates
that the physician provides at least some of the relevant procedure cases at both ASC and HOPD settings. It is
effectively synonymous with the extensive margin ASC use for the LC surgeons in our context. The control group is
composed of all provider-procedure combinations among non-LC physicians observed over our analytic window.
Time periods are in half-year increments. The variables are constructed based only on traditional Medicare (i.e., fee-
for-service) cases for the physicians in the sample. N = 105,168, unique provider-procedure fixed effects = 7,512.
  TABLE 3­­DIFF-IN-DIFF ESTIMATES FOR THE SPILLOVER
 EFFECT OF MEDICARE REGULATION ON THE LIKELIHOOD
  OF USING BOTH ASC AND HOPD TREATMENT SETTINGS
              FOR COMMERCIAL PATIENTS


                                Pr(Splitter)           Pr(Splitter)

                                     (1)                    (2)
Post   ×   LC Surgeon               0.065***
                                   (0.013)
(t ­ 6)    ×   LC Surgeon                                 ­0.008
                                                          (0.017)
(t ­ 5)    ×   LC Surgeon                                  0.006
                                                          (0.018)
(t ­ 4)    ×   LC Surgeon                                  0.005
                                                          (0.016)
(t ­ 3)    ×   LC Surgeon                                 ­0.014
                                                          (0.016)
(t ­ 2)    ×   LC Surgeon                                  0.005
                                                          (0.014)

(t + 0)    ×   LC Surgeon                                  0.015
                                                          (0.013)
(t + 1)    ×   LC Surgeon                                  0.036**
                                                          (0.016)
(t + 2)    ×   LC Surgeon                                  0.051***
                                                          (0.016)
(t + 3)    ×   LC Surgeon                                  0.063***
                                                          (0.018)
(t + 4)    ×   LC Surgeon                                  0.083***
                                                          (0.019)
(t + 5)    ×   LC Surgeon                                  0.089***
                                                          (0.020)
(t + 6)    ×   LC Surgeon                                  0.088***
                                                          (0.020)
(t + 7)    ×   LC Surgeon                                  0.088***
                                                          (0.021)
Physician-Procedure FE                Yes                   Yes
Half-Year FE                           No                   Yes
Unique Physician-                    11,465               11,465
Procedure Pairs
Observations (N)                    160,510               160,510
Notes: "Splitter" indicates that the physician provides at least some of
the relevant procedure cases at both ASC and HOPD settings to their
commercially insured patients. It is effectively synonymous with the
extensive margin ASC use for the LC surgeons in our context. "LC
Surgeon" is our treatment group (i.e., laparoscopic cholecystectomy
surgeons). The control group is composed of all provider-procedure
combinations among non-LC physicians observed over our analytic
window. During the pre-period, the splitter prevalence rate for LC
surgeons and LC commercial cases in our analytic sample is 12.4%.
** P value at 0.05 *** P value at 0.01, standard errors clustered at the
physician-procedure level
                                                                           Pr(Splitter)
                                          0.13

                                          0.11

                                          0.09
               Event Study Coefficients




                                          0.07

                                          0.05

                                          0.03

                                          0.01

                                          -0.01

                                          -0.03

                                          -0.05
                                                  t-6   t-5   t-4   t-3   t-2   t-1   t   t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t+6 t+7


FIGURE 3. SPILLOVER EFFECT OF MEDICARE POLICY CHANGE FOR NON-MEDICARE LC PATIENTS

Notes: The treatment group is all LC surgeons consistently observed over our 2005-2011 period. "Splitter" indicates
that the physician provides at least some of the relevant procedure cases at both ASC and HOPD settings. It is
effectively synonymous with the extensive margin ASC use for the LC surgeons in our context. The control group is
composed of all provider-procedure combinations among non-LC physicians observed over our analytic window.
Time periods are in half-year increments. The variables are constructed based on only commercially insured (i.e.,
private, non-Medicare payer) cases for the physicians in the sample. N = 160,510, unique provider-procedure fixed
effects = 11,465. During the pre-period, the splitter prevalence rate for LC surgeons and LC cases in our analytic
sample is 12.4%.
                                        80
                                        60
                              Percent
                                        40
                                        20
                                        0




                                                  .108         .11            .112         .114     .116
                                                                          Coefficients

                          (a) Systematically Excluding One Control Group Per Iteration
                                                  8
                                                  6
                                        Percent
                                                  4
                                                  2
                                                  0




                                                         .09         .1              .11      .12     .13
                                                                            Coefficients

                                                  (b) Randomly Drawn Control Groups: 1000 Iterations

  FIGURE 4. ROBUSTNESS CHECKS AGAINST ALTERNATIVE CONTROL GROUPS FOR THE DIRECT
                               (MEDICARE) DD EFFECT

Notes: Panel A represents 358 re-estimations for the direct effect on LC Surgeons' probability of splitting Medicare
LC cases between ASC and HOPD settings. Control group procedures are dropped one-by-one across the iterations.
Panel B includes the DD estimates for 1,000 iterations of a randomly drawn 50% control group of non-LC principle
procedures
                                           80
                                           60
                                 Percent
                                           40
                                           20
                                           0




                                                .064   .065         .066    .067     .068   .069
                                                                    Coefficients

                              (a) Systematically Excluding One Control Group Per Iteration
                                       8
                                       6
                             Percent
                                       4
                                       2
                                       0




                                            .05               .06              .07          .08
                                                                    Coefficients


                                           (b) Randomly Drawn Control Groups: 1000 Iterations


FIGURE 5. ROBUSTNESS CHECKS AGAINST ALTERNATIVE CONTROL GROUPS FOR THE SPILLOVER
                             (COMMERCIAL) DD EFFECT

Notes: Panel A represent 540 re-estimations for the spillover effect on LC Surgeons' probability of splitting
commercial payer LC cases between ASC and HOPD settings. Control group procedures are dropped one-by-one
across the iterations. Panel B includes the DD estimates for 1,000 iterations of a randomly drawn 50% control group
of non-LC principle procedures.
   TABLE 4­­DIFF-IN-DIFF ESTIMATES FOR MEDICARE REGULATION SPILLOVER EFFECTS ON
                           UNTARGETED (NON-LC) PROCEDURES



                                       Pr(Splitter)                     Pr(Use ASC with Lap Technology)

                            Medicare            Commercial              Medicare                 Commercial

                               (1)                  (2)                    (3)                        (4)
Post   ×   LC Surgeon        ­0.008               ­0.002                 ­0.008                     ­0.008
                             (0.018)              (0.018)                (0.019)                    (0.019)
Physician FE                   Yes                  Yes                    Yes                        Yes
Unique Physicians             4,040                4,112                  4,040                      4,112
Observations (N)             52,599               57,567                 52,599                     57,567
LC surgeon
Pre-Period Mean               0.46                    0.57                 0.41                      0.49

Notes: Analytic sample is restricted to physicians present in the main spillover analysis (column 2 Table 2) and all
non-LC procedures belonging to those physicians. "Splitter" indicates that the physician provides at least some of
the relevant procedure cases at both ASC and HOPD settings. "Use of ASC with Lap Technology" is equal to one
for a physician-half-year when at least one non-LC procedure takes place within an ASC that currently has
laparoscopic surgery technology. "LC Surgeon" is composed of our treatment group (i.e., laparoscopic
cholecystectomy surgeons), just as before.
** P value at 0.05 *** P value at 0.01, standard errors clustered at the physician level
                                                                  Split Medicare Non-LC Procedures
                                90

                                80
   Percent (%) of LC Surgeons




                                70

                                60

                                50

                                40

                                30

                                20
                                      t-6    t-5    t-4     t-3      t-2      t-1     t       t+1    t+2     t+3     t+4     t+5     t+6    t+7

                                             Split Commercial LCs in Pre-Period                 Newly Split Commercial LCs in Post-Period
                                             Never Split Commercial LCs

                                                                            (a) Medicare Outcomes

                                                             Split Commercial Non-LC Procedures
                                100

                                 90
   Percent (%) of LC Surgeons




                                 80

                                 70

                                 60

                                 50

                                 40

                                 30

                                 20
                                       t-6    t-5    t-4     t-3      t-2      t-1        t   t+1     t+2    t+3     t+4     t+5     t+6    t+7

                                             Split Commercial LCs in Pre-Period                 Newly Split Commercial LCs in Post-Period
                                             Never Split Commercial LCs

                                                                   (b) Commercially Insured Outcomes

  FIGURE 6. TRENDS IN SPLITTING FOR NON-LC PROCEDURES AMONG LC SURGEONS BY PAYER

Notes: Restricts to LC surgeons belonging to our main analytic sample underlying column 2 in Table 2 and their
corresponding non-LC outpatient procedures (i.e., all other services these surgeons provide to the Medicare or
commercial market in a given time period). LC surgeons are further stratified by their regulatory response type from
the main spillover analysis (Table 2).
                                                         Any Medicare Non-LCs Performed at an ASC with Lap Tech
                                           90

                                           80
             Percent (%) of LC Surgeons




                                           70

                                           60

                                           50

                                           40

                                           30

                                           20
                                                 t-6    t-5      t-4    t-3      t-2       t-1    t       t+1    t+2     t+3     t+4    t+5     t+6     t+7

                                                        Split Commercial LCs in Pre-Period                  Newly Split Commercial LCs in Post-Period
                                                        Never Split Commercial LCs

                                                                                        (a) Medicare Outcomes

                                                              Any Comm Non-LCs Performed at an ASC with Lap Tech
                                           100

                                            90
              Percent (%) of LC Surgeons




                                            80

                                            70

                                            60

                                            50

                                            40

                                            30

                                            20
                                                  t-6    t-5      t-4    t-3      t-2      t-1        t   t+1    t+2     t+3     t+4     t+5    t+6     t+7

                                                        Split Commercial LCs in Pre-Period                  Newly Split Commercial LCs in Post-Period
                                                        Never Split Commercial LCs

                                                                               (b) Commercially Insured Outcomes

   FIGURE 7. TRENDS IN EXTENSIVE MARGIN USE OF ASCs WITH LAP TECHNOLOGY FOR NON-LC PROCEDURES
                                   AMONG LC SURGEONS BY PAYER

Notes: Restricts to LC surgeons belonging to our main analytic sample underlying column 2 in Table 2 and their corresponding non-LC
outpatient procedures (i.e., all other services these surgeons provide to the Medicare or commercial market in a given time period). LC
surgeons are further stratified by their regulatory response type from the main spillover analysis (Table 2).
APPENDIX RESULTS
Appendix A




             Appendix Table A1­­Diff-in-Diff Estimates for the Medicare
              Regulation Direct Effect on the Likelihood of Using Both
              ASC And HOPD Treatment Settings for Medicare Patients


                                                          Pr(Splitter)

                                                                (1)
             Post   ×   LC Surgeon                            0.110***
                                                            (0.0196)
             Physician-Procedure FE                            Yes
             Unique Physician-Procedure Pairs                 7,512
             Observations (N)                                105,168
             Notes: "Splitter" indicates that the physician provides at least
             some of the relevant procedure cases at both ASC and HOPD
             settings. It is effectively synonymous with the extensive
             margin ASC use for the LC surgeons in our context. "LC
             Surgeon" is composed of our treatment group (i.e.,
             laparoscopic cholecystectomy surgeons). This differs from our
             main specification in that standard errors are clustered at the
             physician level.
             ** P value at 0.05 *** P value at 0.01, standard errors clustered
             at the physician level
 Appendix Table A2­­Diff-in-Diff Estimates for the Medicare
 Regulation Spillover Effect on the Likelihood of Using Both
 ASC And HOPD Treatment Settings for Commercial Patients


                                               Pr(Splitter)

                                                     (1)
Post   ×   LC Surgeon                               0.065***
                                                  (0.0133)
Physician-Procedure FE                               Yes
Unique Physician-Procedure Pairs                   11,465
Observations (N)                                  160,510
Notes: "Splitter" indicates that the physician provides at least
some of the relevant procedure cases at both ASC and HOPD
settings. It is effectively synonymous with the extensive margin
ASC use for the LC surgeons in our context. "LC Surgeon" is
composed of our treatment group (i.e., laparoscopic
cholecystectomy surgeons). This differs from our main
specification in that standard errors are clustered at the physician
level.
** P value at 0.05 *** P value at 0.01, standard errors clustered
at the physician level
              Appendix Figure A1: Separate Event Study Estimates for the Control Group and Treatment Group by Payer

                        Medicare - Control Group                                     Medicare - Treatment Group (LC Surgeons)
           0.2                                                                      0.2


          0.15                                                                     0.15


           0.1                                                                      0.1


          0.05                                                                     0.05


             0                                                                       0


          -0.05                                                                 -0.05
                  t-6 t-5 t-4 t-3 t-2 t-1   t t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t+6 t+7                 t-6 t-5 t-4 t-3 t-2 t-1       t t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t+6 t+7



                       Commercial - Control Group                                    Commercial - Treatment Group (LC Surgeons)
    0.1                                                                      0.1

   0.08                                                                     0.08

   0.06                                                                     0.06

   0.04                                                                     0.04

   0.02                                                                     0.02

      0                                                                        0

  -0.02                                                                     -0.02

  -0.04                                                                     -0.04

  -0.06                                                                     -0.06
           t-6 t-5 t-4 t-3 t-2 t-1     t    t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t+6 t+7              t-6 t-5 t-4 t-3 t-2 t-1        t   t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t+6 t+7




Notes: Control group corresponds to that used in the main event studies displayed in Figures 2 and 3. Of note, the top right panel
(Medicare LC Surgeons) is not a precise zero for the pre-period coefficients due to a very small number of LC procedures reported as
taking place within an ASC and for a Medicare patient. This may reflect misclassification of these cases or, at least in theory, could
reflect a small minority of LC surgeons receiving special permission to perform select Medicare LC cases in the ASC­­even though the
ASC will receive no subsequent payment from Medicare. One such scenario could be an LC surgeon with a significant ownership stake
in the ASC and therefore extensive discretion in such a decision. The vertical and dashed lines enclose the announcement period prior
to the Medicare regulatory change.
Appendix Figure A2: Sample Size Changes When Systematically Re-Estimating the DD Model Without One
                                 Control Group Principle Procedure


                                                          (a) Medicare



                               20   50
                                    40
                                 Percent
                                    10
                                    0  30                        Sample Size




                                            98000       100000         102000        104000        106000
                                                                 Observations (N)



                                                        (b) Commercial

                                                          Sample Size
                       50
                       40 30
                    Percent
                  20   10
                       0




                         152000                154000       156000          158000        160000
                                                           Observations (N)
                                           Appendix Figure A3: Event Study Results Corresponding to Table 4 in the Main Results


                                                                               Outcome: Pr(Splitter)


                                                     Medicare                                                                                                        Commercial
                           0.04                                                                                                             0.08

                           0.02                                                                                                             0.06
Event Study Coefficients




                                                                                                                 Event Study Coefficients
                              0                                                                                                             0.04

                           -0.02                                                                                                            0.02

                           -0.04                                                                                                                  0

                           -0.06                                                                                                            -0.02

                           -0.08                                                                                                            -0.04

                            -0.1                                                                                                            -0.06

                           -0.12                                                                                                            -0.08
                                   t-6 t-5 t-4 t-3 t-2 t-1   t   t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t+6 t+7                                                           t-6 t-5 t-4 t-3 t-2 t-1 t t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t+6 t+7




                                                                  Outcome: Pr(Use ASC with Lap Technology)


                                                    Medicare                                                                                                        Commercial
                           0.06                                                                                                        0.08

                           0.04                                                                                                        0.06
Event Study Coefficients




                                                                                               Event Study Coefficients




                           0.02                                                                                                        0.04

                              0                                                                                                        0.02

                           -0.02                                                                                                              0

                           -0.04                                                                                               -0.02

                           -0.06                                                                                               -0.04

                           -0.08                                                                                               -0.06

                            -0.1                                                                                               -0.08
                                   t-6 t-5 t-4 t-3 t-2 t-1   t t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t+6 t+7                                                            t-6 t-5 t-4 t-3 t-2 t-1   t t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t+6 t+7
                                                        Appendix Figure A4: Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy Volumes in Florida 2005-2011 by Payer
                                                      5500
                  Total Outpatient Lap Chole Procedures




                                                                                                 Medicare ASC Policy Change
               500    1500     2500    3500    4500




                                                 2005q1             2006q1      2007q1       2008q1      2009q1        2010q1       2011q1
                                                                                               Year-Quarter

                                                                                      Medicare FFS                Commercial
                                                                                      All Other Payers

Notes: The data are from the universe of ambulatory procedure discharge records in Florida 2005-2011. The data are at the year-quarter
level.
Appendix B

Evidence on Rule Following

Here we investigate whether commercial insurers adopt Medicare's rules for banning (and lifting
the ban) on LCs performed within ASC treatment settings. We begin by focusing on a subgroup
of physicians for whom commercial insurer rule following would seem to be the primary plausible
explanation for an abrupt change in treatment setting decisions: physicians that do not perform LC
procedures at ASCs for their Medicare patients (and so cannot be motivated by complementarities
related to treatment decisions over their Medicare LC patients).
       As an empirical test for whether rule following could be partially responsible for our
overall findings from Section IV, we leverage our ability to observe the same physicians' LC
treatment setting decisions across the Medicare and commercially insured markets. We use this
information to then determine the within-physician prevalence of concordant behavior in terms of
treatment decisions for Medicare and commercially insured LC patients following the deregulation
event. Newly relying on ASCs for commercial LC procedures but not for Medicare LC procedures
would, at least initially, be at odds with the complementarity mechanism but could be consistent
with commercial insurer rule following.
       Operationally, we simply take all of the observed potential policy responders from our
main (spillover) analysis (i.e., those newly splitting commercial LC procedures in the post-period)
and then examine their treatment setting choices for their respective Medicare LC procedures. We
then calculate the share of these (spillover) policy responders that also devote Medicare LC
procedures to ASCs at some point after the Medicare rule change (i.e., from 2008 through 2011).
We find that 42% of post-policy new commercial LC splitters also perform at least one Medicare
LC within an ASC following the regulatory change (aligning with the complementarity mechanism
interpretation). This means that 58% of these LC surgeons do not move any Medicare LCs into an
ASC setting once they are allowed to do so. Given that they have non-zero Medicare LC volumes
during the 2008-2011 period, this latter group seems not to be motivated by complementarities
originating from the provision of Medicare and commercial LC procedures within an ASC.
       Before accepting this interpretation, we compare and contrast these two types of new
commercial LC splitters in the post-policy period. Within Appendix Table B1, we see that those
who never allocate Medicare LCs to ASCs during 2008-2011 have much less consistent splitter
status for their commercial LCs over this same period (2008-2011). When summing their total
time observed as a commercial LC splitter during the four-year post-deregulation period, the
median value is one-half-year (i.e., six months in total), and the 90th percentile is 1.5 years in total.
Conversely, LC surgeons that newly split commercial and Medicare LCs during the post-period
demonstrate much more frequent and persistent commercial LC splitter status from 2008-2011­­
e.g., the median is 2 years and the 90th percentile is 3.5 years out of a possible 4.0 for this subgroup.
Unsurprisingly, Appendix Figure B1 shows that this same subgroup drives the non-LC-procedure
trend changes observed in Figure 6. Taken together, it could be argued that the 58% that never opt
for ASC delivery of Medicare LCs are only weakly, if at all, responding to the Medicare policy
change since their switch into splitter status is typically short-lived. Meanwhile, the treatment
setting changes for the 42% that use ASCs for both commercial and Medicare LCs in the post-
period as well as their non-LC procedure trend changes are consistent with the proposed
complementarities mechanism.
           That said, we cannot observe commercial contract details with LC surgeons­­and hence
any direct rule following­­in our discharge data, which does not include information about
reimbursement rules belonging to the various payers. We therefore supplement our existing
analyses with Marketscan data from 2005-2012 in order to explore the rule-following mechanism
further.
           The Marketscan claims database offers the highest quality large, transaction-level,
commercial insurer dataset for our time period of interest. Nonetheless, there are several
limitations. First, it is impossible to link providers (such as LC surgeons) across procedures and
over time in the database. Second, we are unable to track specific facilities in the database and
have no geographic information on the location where a given physician service took place. Data
contributors (typically large, self-insured firms) also change over time, which creates further
ambiguity for the underlying providers and geographic locations represented in the database. For
these reasons, the data cannot be used to replicate the same analyses from the paper, which would
require a stable sample over time, as well as the ability to track physicians over time. However,
these data are well-suited for tracking whether data contributors (e.g., large employers) change
their use of ASCs for LC procedures, particularly along the extensive margin (i.e., the margin most
consistent with a rule-following effect, should one exist). In other words, once Medicare allows
LCs at ASC, do commercial insurers make the same change? We provide such statistics insofar as
they can be informative for aggregate patterns and the associated plausibility of a rule-following
mechanism.
       To investigate whether patterns in the Marketscan data are consistent with rule-following,
we aggregate to the level of the payer. In this database this corresponds to the data contributor, and
we limit to data contributors consistently present in the data over the study period. We plot the
fraction of data contributors for which ASC use is precisely zero in each year. An observation is
therefore a payer-year. A decrease in this statistic after 2008 (i.e., fewer commercial payers with
no LCs performed within ASCs) would be consistent with payers changing their rules in the wake
of the Medicare rule change targeting LCs. Panel (a) of Appendix Figure B2 shows no obvious
decline following Medicare's deregulation event. Because having exactly zero ASC LC
procedures in the claims records may be too stringent of a proxy disallowing ASC use, we also
repeat the analysis with a threshold set at <5% ASC using in panel (b) of Appendix Figure B2.
Again, there is no compelling pattern to suggest a sharp coverage policy change for these
commercial payers. So, while we cannot claim conclusive evidence, the basic patterns in the
Marketscan database do not add any support for a rule-following mechanism interpretation, which
is also consistent with our further probing of the Florida discharge data yielded (discussed
immediately above).
Appendix Table B1: Summary Statistics for Total Number of Post-
 Policy Periods Splitting Commercial LCs among Two Types of
              Commercial LC Post-Policy Splitters

                      Newly Split Comm      Newly Split Comm
                      LCs and Use ASCs      LCs and Never Use
                       for Medicare LCs     ASCs for Medicare
                                                  LCs

25th Percentile               2                     1
50th Percentile               4                     1
75th Percentile               5                     2
90th Percentile               7                     3

LC Surgeons (N)                  29                      40
Notes: Restricts to LC surgeons newly splitting commercial LCs
during the post-period (2008-2011). Maximum number of post-
periods to be observed is 8 half-years over the 4-year period.
Appendix Figure B1: Splitter Status for Non-LC Procedures by Two Types of Post-Policy Commercial LC Splitters

                                                              Split Medicare Non-LC Procedures
                               100


                                90
  Percent (%) of LC Surgeons




                                80


                                70


                                60


                                50


                                40


                                30
                                     t-6   t-5      t-4     t-3     t-2     t-1     t      t+1     t+2    t+3     t+4      t+5      t+6   t+7

                                                 Newly Split Comm LCs in Post-Period and Use ASCs for Medicare LCs in Post-Period
                                                 Newly Split Comm LCs in Post-Period but Never Use ASCs for Medicare LCs



                                                            Split Commercial Non-LC Procedures
                               100


                                90
  Percent (%) of LC Surgeons




                                80


                                70


                                60


                                50


                                40


                                30
                                     t-6   t-5      t-4     t-3     t-2     t-1     t      t+1     t+2    t+3     t+4      t+5      t+6   t+7

                                                 Newly Split Comm LCs in Post-Period and Use ASCs for Medicare LCs in Post-Period
                                                 Newly Split Comm LCs in Post-Period but Never Use ASCs for Medicare LCs
Appendix Figure B2: Trends in Extensive Margin Use for LC Procedures at the Payer Level within the Marketscan
                                           Database, 2005-2012




                                               (a) Exactly zero ASC use




                                                      (b) <5% ASC use

Notes: Panel (a) outcome is defined as share with precisely zero ASC cases for LCs. Panel (b) relaxes the threshold to
<5% ASC use for LC procedures among enrollees.
