                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             BRANCH EXPANSION VERSUS DIGITAL BANKING:
THE DYNAMICS OF GROWTH AND INEQUALITY IN A SPATIAL EQUILIBRIUM MODEL

                                           Yan Ji
                                       Songyuan Teng
                                      Robert Townsend

                                     Working Paper 28582
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28582


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




We thank Christian Ahlin, Abhijit Banerjee, Saki Bigio, Emilio Bisetti, Ariel Burstein, Dean
Corbae, Vidhan Goyal, Hugo Hopenhayn, Kai Li, Abhiroop Mukherjee, Yoshio Nozawa, and
seminar and conference participants at MIT, Michigan State University, UCLA, HKUST,
Workshop on Finance and Development, Society for the Advancement of Economic Theory
(SAET), and Roundtable on Central Banking and Inequality for helpful comments. Yan Ji is
grateful for the financial support of the Hong Kong RGC GRF Grant (Project No. 16500718).
Townsend gratefully acknowledge research support from Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) (grant number R01 HD027638), and
the Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR) and the Department for International
Development (DFID) under grant MRG002_1255. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Yan Ji, Songyuan Teng, and Robert Townsend. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Branch Expansion versus Digital Banking: The Dynamics of Growth and Inequality in a Spatial
Equilibrium Model
Yan Ji, Songyuan Teng, and Robert Townsend
NBER Working Paper No. 28582
March 2021
JEL No. C54,E23,E44,F43,O11,O16,R11,R13

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a heterogeneous-agent model with local spatial markets to study the relationships
among bank expansion, growth, and inequality. In the model, households choose their
occupations, consumption, and holdings of loans and portfolio assets that vary by liquidity. Banks
choose the locations of new branches, which affect the financial frictions facing households
across regions. We calibrate the model using a geographic information system to evaluate the
rapid bank expansion in Thailand between 1986-1996. The model quantifies the sources of
growth and inequality over time and across space and the potential role of digital banking in
substantially reducing regional heterogeneity.

Yan Ji                                          Robert Townsend
Room 5005, Department of Finance                Department of Economics, E52-538
Lee Shau Kee Business Building                  MIT
Hong Kong University of Science                 77 Massachusetts Avenue
and Technology                                  Cambridge, MA 02139
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon                        and NBER
Hong Kong                                       rtownsen@mit.edu
China
jiy@ust.hk

Songyuan Teng
Department of Economics
Yale University
28 Hillhouse Ave
New Haven, CT 06520
songyuan.teng@yale.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28582
1     Introduction
Implementing financial sector policies that promote growth is one of the key goals of develop-
ing economies. Most countries selectively target certain regions with an explicit emphasis on
transitional dynamics, but their strategies differ. For example, financial reforms in Thailand
from the 1980s to the 1990s focused on underdeveloped areas to improve financial inclusion.
Reforms in China in the 1970s focused on advancing the capital market in the eastern coastal
provinces; western inland areas were not prioritized until many years later. Many OECD
countries focus on developing lagging regions to promote financial access and catch up
(OECD, 2016). The U.S. remains concerned about income and wealth inequality and equitable
financial access in local markets (Furman, 2016; Nguyen, 2019).1
    A growing number of papers emphasize the importance of spatial heterogeneity (Redding
and Rossi-Hansberg, 2017). However, few studies address the connections between space,
financial deepening, growth, TFP, and inequality during transitions. The objective of our paper
is to provide a micro-founded macroeconomic framework for exploring the rich linkages
across both space and time. We introduce local spatial markets in the context of a growth
model featuring financial frictions (e.g., Greenwood, Sanchez and Wang, 2010; Buera and Shin,
2013; Midrigan and Xu, 2014). At the heart of our framework are financial frictions, captured
by the cost of accessing financial accounts. We introduce ingredients which are novel in their
combination. First, we model the costs of both credit access and portfolio adjustment for
cash and deposits which differ in their liquidity, similar in spirit to the liquid and illiquid
assets emphasized by Kaplan and Violante (2014).2 Second, these costs differ across markets,
depending on how close a market is to its nearest bank branch. New branches are opened
endogenously by profit-maximizing banks. We use the model to predict and evaluate the
impact of bank expansion in Thailand from 1986 to 1996, where we have detailed household
survey data and geographic information system (GIS) data, which provide information on
bank branch locations and road networks. The results shed light on the sources of growth
and inequality over time and across regions. In a counterfactual experiment, we quantify
what would have been the impact of digital banking in reducing regional heterogeneity.
    Since the late 1980s, Thailand has adopted a series of financial liberalization policies,
leading to the rapid expansion of banks' business operations. Panel A of Figure 1 shows
that the number of regions with commercial bank branches steadily increased over the
    1 TheConnectALL initiative launched in 2016 aimed to help Americans to access Internet and benefit from
safe and affordable online payment, borrowing, and savings products. As of early 2019, a survey by Pew
Research Center found that 26% of adults living in households earning less than $30,000 a year do not have
broadband internet at home.
   2 The categorization of what is liquid vs. illiquid varies with context. In our study, cash is liquid for making

payments and deposits (i.e., bonds) are illiquid assets.


                                                        1
                900                                         30


                800
                                                            25

                700
                                                            20
                600

                                                            15
                500


                400                                         10
                   86    88     90    92     94    96         86    88    90    92     94    96


Note: Panel A plots the number of markets with at least one commercial bank branch, using data from the
Bank of Thailand and various other financial institutions. Markets are defined in Section 2.2. Panel B plots the
national credit access ratio, which is defined as the proportion of entrepreneurs with access to bank loans, as
determined by the Thai Socio-Economic Survey.

                Figure 1: Bank branches and credit access in Thailand, 1986-1996.


study period, more than doubling between 1986 and 1996. Many branches were opened
in underdeveloped areas to improve financial inclusion. As a consequence, the national
credit access ratio increased from about 10% in 1986 to more than 25% in 1996 (panel B of
Figure 1). Moreover, bivariate local indicators of spatial association reveal significant spatial
patterns. Regions with high concentrations of bank branches are associated with greater
entrepreneurial activity and better credit access conditions (Felkner and Townsend, 2011).
    These time-series and cross-sectional patterns motivate the development of a dynamic
spatial equilibrium model to explore the rich linkages between bank expansion, various
measures of financial deepening, and occupation choices over time and across space. In the
model, we consider both heterogeneous markets and heterogeneous households within each
market. Households optimally decide their occupations (i.e., farmer, worker, or entrepreneur),
consumption, and holdings of assets (cash, bonds) and loans, and they face different financial
frictions that depend on their distance from bank branches. Banks choose where to open
new branches to maximize profits, taking into account the effects of branches in nearby
regions and endogenous prices in general equilibrium. New branch openings lead to both
lower credit entry costs and lower portfolio adjustment costs in immediate and nearby
regions. Lower credit entry costs increase the proportion of households that choose to pursue
entrepreneurship and households' demand for bank loans, capturing the credit provision
channel of bank expansion. Lower portfolio adjustment costs increase households' demand
for interest-bearing bonds (i.e., term deposits at banks), capturing the deposit mobilization
channel of bank expansion.
    These rich micro underpinnings allow our model to reproduce salient patterns in the data,

                                                        2
even though those patterns are not targeted in our calibration. Specifically, the model correctly
predicts more than 75% of the locations of new bank branches that opened between 1986 and
1996.3 Moreover, the model can largely explain the transitional dynamics of various aggregate
variables including GDP, TFP, credit access, the income Gini coefficient, and occupation.
Further, the model predicts cross-regional patterns of bank locations, entrepreneurial activity,
and credit access conditions that resemble those in the data. Finally, with a slight modification
in some of the parameters, the model can predict remarkably well the decline in GDP
associated with the 1997 financial crisis (Online Appendix 3.6), though that is not our main
focus. The baseline prediction for the 1986-1996 period is also relatively insensitive to the
inclusion of the 1996-2011 period (Online Appendix 3.5).
    Through the lens of this model, we examine regional heterogeneity, traceing out the origins
of growth and inequality and their trends over space. By decomposing GDP growth across
regions, we show that Thailand's GDP growth is attributed to markets that were distant from
bank branches in 1986. In particular, regions that received new branches experienced as much
as 300% growth in local GDP and 100% growth in local TFP, leading to a welfare gain of
over 270% from 1986 to 1996. By contrast, the local GDP, TFP, and welfare of regions that
already had branches in 1986 changed little. We also find that bank expansion generates a
large amount of spatial redistribution, which equalizes entrepreneurs' income but amplifies
wage differences across regions. The higher cross-regional income inequality of workers is
mainly caused by local wage takeoffs, which occur at different times across markets. This
pattern is not produced by models without spatial heterogeneity.
    The model reveals significant inter-regional capital flows within Thailand. In equilibrium,
markets closer to bank branches have excess demand for bank loans relative to their local
households' deposits. Capital flows into these markets through banks' branching networks,
and the interest rate is set to clear the national capital market. The large endogenous flow of
funds contributes to the high level of inequality among entrepreneurs in different regions by
providing those living closer to branches with greater access to loans.
    Using the calibrated model, we run counterfactual experiments to quantify the importance
of providing credit versus the importance of mobilizing deposits. We quantify the deposit
mobilization (credit provision) channel by assuming that new branch openings reduce only the
portfolio adjustment (credit entry) costs in nearby regions, leaving the credit entry (portfolio
adjustment) costs unchanged. We show that the credit provision channel alone generates a
cumulative GDP growth of 66% during the decade, whereas the deposit mobilization channel
alone generates a cumulative GDP growth of only 3%. However, despite its small quantitative
impact, the deposit mobilization channel significantly amplifies the credit provision channel,
   3 Inour calibration, we choose branch setup costs to match the number of new branches in each year, and we
predict where these branches will be opened.

                                                     3
due to the complementarity of these two channels.4 We find that GDP increases by an
additional 9% (75% - 66%) when the deposit mobilization channel is introduced on top of
credit provision, as the baseline simulation with fully functioning new branches generates a
cumulative GDP growth of 75%. Intuitively, the deposit mobilization channel increases the
supply of funds as households put larger proportions of their wealth into banks. However, in
the counterfactual scenario, where new branches reduce portfolio adjustment costs but not
credit entry costs in nearby regions, the talented entrepreneurs living in these regions still
cannot afford to pay for credit entry. As a result, the increased supply of funds is absorbed by
entrepreneurs in other regions (those close to branches in 1986) who already have credit access
and who are on average less talented. This results in capital misallocation and thus a small
increase in GDP. By contrast, when new branch openings reduce both portfolio adjustment
costs and credit entry costs, talented entrepreneurs who were previously excluded from the
financial market in these regions can borrow because of the low credit entry costs, boosting
GDP growth more significantly.
    The regional difference is further illustrated by a final set of experiments in which we
compare the model's baseline path with one in which digital banking is introduced in the
initial year, 1986, which decreases deposit and credit costs to zero.5 We show that digital
banking greatly eliminates regional heterogeneity, although the effects on other dimensions
are not instantaneous. As it takes time for households to accumulate wealth and savings, the
immediate effects on GDP and TFP of introducing digital banking are much smaller than the
long-run effects.
    A further decomposition is used to gauge the impact of replacing some or all paper
currency with interest-bearing accounts, as in some versions of central bank digital currency
(CBDC) administered through the commercial banking system. More generally, digital
payments and financial access are emphasized in China, Hong Kong, India, and Brazil, as
leading examples. We lower deposit costs to zero in the initial year, while letting branch
expansion lower credit costs, as in the baseline. This eliminates currency previously held
for consumption smoothing, from household wealth portfolios. We compare this with the
impact of lowering credit costs to zero in the initial year while letting branch expansion lower
deposit costs, as in the baseline. This removes the use of currency by entrepreneurs who
   4 The development economics literature shows that complementarity between inputs and constraints is

important to the allocation of resources. For example, Hirschman (1958) emphasizes complementarity through
linkages in a production network. Kremer (1993) and Blanchard and Kremer (1996) build models with
complementarity among different tasks or chains of production. Jones (2011, 2013) focuses on complementarity
among production inputs. Dabla-Norris et al. (2020) study complementarity among financial constraints.
   5 With the calibrated model in hand, we could also conduct less radical experiments, such as subsidizing but

not eliminating branch entry costs, in designated rural areas for example. With our explicit bank optimization
problem incorporated, one could then examine counterfactual branch placements and their impacts on the
aggregate and market economies.


                                                      4
self-finance the purchase of capital. Our comprehensive digital banking experiments clarify
the contribution of each piece and the complementarity between the two.


Related Literature.     Our model contributes to the macro-development literature that applies
micro-founded general equilibrium models to study growth, inequality, and entrepreneur-
ship.6 Our paper is closest to works focusing on the nexus between financial development
and growth (e.g., Greenwood and Jovanovic, 1990; Greenwood, Sanchez and Wang, 2010, 2013;
Buera and Shin, 2013; Midrigan and Xu, 2014; Moll, 2014). Motivated by the theoretical work
of Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990), we emphasize the cost of accessing financial accounts,
which can be naturally mapped onto the market's distance from bank branches. A key
difference between our approach and existing models is that we explicitly model local spatial
markets, based on which dynamic bank expansion is evaluated.7 Although similar aggregate
dynamics can be generated in a one-market model, a realistic evaluation of dynamic bank
expansion (and its channels) that can be used for welfare analysis, including counterfactuals,
requires a spatial equilibrium model that incorporates multiple local markets. Our model can
reproduce the interesting regional heterogeneity in entrepreneurship and credit access seen
in the data, as well as the flow of funds and local wage takeoffs across regions.
    Modeling portfolio adjustment costs dates back at least to Baumol (1952), Tobin (1956), and
Miller and Orr (1966). Kaplan and Violante (2014) consider these costs in a life-cycle model
to explain wealthy hand-to-mouth households with a high marginal propensity to consume.
Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018) and Alves et al. (2020) adopt this version of liquidity to study
the impact of monetary policies in the context of a Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian
(HANK) model. Incorporating both liquid and illiquid assets allows the HANK model to
capture realistic microeconomic consumption behavior and a sizable marginal propensity
to consume out of transitory income, playing an important role in determining the policy
impact. We follow Kaplan and Violante (2014) and adopt this friction for the savings side of
our model, though we consider liquid assets as cash to fit the Thai context and conduct an
   6 See, e.g., Banerjee and Newman (1993); Lloyd-Ellis and Bernhardt (2000); Quadrini (2000); Gine and
Townsend (2004); Cagetti and Nardi (2006); Townsend and Ueda (2006); Jeong and Townsend (2008); Amaral and
Quintin (2010); Buera, Kaboski and Shin (2011); Felkner and Townsend (2011); Kaboski and Townsend (2011);
Moll (2014); Cheremukhin et al. (2015, 2017); Moll, Townsend and Zhorin (2017); Dabla-Norris et al. (2020).
A complementary approach exploits randomized control trials and quasi natural experiments to study the
implications of credit access (e.g., Pitt and Khandker, 1998; Karlan and Zinman, 2009; Kaboski and Townsend,
2012; Banerjee and Duflo, 2014; Banerjee et al., 2015; Augsburg et al., 2015). Recently, Bergquist et al. (2020)
combine field experiments and structural models to shed light on the general equilibrium effects of policy
intervention at the national level.
   7 There are extensive reduced-form studies of bank expansion (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996; Black and Strahan,

2002; Burgess and Pande, 2005; Cetorelli and Strahan, 2006; Kerr and Nanda, 2009; Célerier and Matray, 2019;
Nguyen, 2019), but to our knowledge, there is no formal dynamic spatial-based model of the impact of dynamic
bank expansion.


                                                       5
experiment that introduces digital currency, which replaces branch banking. Other studies
emphasize heterogeneity in the effects of monetary policy (Doepke and Schneider, 2006;
Auclert, 2019). However, in New Keynesian models, the price level is determined not by the
money supply but mechanically, to ensure the validity of the other variables. Similarly, in
our model, the money supply (currency outstanding) is adjusted in the background to keep
the real price level constant. Wang (2020) assumes that all financial intermediation takes
place though commercial banks, as we do, but for us savers and borrowers are endogenously
determined. Aguirregabiria, Clark and Wang (2016) examine the cross-state expansion of
bank branches subsequent to the Riegle-Neal Act. Corbae and D'Erasmo (2019) develop a
model of banking industry dynamics for bank capital requirements. For tractability, they
distinguish large banks from a large competitive fringe. We explicitly model bank branches
and their expansion in space, at a granular level.
     Our paper is related to the literature emphasizing the role of spatial heterogeneity in trade,
growth, and development.8 Our paper is closest to Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2014), as we
develop a dynamic model of growth with an explicit emphasis on geography and locations.
However, our paper differs from theirs in several respects. First, our focus is on economic
growth during transitions triggered by bank expansion, whereas Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg
(2014) focus on the balanced growth path of endogenous innovation. Second, our model
considers a discrete number of markets and a continuum of heterogeneous households within
each market, whereas Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2014) consider a continuum of markets
(i.e., locations) and a representative agent in each market.9 Modeling heterogeneous agents
in each market allows us to better connect our theory with household data, allowing us to
capture the rich interaction between inequality, growth, and the macroeconomy (Heathcote,
Storesletten and Violante, 2009; Guvenen, 2011; Ahn et al., 2018; Kaplan and Violante, 2018).
Third, we propose a tractable numerical algorithm that solves the types of models that we
consider, which is one of the principal contributions of our paper.10
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We introduce the spatial data and define
the markets in Section 2. The model is described in Section 3, calibrated in Section 4, and
validated against the data in Section 5. In Section 6, we evaluate the model's implications
regarding the sources of growth and inequality, flow of funds, and underlying channels. In
   8 See Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017) for a comprehensive review.
   9 Our  modeling approach is natural given that our purpose is to evaluate bank expansion, during which
a discrete number of branches are opened in each period of the data. The structure adopted by Desmet and
Rossi-Hansberg (2014) and Desmet, Nagy and Rossi-Hansberg (2018) yields elegant and tractable static policy
functions in a dynamic model with forward-looking agents. Their framework is tractable for analyzing questions
regarding spatial concentration and inter-regional trade.
  10 See Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2014, footnote 1) for a discussion of the challenges faced by this type of

spatial equilibrium models.



                                                      6
Section 7, we shed light on issues related to digital banking. Finally, Section 8 concludes.


2      Spatial Data, GIS, and Markets
Thailand's economy motivates the development of our spatial equilibrium model of dynamic
bank expansion. Since the late 1980s, Thailand has implemented a series of financial lib-
eralization policies (Abiad, Oomes and Ueda, 2008). We focus on the decade from 1986
to 1996, during which the Thai economy underwent swift economic expansion marked by
uneven financial deepening and the rapid expansion of commercial bank branches.11 Thailand
provides an ideal economic setting for the quantitative application of our model because of its
detailed GIS data on bank branch locations and road networks, which we use in combination
with household and village surveys. However, our model is not peculiar to Thailand; we
hope to extend the analysis to other countries.


2.1         Data
Our GIS data contain high-resolution spatial data on bank locations, digitized major and
minor road networks, and political boundaries at various administrative levels. We obtain our
GIS data from the Thailand Environment Institute. These data provide detailed information
on the spatial geometry of roads, railroads, future segments, and intersections nationwide.
We use the ArcGIS Network Analyst tool to construct local spatial markets and build the
transportation network in each year. In total, 59,238 junctures are connected by seven types
of road. We estimate the average vehicle speed for each type of road based on real-time
information and obtain the car travel time for every road segment (see Online Appendix
1.2).12 Commercial bank branch locations in each year are constructed using data from the
Bank of Thailand. Branch locations are mapped directly onto the GIS data for Thailand
according to the location of the nearest village or the nearest major road intersection.
    11 Wedo not analyze the 1997 crisis. Instead, we focus on the prior growth period to understand the
endogenous linkages between financial deepening, growth, and inequality across regions. In Online Appendix
3.6, we show that the model-implied transitional dynamics between 1986-1996 would be virtually unchanged
even if households fully anticipated the 1997 financial crisis.
   12 Our paper focuses on the expansion of commercial bank branches, which are the central players in the Thai

financial system. They jointly absorbed 80.9% of deposits and accounted for 73.1% of total financial system
assets during the study period. We do not consider branches of the Bank for Agriculture and Agricultural
Cooperatives, a state-owned enterprise.




                                                      7
          A. Local spatial markets in the GIS data                 B. Mapping to the model




                                     branch location
                                     village
                                     road
                                     population density                                branch location
                                     (people per square km)                            car travel time (min)
                                     [0, 47)                                           (0, 50)
                                     [47, 107)                                         [50, 100)
                                     [107, 157)                                        [100, 150)
                                     [157, 232)                                        [150, 200)
                                     [232, 409)                                        [200, 250]


Note: Panel A plots the local spatial markets in the GIS data for Buriram province in Thailand. The yellow
nodes represent commercial bank branch locations, and the small gray dots represent villages. The thick gray
lines represent the borders of each market, and the thin gray lines represent the road network. The different
colors of the markets indicate their population densities. Panel B plots the model economy of Buriram province.
The yellow nodes correspond to the local spatial markets that enclose the branch locations in panel A. These
markets are connected by links, and the distance between each pair of markets is measured by car travel time
along the actual road network, which is shown in panel A.


         Figure 2: An illustration of local spatial markets in the GIS data and model.


2.2    Local Spatial Markets
In Thailand, commercial bank branches are generally opened in populous regions in which
households engage in market activity. We have actual branch locations in the data, which
are represented by their latitudes and longitudes. Although our study period for model
evaluation is from 1986 to 1996, our definition of markets is based on actual commercial
bank branch locations in 2011, the latest year of data available to us. In total, we identify
1,428 branch locations, based on which we define local markets, which we use as actual and
potential branch locations in the study period. Each market includes only a single branch
location, and the borders that separate markets are determined by the travel times along the
road network. Any village or point on road within a market has a minimum travel time to
the branch location in the market, which is less than the travel time to the branch locations in
other adjacent markets. The population of each market is estimated as the sum of the village


                                                              8
and municipal populations in 1986.13 The population density within a market is equal to the
market's population divided by the market's area computed from GIS data.
    As an illustration, Figure 2 plots the local spatial markets in the GIS data for one province
and how they map onto our model, which is developed in Section 3. In panel A, the large
yellow nodes represent the commercial bank branch locations in 2011. In a given year between
1986 and 1996, some of these locations may or may not have branches in the data. The gray
lines that divide the province into multiple regions represent the borders of local spatial
markets, and the thin gray lines represent the road network. Each market contains a single
branch location, and the travel time between any point on the market border and the branch
locations in adjacent markets is identical. In our model, we ignore the travel time within
a market for tractability, which is equivalent to assuming that households from different
villages (small gray dots) within a market are all located at the branch location enclosed in
the market. Panel B presents our model economy which consists of the local spatial markets
corresponding to the branch locations in panel A. These markets are connected via road links,
forming a network. The distance between each pair of markets is measured by the car travel
time between the branch locations in the two markets along the road network. The other
economic variables are constructed from household and village surveys (see Online Appendix
1.1).


3      Model
We develop a spatial equilibrium model to quantitatively evaluate the impact of dynamic
bank expansion through different channels, over time, and across space.


3.1      Basic Environment
Time is discrete and is indexed by t. The economy consists of N markets, indexed by i =
1, ..., N , representing different geographical regions. In each market i, there is a continuum of
heterogeneous households of measure i , capturing market size. We do not allow households
to migrate, so the size of each market is fixed at i . Markets are connected by roads. Denote
by ij the distance between the central nodes of markets i and j. The road network is complete,
meaning that ij exists for all i, j, with ij  0 for i = j. The market size and road network are
exogenously specified and do not change over time.
     Although the place of residence and road network are exogenous, the financial intermedi-
ation network evolves endogenously over time. Markets differ in their access to finance: some
    13 The
        population of each village is mapped onto its nearest market based on the road network, and the
population of each municipality is likewise assigned to the markets within its administrative boundary.

                                                  9
markets have bank branches, while others do not. Households in markets with bank branches
can obtain financial services (i.e., take out loans or invest in bonds) locally, whereas those in
markets without branches must travel to nearby markets to borrow and lend. For realism, we
assume that a branch has capacity h to serve households. Households from other markets
can obtain financial services from market i's branch only when market i's size is smaller than
the branch capacity, i.e., i < h.14
    We use the binary indicator Bi,t to show whether market i has a branch at time t ( Bi,t = 1)
or not ( Bi,t = 0). Denote by t the set of markets with bank branches at time t, i.e., Bi,t = 1
for all i  t . We define the distance from the nearest bank branch for households in market
i at time t as follows
                                vi,t = min ij : j  t ,  j < h .                             (3.1)

The variable vi,t depends on the branch distribution t , which is endogenously determined
by banks' expansion strategy. In our model, the distance from the nearest bank branch vi,t
fully captures the degree of financial frictions in market i.


3.2    Households
Heterogeneity and Demographics.          Households live indefinitely and are heterogeneous in
their talent zt . For brevity, we omit the index for an individual household. Talent zt follows
an exogenous stochastic process. With probability , households retain their talent in the
previous period, i.e., zt = zt-1 , and with probability 1 - , households draw new talent zt
from a time-invariant Pareto distribution (z) governed by the tail parameter . The shocks
to talent can be interpreted as changes in conditions that affect the profitability of individual
skills (e.g., Buera, Kaboski and Shin, 2011).
    The wealth of households consists of cash-in-hand mt and deposits at as a claim on the
bonds acquired by banks in lending to firms. Both assets are denominated in consumption
units. Households can purchase consumption goods ct or capital k t using cash mt , but they
cannot use bonds at to do so.15 The tradeoff between the two savings instruments is that cash
earns a zero return, while bonds earn the interest rate rt > 0 in equilibrium. Transforming cash
  14 For tractability, we do not consider rationing and we make the following assumptions. When i  h, market
i's households can always obtain financial services locally with probability one. When i < h, households
traveling to market i from other markets can always obtain financial services with probability one.
   15 Because our goal is to evaluate bank expansion, our model focuses on spatial heterogeneity in accessing

financial accounts. For tractability, we do not introduce heterogeneous prices of goods or capital across local
spatial markets. Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2014) and Monte, Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2018) develop
models that emphasize spatial linkages in goods markets. Even in the same geographical area, the prices of
identical goods can differ significantly across stores and households (Kaplan and Menzio, 2015; Kaplan et al.,
2019), and such patterns can be explained by search frictions in the product markets (Menzio and Trachter, 2015;
Kaplan and Menzio, 2016; Menzio and Trachter, 2018).


                                                      10
into bonds or vice versa requires households to pay the market-specific portfolio adjustment
cost  i,t of going to the bank.16 The tradeoff between cash mt and bonds at emphasized here
is highly reminiscent of the main insight of optimal cash management models (Baumol, 1952;
Tobin, 1956; Miller and Orr, 1966). A lower  i,t motivates households to put more of their
wealth into bonds. Motivated by the empirical evidence that the density of bank branches
affects access to savings accounts (Célerier and Matray, 2019), we specify that  i,t   (vi,t ) is
strictly increasing in vi,t , meaning that households travel to their nearest bank branch to obtain
financial services and that the costs increase with distance. Modeling distance-dependent
portfolio adjustment costs enables us to incorporate the effect of bank expansion on aggregate
savings.17 In Online Appendix 2.2, we show how the average deposit-cash ratio (at /mt ) varies
with i,t under our calibration.
    Our modeling approach of the two assets mt and at is similar in spirit to that of Kaplan and
Violante (2014).18 Bonds are liquid in the U.S. but not in developing countries. Adjustments
between cash and bonds can only be made once per period. Thus, investing in bonds
at is similar to making a term deposit, which is less liquid than holding cash. Moreover,
as in Kaplan and Violante (2014), households choose consumption after making portfolio
adjustments within each period. This timing assumption implies that our model does not
feature a cash-in-advance constraint.


Preferences.      Households derive utility from consumption ct and have preferences

                                                               c1 -
                                            Et          t -t    t
                                                               1-
                                                                    ,                                       (3.2)
                                                 t =t

where  is the discount factor and  captures risk aversion.


Occupation Choice and Technology.       In any period t, households can choose from three
occupations: farmer, worker, or entrepreneur. Farmers earn a subsistence income f , which is
exogenous and the same across markets. Workers supply one unit of labor inelastically and
  16 As  in Kaplan and Violante (2014), the quantitative implications of our model do not depend on whether the
portfolio adjustment cost is specified in terms of consumption units or disutility.
   17 Studies find that highly developed financial markets promote growth by raising domestic savings rates (e.g.,

King and Levine, 1994; Fry, 1995; Bandiera et al., 2000).
   18 Such two-asset models have been commonly adopted in recent macroeconomic models (e.g., Kaplan,

Moll and Violante, 2018; Heathcote and Perri, 2018; Bayer et al., 2019; Auclert, Rognlie and Straub, 2020;
Kaplan, Mitman and Violante, 2020), because they can be calibrated to generate realistic microeconomic
consumption behavior and heterogeneous households' marginal propensity to consume, which are closely
related to households' access to liquidity (Mian, Rao and Sufi, 2013; Kaplan, Violante and Weidner, 2014; Fuster,
Kaplan and Zafar, 2021). Early generations of two-asset models assume that portfolio adjustments can be made
at given frequencies (e.g., Alvarez, Atkeson and Edmond, 2009).


                                                        11
earn the endogenous market-specific wage wi,t . Entrepreneurs operate a technology that uses
capital k t and labor lt to produce output q(k t , lt , zt ),

                                                                         1-  1- 
                                         q ( k t , lt , zt ) = zt ( k t lt  ) ,                                (3.3)

where output increases with households' talent zt . The parameter  determines the span of
control, and 1 -  represents the share of output accruing to variable factors. A fraction 
out of this output goes to capital and 1 -  goes to labor. Capital depreciates at rate . In
each market i, the equilibrium wage wi,t is determined to clear the local labor market. The
cross-market difference in the degree of financial frictions endogenously drives the differences
in wage, entrepreneurship, and output.


Frictions in Credit Markets.       Following Buera and Shin (2011), we focus on within-period
credit for production purposes. We do not allow households to borrow for consumption
smoothing by imposing mt , at  0. The interest rate rt is determined endogenously by the
economy-wide capital market clearing condition. The lending rate rt         l is higher than the

deposit interest rate rt by a margin , which determines the profits of financial intermediation
that accrue to banks after subtracting the real intermediation costs.
    There is limited participation in the credit market. To obtain a loan, entrepreneurs
need to pay an upfront market-specific credit entry cost i,t  (vi,t ) using cash mt , as in
Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990). A lower i,t motivates more entrepreneurs to borrow loans,
increasing credit access. Motivated by the empirical evidence that road distance affects credit
access (Agarwal, Mukherjee and Naaraayanan, 2019; Nguyen, 2019), we specify that (vi,t ) is
strictly increasing in vi,t . The amount of capital used in production is subject to a borrowing
constraint:19
                                         k t  mt + at - i,t .                               (3.4)

The parameter   [0, 1] determines the tightness of borrowing constraints, with  = 1
representing autarky, where capital must be self-financed by entrepreneurs.
  19 A micro foundation can be offered as in Jermann and Quadrini (2012). Consider an entrepreneur who
approaches the bank for a loan xt . After obtaining the loan xt , the entrepreneur buys capital k t = mt + xt - i,t
using her own cash mt and loan xt net of the cost i,t . Both capital k t and bonds at are then used as collateral
to secure the loan xt . The entrepreneur is free to default and walk away with her income and wealth at any
time, but if she does, the bank will seize the collateral, k t + at . We assume that the liquidation value of capital
is uncertain at the time of contracting. With probability 1 -  the bank recovers the full value k t , but with
probability  the bank recovers nothing. Thus to avoid default, the amount of loan xt that the bank is willing to
lend is restricted to xt  (1 -  )k t + at . Substituting xt = k t - mt + i,t into the loan constraint, we derive the
entrepreneur's capital constraint (3.4).




                                                          12
                                                                                        repay loans at
      banks open  branches                                                              rate  +  choose 
                          borrow? (pay , )                                    pay wage ,  ,     adjust?
                                choose  ,                                     receive profits   (pay , )
            ,

                                                                                 receive ,
                  worker ,
                                                                                                      + 1
                                                                                 receive 
      realized
                                           interest earnings on bonds  
     given  ,                                                                                   +1 , +1 realized


                                          Figure 3: Timing of events.


Household Problem.       The timing of decisions is presented in Figure 3. At the beginning
of the period, new branches are opened, and the current talent zt is realized, after which
households make their occupation choice. Households choosing to be entrepreneurs need
to decide whether to borrow and make production decisions. At the end of the period,
households receive subsistence incomes, wages, or production profits depending on their
occupations, and repay loans (if any). Finally, households decide whether to adjust their bond
holdings and then choose their consumption. For further clarity, we present households' cash
flow statements in Online Appendix 2.8.
    We formulate households' problem recursively. Let st  {zt , mt , at } represent households'
individual states. Denote by Vi,t (st ) the value function of a household in market i at the
beginning of period t, before making the occupation choice. The value function depends on
time t because we focus on transitional dynamics and households fully anticipate changes in
the costs i,t and  i,t due to future branch openings. Denote by Fi,t (st ), Wi,t (st ), and Ei,t (st )
the household's value if she chooses to be a farmer, a worker, or an entrepreneur, respectively,
at time t. The occupation choice is made to maximize utility,

                                 Vi,t (st ) = max { Fi,t (st ), Wi,t (st ), Ei,t (st )} .                          (3.5)

The farmer's value is Fi,t (st ) = max{ Fi0           1                    0               1
                                          ,t ( st ), Fi,t ( st ) }, where Fi,t ( st ) and Fi,t ( st ) are respectively,
the value conditional on not adjusting and adjusting the portfolio, given by

                                                                    -
                                                                 c1
                                     Fi0
                                       ,t ( st ) = max
                                                                  t
                                                                      + Et [Vi,t+1 (st+1 )] ,                      (3.6)
                                                  c t , m t +1   1-
                             s.t. mt+1 + ct = mt + f ,
                                        at+1 = (1 + rt ) at , with mt+1  0,



                                                                 13
where cash mt earns a zero return and bonds at earn the return rt .

                                                                          -
                                                                       c1
                           Fi1
                             ,t ( s t ) =           max                 t
                                                                            + Et [Vi,t+1 (st+1 )] ,   (3.7)
                                              c t , m t +1 , a t +1    1-
           s.t. mt+1 + at+1 + ct = mt + (1 + rt ) at -  i,t + f , with mt+1 , at+1  0.

    The worker's value is determined by solving a problem similar to the farmer's (i.e.,
equations (3.6) and (3.7)), except that the subsistence income f is replaced with the equilibrium
local wage wi,t in market i. We present the workers' problem in Online Appendix 2.1. In
equilibrium, it must be the case that wi,t  f ; otherwise, the local labor market in market i
does not clear because households strictly prefer to be farmers rather than workers, resulting
in a zero supply of labor. Further, if wi,t > f , households strictly prefer to be workers, and
farmers do not exist in market i. If wi,t = f , households are indifferent as to whether they are
workers or farmers. As a result, the supply of labor in market i is entirely determined by local
entrepreneurs' demand for workers, and the remaining households not hired by entrepreneurs
are farmers. Intuitively, this happens when market i is far away from bank branches, as local
entrepreneurs cannot run their businesses on a large scale because obtaining bank loans is
too costly. This results in a low demand for labor and a low wage wi,t that is stuck at the
subsistence level of income f . By reducing the credit entry cost i,t , bank expansion can
generate local wage takeoffs across markets, increasing the cross-market income inequality
among workers (see Section 6.1).
    Finally, the entrepreneur's value function is

                        Ei,t (st ) = max{ Ei00           10           01           11
                                             ,t ( st ), Ei,t ( st ), Ei,t ( st ), Ei,t ( st ) },      (3.8)

where the first superscript denotes whether the entrepreneur adjusts (1) or does not adjust (0)
the portfolio, and the second superscript denotes whether the entrepreneur borrows (1) or
does not borrow (0). These values are determined recursively as follows. If the entrepreneur
does not adjust the portfolio or borrow, her value is Ei00
                                                         ,t ( s t ),

                                                                         -
                                                                      c1
                         Ei00
                            ,t ( s t ) =         max                   t
                                                                           + Et [Vi,t+1 (st+1 )] ,    (3.9)
                                           c t , k t , l t , m t +1   1-
                                                     1-  1- 
                 s.t. mt+1 + ct = mt - k t + zt (kt lt  )    + (1 -  ) k t - wi ,t l t ,
                                 k t  mt ,
                             at+1 = (1 + rt ) at , with mt+1  0.

The budget constraint implies that the entrepreneur uses cash mt to buy capital k t , and


                                                                        14
                                                                                1-  1- 
the remaining mt - k t earns a zero return. Profits are given by output zt (kt lt  )       plus
undepreciated capital (1 - )k t minus wage payments to workers wi,t lt .
   If the entrepreneur adjusts and borrows (which requires mt  i,t ), her value is Ei11
                                                                                      ,t ( s t ),

                                                                                 -
                                                                              c1
                        Ei11
                           ,t ( s t ) =             max                        t
                                                                                   + Et [Vi,t+1 (st+1 )] ,            (3.10)
                                          c t , k t , l t , m t +1 , a t +1   1-
        s.t. mt+1 + at+1 + ct = - [1 + (rt + )1{kt mt -i,t } ][k t - (mt - i,t )] + (1 + rt ) at
                                                               1-  1- 
                                          -  i ,t + z t ( k t lt  )    + (1 -  ) k t - wi ,t l t ,
                                k t (mt + at - i,t )/ , with mt+1 , at+1  0,

where 1{kt mt -i,t } is the indicator function that equals one if k t  mt - i,t . This means that if
the entrepreneur uses more capital k t than her cash mt - i,t , the difference is borrowed from
the bank at the lending rate rt + . The other two cases Ei10                01
                                                             ,t ( st ) and Ei,t ( st ) can be formulated
similarly and are relegated to Online Appendix 2.1.


3.3    Banks
Competitive banks operate branches that are located in different markets of the economy.20 A
branch makes profit by channeling funds from households to entrepreneurs. The per-unit cost
of funds is the interest rate rt , which is offered to households for their deposits. The revenue
per unit of loans is the lending rate rt   l . Thus the net profit per unit of funds is r l - r = .
                                                                                          t    t
Consider market i with a branch at time t ( Bi,t = 1). The present value of the profits that the
branch receives for t  t is given by21
                                                                                                               
                                            
                           i ,t =            t - t  Di , t                     +                           D j,t  .   (3.11)
                                                                                                                 
                                          t =t                                     j j:j,t =ij , Bj,t =0


In equation (3.11), the total deposits that the branch in market i receives from households
include two parts. The term Di,t captures the deposits of households in market i at time
t , defined in equation (3.17) below. The term                     D j,t captures the deposits
                                                                                     j j:j,t =ij , Bj,t =0
of households in other markets that travel to market i to make deposits. These markets
are identified by the set j : j,t = ij , Bj,t = 0 , meaning that they do not have a local bank
  20 Rysman,    Townsend and Walsh (2021) show that the implications of various counterfactual experiments are
virtually similar regardless of whether commercial banks act competitively or as a monopoly, though parameters
have to be reestimated against the data after changing the specification.
   21 In equilibrium, the economy-wide capital market clearing condition ensures that all deposits in equation

(3.11) are lent out to entrepreneurs and generate profits at rate .


                                                                                15
branch ( Bj,t = 0) and that their distance from the nearest bank branch at time t , j,t , is
equal to the distance between market i and market j. The markets included in the set
  j : j,t = ij , Bj,t = 0 evolve endogenously as new branches are opened over time.
     Bank branch expansion is determined by a free entry condition. In period t, banks can
set up a new branch at a cost t in markets without branches. For tractability, we assume
that banks do not know ex ante in which market they will end up with a branch.22 Suppose
that the total number of branches opened in period t is nt  0. At the beginning of period
t, these branch locations are optimally chosen to maximize the total profits t (nt ) from nt
newly opened branches. The nt locations will then be randomly assigned to the banks that
have expressed the intention to set up new branches and that have paid the cost t . The total
profits t (nt ) are given by

                                        t (nt ) = max
                                                    t
                                                   new              i ,t ,                              (3.12)
                                                           i new
                                                             t

                                     s.t. Bi,t-1 =0 for all i  new
                                                               t ,                                      (3.13)
                                        |new
                                         t | =nt .                                                      (3.14)

Thus, given nt , the optimal location choice for new branches boils down to solving a combina-
torial programming problem (3.12), in which the set of new branches new     t   opened in period
t is chosen optimally, subject to two constraints. Constraint (3.13) indicates that new branches
are opened in markets without branches in period t - 1. Constraint (3.14) indicates that the
number of new branches is given by nt , where the symbol | · | denotes the cardinality of a set.
    For the banks that have paid the setup cost t , the expected profits of opening one branch
are t (nt )/nt because banks are assigned randomly to the markets in set new       t . The total
profits t (nt ) have decreasing returns to scale because the most profitable markets will
be chosen first when solving problem (3.12). As a result, the expected profits of a branch
t (nt )/nt are decreasing in nt ; the free entry condition ensures that in equilibrium,

                                        t ( n t + 1)      t (nt )
                                                     < t          .                                     (3.15)
                                         nt + 1            nt

   The location choice problem (3.12) is forward looking because i,t includes profits made
by the branch in the future, internalizing the possibility that new branches will be opened in
  22 Itis as if banks apply for permits to open a branch but regulators determine where. If we allow banks
to freely choose locations ex ante, they may strategically move first even within each period due to the
preemption incentive, which makes the model intractable. Our assumption essentially implies that all banks
make simultaneous entry decisions within the period, similar to Jia (2008). In our dynamic model, however,
different from the static setting of Jia (2008), banks that open branches in period t internalize the impact of
future branch openings on their profits.



                                                      16
subsequent periods. Intuitively, because households can travel to other markets along the road
network to obtain financial services, future branches that are opened in nearby markets can
potentially reduce the profits of existing branches (by changing the term  j{ j: = ,B =0} D j,t
                                                                                  j,t ij j,t
in equation (3.11)). Moreover, the location choice problem (3.12) internalizes the impact of new
branches on i,t through the endogenous interest rate rt and wages wi,t . In other words, the
choice of branch locations that we solve is consistent with a rational expectation equilibrium.
    Because of the interaction effects through network linkages, the combinatorial program-
ming problem (3.12) is NP-hard, and impossible to solve exactly given the large number of
markets that we consider in our calibration. Therefore, we propose a tractable numerical
algorithm that solves the problem approximately in polynomial time (see Online Appendix
4). In a nutshell, we break banks' branch-opening problem over the whole country into a
set of smaller problems that focus on specific segments of the country. These segments are
constructed using the k-medoids clustering algorithm in machine learning to ensure that
there is little interaction among locations in different segments. This allows us to solve the
problem of each segment separately, which is computationally feasible. Finally, we solve the
whole country's bank expansion problem by aggregating all of the segments' location choices
and transforming the problem into a tractable multiple-choice knapsack problem.


3.4    Equilibrium and Aggregation
Figure 4 presents the circular flow of our model to facilitate discussion of equilibrium. Denote
by i,t (s) the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of households of type s = {z, m, a} in
market i and period t. Given the initial distribution i,0 (s) for all i = 1, ..., N at t = 0, and the
cost of opening branches t for t  0, the competitive equilibrium consists of allocations of
new bank branches new      t , consumption ci,t ( s ), savings in the form of cash mi,t+1 ( s ) and bonds
ai,t+1 (s), occupations, credit access, portfolio adjustments, capital k i,t (s), and labor li,t (s) for
each type s, sequences of the joint distribution i,t (s) of talent, cash, and bonds, prices wi,t ,
and rt for each market i and t  0, such that the following conditions are satisfied.
      i). Given { , r }                    
                           =0 and { wi, } =0 for i = 1, ..., N , households of type s in each market i
choose ci,t (s), ai,t+1 (s), mi,t+1 (s), occupations, credit access, portfolio adjustments, k i,t (s), and
li,t (s) optimally by solving problems (3.5) to (3.10) for all t  0.
      ii). Given the allocation of households' variables, distribution {i, }                           
                                                                                    =0 , prices {r } =0 ,
and {wi, }     =0 in each market i, the allocation of new bank branches t
                                                                                   new solves problem

(3.12), where the number of new branches nt satisfies (3.15).
      iii). The equilibrium interest rate rt is determined by the economy-wide bond-market




                                                   17
                                         A. Circular flow of the aggregate economy


                                               Households




                                                                            labor                                              cash          Capital Shop
                                                                                                                                             (the only role is to
  Farmers                         Workers                                                               Entrepreneurs                        transform cash to capital
                                                                 market-specific wage ,                                        capital       or vice versa at unit
                                  interest                                                                                                   conversion rate)


                                                bond 




                                                   Bank




                                              B. Circular flow across local spatial markets


                                                  Centralized Marketplace
                Financial Market                                    Goods Market                                  Capital Shop
               (all branches pool funds                     (households buy  with cash                       (entrepreneurs buy (and sell)
               together, interest rate  )                     and entrepreneurs sell)                          capital  using cash  )




    Spatial Market                                                                                                   Spatial Market 
                              save/withdraw 
Farmers      Households       (cost , )                                                                                      Households           Farmers

                                                        travel to nearest branch to save/withdraw  (cost , )                                      Workers
Workers     Entrepreneurs                                                                                                   Entrepreneurs
                                        Bank
                                       branch                       connected by roads
                                                        travel to nearest branch to borrow loans (cost , )
     local wage ,       borrow loans (cost , )                                                                                      local wage ,


     Local labor market                                                                                                      Local labor market




                                          Figure 4: Circular flow of the model.



                                                                                   18
clearing condition in period t:

                   N            N
                    Di , t =           i      [k i,t (s) - (m - i,t )] 1{ki,t (s)m-i,t } di,t (s) ,            (3.16)
                  i =1         i =1

where the integration is taken over all households of type s = {z, m, a} using the CDF i,t (s)
of market i. The indicator function 1{ki,t (s)m-i,t } restricts the integration to entrepreneurs
who demand loans. The demand for bonds from market i is given by Di,t ,

                                                Di , t =  i        a d  i ,t ( s ).                            (3.17)

   iv). The equilibrium wage wi,t is determined by taking into account two cases. If
the demand for workers li,t (s)di,t (s) is smaller than the measure of non-entrepreneurs
  1{Vi,t (s)>Ei,t (s)} di,t (s) in market i, we have wi,t = f because there is an excess supply of
potential workers (due to the existence of farmers). Otherwise, we have wi,t > f , and the local
wage wi,t is determined by the labor-market clearing condition in market i:

                                      1{Vi,t (s)>Ei,t (s)} di,t (s) =         li ,t ( s )d  i ,t ( s ).        (3.18)

    v). The joint distributions i,t (s) in each market i evolve according to the equilibrium
allocation of quantities and prices. The set t consisting of markets with bank branches
evolves according to t = t-1  new     t .



3.5    Illustration of Model Mechanisms
Our model incorporates multiple markets to focus on the analysis of a spatial equilibrium.
Dynamic bank expansion reduces the local credit entry cost i,t and portfolio adjustment
cost  i,t , which affects the distribution of loans and bonds across markets, consequently
influencing households' occupation choice and income. In this section, we shed light on the
model mechanisms by presenting households' choice of occupations, loans, and portfolio
composition (cash/bonds) for different values of i,t and  i,t . For clarity, we focus on a
partial-equilibrium setting with fixed interest rate rt and local wage wi,t .


Occupation and Borrowing Boundaries.        Panel A of Figure 5 depicts the occupation and
borrowing decisions of households with different values of mt + at (x-axis) and zt (y-axis),
given at /(mt + at ) as fixed.23 Panel B complements panel A by representing mt + at along
  23 Households     are characterized by st = {zt , mt , at }. To explain the intuition, we change variables and focus
on talent zt , total wealth mt + at , and bond-wealth ratio at /(mt + at ).


                                                              19
          2                                                1


        1.8                                              0.8


        1.6                                              0.6


        1.4                                              0.4


        1.2                                              0.2


          1                                                0
              0    2      4       6      8      10             0   2      4       6      8      10




Note: This figure illustrates occupation choice and borrowing decisions for households of different types
(zt , mt , at ). The x-axis is total wealth mt + at for both panels. In panel A, we set the bond-wealth ratio at
at /(mt + at ) = 0.165, corresponding to the median value across markets, and vary talent zt along the y-axis.
In panel B, we set zt = 1.73, corresponding to the median value of entrepreneurs, and vary at /(mt + at ) along
the y-axis. We set the portfolio adjustment cost at  i,t =  so that adjustment decisions are irrelevant. We set
rt = 8.3% and wi,t = 0.787, corresponding to the median value across markets in 1986. The other parameter
values are set according to our calibration in Section 4.

                           Figure 5: Occupation and borrowing decisions.


the x-axis and at /(mt + at ) along the y-axis, given zt as fixed. Households' occupation and
borrowing decisions can be sufficiently summarized by the occupation boundary and the
borrowing boundary.
    First, consider the case with i,t = 1.5. In panel A (B), households to the southwest
(northwest) of the occupation boundary (blue solid line) choose to be workers or farmers
because they do not have sufficient wealth to start a profitable business, whereas households
to the northeast (southeast) choose to be entrepreneurs. In panel A, the occupation boundary
is downward sloping, indicating that more talented households require less wealth to become
entrepreneurs because their businesses can be profitable at smaller scales due to higher pro-
ductivity. In panel B, the occupation boundary is upward sloping, implying that households
with a higher bond-wealth ratio need more total wealth to start a profitable business due to
the illiquidity of bonds (i.e., buying capital requires cash).
    The blue dashed lines in each panel indicate the borrowing boundaries, which are to
the right of the occupation boundary because only entrepreneurs can obtain bank loans.
Entrepreneurs in the region enclosed by the borrowing boundary pay the credit entry cost
i,t to borrow. The left-part of the borrowing boundary (up to the bend) in panel A and

                                                      20
           2                                                  1


         1.8                                                0.8


         1.6                                                0.6


         1.4                                                0.4


         1.2                                                0.2


           1                                                  0
               0    1       2       3       4      5              0    1       2       3       4       5




Note: This figure illustrates the portfolio adjustment decisions for households of different types (zt , mt , at ). The
x-axis is total wealth mt + at for both panels. In panel A, we set the bond-wealth ratio at /(mt + at ) = 0.165,
corresponding to the median value across markets, and vary talent zt along the y-axis. In panel B, we set
zt = 1.19, corresponding to the median value of households, and vary at /(mt + at ) along the y-axis. We set
the credit entry cost at i,t =  so that borrowing decisions are irrelevant. We set rt = 8.3% and wi,t = 0.787,
corresponding to the median value across markets in 1986. Other parameter values are set according to our
calibration in Section 4.

                                 Figure 6: Portfolio adjustment decisions.


the left borrowing boundary in panel B indicate the minimum amount of cash that allows
the entrepreneur to pay i,t . The right part of the borrowing boundary in panel A and the
right borrowing boundary in panel B are upward sloping, indicating that entrepreneurs
with greater total wealth choose to borrow only if they are more talented or have higher
bond-wealth ratios, because production technology (3.3) exhibits diminishing returns to scale.
Entrepreneurs in the region not enclosed by the borrowing boundaries do not borrow, either
because they do not have enough cash to pay i,t or because the benefit from loans is less
than the credit entry cost.
    Moving from the case with i,t = 1.5 to the case with i,t = 1, we see that the occupation
boundary remains unchanged, but the borrowing boundaries in both panels shift outward
(from the blue dashed lines to the red dotted lines), implying that more entrepreneurs obtain
loans when the credit entry cost i,t is lower. Thus, when all else is equal, bank expansion
leads to a higher credit access ratio by reducing i,t .


Portfolio Adjustment Boundaries.  While the credit entry cost i,t largely determines house-
holds' occupation and borrowing decisions, the portfolio adjustment cost  i,t mostly deter-

                                                         21
mines households' portfolio adjustment decisions. Figure 6 illustrates households' withdrawal
and deposit boundaries.
    Focusing on the case of  i,t = 0.14, households above the withdrawal boundary (blue solid
lines in panels A and B) withdraw (i.e., convert a fraction of their bonds to cash). Intuitively,
in panel A, given the same total wealth mt + at , households with higher talent zt operate
businesses with higher returns, which motivates them to withdraw to buy more capital. The
withdrawal boundary is downward sloping because more talented households are more eager
to withdraw at lower wealth levels due to the higher returns from their businesses. In panel
B, given mt + at , households with higher bond-wealth ratios withdraw because they need
cash to buy consumption goods or capital.24
    The blue dashed line in each panel indicates the deposit boundary. Households in the
lower-right region enclosed by the deposit boundary make a deposit (i.e., convert a fraction
of their cash to bonds). These households have high wealth and hold much more cash than
they need, either because their talent is low (panel A) or because their bond-wealth ratio is
low (panel B). Thus, they choose to put some of their cash into the bank to earn interests.
    The remaining region indicates inaction. Households in this region keep their current
portfolio of cash and bonds unchanged to save the portfolio adjustment cost  i,t . Moving
from the case with  i,t = 0.14 to the case with  i,t = 0.1, we see that both the withdrawal and
deposit regions expand and the inaction region shrinks, as households choose to optimize
their portfolios more frequently when the cost of doing so is lower.


4      Calibration
Because we are interested in the fast growth period between 1986-1996, we do not consider
the 1997 financial crisis in our baseline specification. However, in Online Appendix 3.6, we
show that the model-implied transitional dynamics between 1986-1996 would be virtually
unchanged even if households fully anticipated the 1997 financial crisis. Parameters are either
determined from external information without simulating the model (panel A of Table 1) or
calibrated internally from moment matching (panel B of Table 1). Each period represents one
year.


Externally Determined Parameters.       We calibrate the initial locations of the 406 bank
branches in 1986 directly according to the data. The interest rate spread is set at  = 4.82%
according to the average value of the difference between the prime lending rate and the
    24 Whenthe total wealth mt + at is very low, households do not withdraw even when the bond-wealth ratio is
very high, because the benefit of having more cash is outweighed by the portfolio adjustment cost  i,t .



                                                     22
                                Table 1: Calibration and parameter choice.

                                     Panel A: Externally determined parameters

  Parameter                          Symbol    Value Parameter                                   Symbol   Value
  Risk aversion                                 1.5    Capital share                                      0.33
  Return-to-scale                               0.14   Depreciation rate                                  0.08
  Liquidation loss rate                         0.05   Branch capacity   (people/km2 )             h       300
  Interest rate spread (%)                      4.82

                                      Panel B: Internally calibrated parameters

  Parameter                          Symbol    Value Moments                                      Data    Model
  Persistence of talent                         0.7    Num. of years in current business          4.0      4.1
  Tail parameter of talent distbt.               4     Top 20% employment                         0.72    0.71
  Discount rate                                 0.89   Interest rate in 1986                     0.083    0.083
  Subsistence income                    f       0.79   Fraction of farmers in 1986                0.46    0.47
  Credit entry cost (constant)         a        0.86   Frac. of households with loans (%)         1.63    1.63
  Credit entry cost (slope)            b        0.36   Sensitivity of loan access to i,t         -0.20    -0.20
  Portfolio adj. cost (constant)       a        0.1    Average deposit-cash ratio (%)             27       27
  Portfolio adj. cost (slope)          b      0.00125 Sensitivity of deposit-cash ratio to i,t   -0.99    -1.05


interest rate provided by Bank of Thailand for the period 1986-1996. Following standard
practice, we set the risk aversion parameter to be  = 1.5. We set the production technology
parameters at  = 0.33 and  = 0.14 according to the estimate of Paweenawat and Townsend
(2019) based on the Townsend Thai data. The one-year depreciation rate  is set as 0.08
according to the estimate of Samphantharak and Townsend (2009). We set the liquidation
loss rate  = 0.05 according to the structural estimate of Paulson and Townsend (2004). The
market size i of each market i is represented by its population density and estimated directly
from the data (see Online Appendix 1.3).25 We set the capacity of bank branches h at 300
people per square kilometer.26 This parameter determines the interdependence of profits
among branches. In Online Appendix 2.4, we discuss how it affects the model's prediction
for new branch locations.


Internally Calibrated Parameters.The remaining parameters are calibrated by matching
relevant moments. We solve and simulate the entire transition path from the initial dis-
  25 Inthe model, each market is represented by a single node (see panel B of Figure 2), so it occupies the same
"area". However, the market area differs across markets in the data (see panel A of Figure 2). The population
density is thus a better measure of market size than population because it adjusts for the heterogeneous areas of
markets in the data.
  26 The median population density is 150 people per square kilometer across the 1,428 markets in the data.

Setting h = 200 or h = 400 does not change our quantitative results much.


                                                         23
tribution of households and bank branches in 1986 until the economy reaches the steady
state corresponding to the branch locations in 1996. We then calculate the model-implied
moments and adjust the parameters until these moments are in line with their values in the
data. Although most of the moments that we target are in the initial year, 1986, the whole
model needs to be solved and simulated again whenever parameters are changed because
households are forward looking. As a benchmark, we specify that the economy is in a steady
state in 1986. Thus, GDP would remain constant if there were no financial reforms thereafter.
All of the remaining parameters are determined jointly, as each moment is affected by every
parameter. Below, we make a heuristic identification argument that relates each parameter to
the moment that intuitively determines it.
    The persistence of talent  determines the frequency with which entrepreneurs quit their
businesses. In the Townsend Thai annual survey, entrepreneurs stay in their current businesses
for about 4.0 years. We calibrate  = 0.7 so that the model-implied moment is 4.1 years.
The tail parameter  governs the distribution of talent, which affects entrepreneurs' relative
business income and employment. We estimate that the top 20% of Thai manufacturing firms
in the World Bank Enterprise Survey have a 0.72 employment share. We calibrate  = 4
to generate roughly the same employment share in the model. The initial interest rate of
commercial banks is 8.3% in the data, and we calibrate the discount rate  = 0.89 to match
it. The level of subsistence income f determines the fraction of farmers in 1986, which is
estimated to be 0.46 in the data. We calibrate f = 0.79 to match this moment.
    Because the credit entry costs (i,t ) and portfolio adjustment costs  (i,t ) are not directly
observable, we calibrate their values through indirect inference. We assume that both (i,t )
and  (i,t ) are linear functions of i,t , (i,t ) = a + b i,t and  (i,t ) =  a +  b i,t .27 The
parameters a and  a determine the overall costs of obtaining credit access and adjusting
portfolios. We calibrate their values at a = 0.86 and  a = 0.1 so that the model-implied
average fraction of households with loans is 1.63% and households' deposit-cash ratio at
the country level is 27%, which are in line with the values estimated for the 1986 data. The
parameters b and  b determine the sensitivity of the fraction of households with loans and
the households' deposit-cash ratio to distance. To calibrate these two parameters, in the
data, we estimate the panel regressions by regressing the village-level credit access conditions
and deposit-cash ratios on the villages' distance from the nearest bank branch. Column (1)
  27 We are conscious that the functional forms of (i,t ) and  (i,t ) can affect the quantitative implications of
bank expansion in our model. However, estimating the relationships between access to bank loans, savings in the
bank, and distance from the nearest branch nonparametrically requires detailed household data. Without such
high-quality data, a linear functional form seems to be a useful benchmark that can be mapped directly onto
our linear regression coefficients. The quantitative implications vary little if we instead specify an exponential
functional form, with the parameters calibrated to match the same moments. More flexible functional forms are
more difficult to identify due to the larger number of parameters.



                                                       24
          Table 2: Relationships between branch, credit access, and deposit-cash ratios.

                                          (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
                                        Access to bank loans (%)                Deposit-cash ratio (%)

Distance from the nearest branch        -0.54               -0.20              -1.16              -0.99
                                       (-26.40)            (-8.74)            (-8.24)            (-6.54)
                                                                                                   
Year fixed effect
                                                                                                   
Township fixed effect
Observations                            194, 674           194, 674            2, 576             2, 576
R2                                       0.026              0.266              0.096              0.198
 Note: Columns (1) and (2) use the village-year observations of the CDD data from 1986 to 1996. Columns (3)
and (4) use the village-month observations of the Townsend Thai data from August 1998 to December 2011.
Because households living in the same villages are at an identical distance from the nearest bank branch,
we first aggregate the ratios of households' savings in the bank to cash at the village level. t-statistics are
reported in parentheses.


of Table 2 shows that a one-minute increase in car travel time (i.e., about 0.7 kilometers)
is associated with a 0.54% decrease in the probability of households accessing commercial
bank loans at the village level. In column (2), we further control for township and year fixed
effects to capture the variation in the distance from the nearest bank branch over time caused
by new branch openings. The results remain statistically significant and have comparable
economic magnitudes. Columns (3) and (4) show that a one-minute increase in car travel
time is associated with an approximate 1% decrease in the deposit-cash ratio. In the model,
we run similar regressions using market-level simulated data. We calibrate b = 0.36 and
 b = 0.00125 so that the model-implied regression coefficients on the distance from the nearest
bank branch are consistent with the estimates in columns (2) and (4) of Table 2.
    Finally, we calibrate the cost of opening branches t in each year so that the number of
new branches nt implied by the model is the same as that in the data in each year from 1987 to
1996 (panel A of Figure 1). These costs are not reported in Table 1, but can be computed after
solving the model (see Online Appendix 2.5). Thus, our calibration is essentially equivalent to
assuming that banks choose locations of new branches in each year from 1987 to 1996 given
the number of branches nt observed to open in the data. We set high costs t after 1996 to
ensure that the eventual steady state of the economy is consistent with the branch locations
in 1996.28
  28 InOnline Appendix 3.5, we verify that allowing banks to continue opening new branches from 1997 to 2011
has a negligible impact on the transitional dynamics from 1986 to 1996.




                                                        25
5      Model Validation
Our calibration does not target moments along the transitional path from 1987 to 1996;
these data are saved to validate our model's quantitative implications. We validate the
model in three steps. In Section 5.1, we show that the model-predicted branch locations
are reasonably consistent with the data. In Section 5.2, we compare the model-predicted
transitional dynamics with the data. In Section 5.3, we compare the model-predicted credit
access conditions and entrepreneurial activity across regions with those in the data. In
Sections 5.2 and 5.3, we also provide interpretations through the lens of the model.


5.1      Bank Branches: Model vs. Data
In Figure 7, we compare the model-predicted branch locations in 1996 with those in the data.
Panel A displays the branch locations in the data. The yellow dots represent the 406 branch
locations in 1986, which are taken as given in our model calibration. The red dots represent
the locations of 431 new branches opened from 1987 to 1996. As explained in Section 2.2, there
are 1,428 markets in total, defined based on the same number of branch locations observed in
2011. Our model predicts the locations of these 431 new branches opened from 1987 to 1996
of the 1,022 (1,428-406) markets that do not have branches in 1986.29
    Panel B assesses the predictive power of the model. Our model correctly predicts the
locations of 324 (gold dots) of the 431 new branches opened from 1987 to 1996, with a correct
prediction ratio of 75.17% (= 324/431). We show that as a benchmark without predictive
power, the median correct prediction ratio would be 42.2% if the locations of new branches
were randomly selected (see Online Appendix 2.3). Clearly, our model outperforms random
predictions by a wide margin.
    A closer look at panel B reveals a spatial pattern of under- and over-prediction: the model
predicts fewer branches around Bangkok than are found in the data (black dots around
Bangkok), but predicts more branches in eastern Thailand relative to the data (purple dots).
In reality, a branch can only serve a limited number of customers at each time; thus, in the
data, it is natural to observe more branches in the populous Bangkok metropolitan area. Our
model captures the idea of branch capacity using the parameter h, which restricts households
from traveling to nearby markets to obtain financial services if those markets' population
densities are already higher than h. Without imposing the capacity constraint (i.e., setting
h = ), the model would predict even fewer branches around Bangkok.30
    29 Note
          that even in 1996, there are 591 markets that do not have branches, as given by the total number of
markets less the number in 1986 and newly established (1,428-406 - 431 = 591).
  30 In Online Appendix 2.4, we show that modeling branch capacity significantly increases the number of

branches opened around Bangkok, making the model more consistent with the data. In principle, it is possible


                                                     26
             A. Bank branches in the data                                B. Model predictions




                        Bangkok                                                 Bangkok
                        ^                                                       ^




                                                                                              new branch (87-96)
                                                                                              model=1, data=1
                                     existing branch (86)
                                                                                              model=1, data=0
                                     new branch (87-96)                                       model=0, data=1
                                     province boundary                                        province boundary




Note: Panel A displays the branch locations in the data. The yellow dots represent the 406 branch locations
in 1986, which are taken as given in our model calibration. The red dots represent the locations of 431 new
branches opened from 1987 to 1996. Panel B displays the model-predicted locations of the new branches opened
from 1987 to 1996. The gold dots (324 in total) represent the branch locations for which the model's predictions
are consistent with the data. The purple dots (107 dots) represent the locations where there are branches in the
model but not in the data. The black dots (107 dots) represent the locations where there are branches in the data
but not in the model.


                   Figure 7: Model vs. data: The distribution of bank branches.


    To assess the model-predicted timing of branch expansion, we compute the difference
between the actual branch opening year and the predicted branch opening year for each
market. The average difference is 3.01 years across all markets, indicating that the average
model-predicted branch opening time is about 3 years different from that in the data. We
further show that even within provinces, our model has reasonably good prediction accuracy
for the dynamics of bank expansion (see Online Appendix 3.3).


5.2    Transitional Dynamics: Model vs. Data
Figure 8 displays the model's prediction for transitional dynamics in Thailand from 1986 to
1996. Panel A shows that the model implies a GDP growth of 75% over the decade caused
to further improve the prediction of branches around Bangkok by incorporating more sophisticated branch
capacity constraints, such as by allowing h to differ across markets.

                                                            27
                                                                               28
          2.2                                                                                                  0.6
                                               1.3
          1.9                                                                  23
                                                                                                               0.4
                                               1.2
          1.6                                                                  18

                                               1.1                                                             0.2
          1.3                                                                  13

           1                                    1                               8                               0
            86    88   90   92   94   96         86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96


         0.27                          0.54    19                              50                              65

                                               18
                                                                               40
         0.25                          0.52                                                                    55
                                               17
                                                                               30
                                               16
         0.23                          0.5                                                                     45
                                                                               20
                                               15

         0.21                           0.48   14                              10                              35
             86   88   90   92   94   96         86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96




Note: In the model, GDP and TFP are measured by equations (2.5) and (2.6) in Online Appendix 2.6. In both
the model and data, the credit access ratio is the fraction of entrepreneurs with bank loans, credit access Gini
is the Gini index of market-level credit access ratio across all markets, and income Gini is the Gini index of
households' income for all households in the economy.

     Figure 8: Model-implied aggregate and distributional dynamics during transitions.


purely by bank expansion, compared with 117% in the data. This unexplained GDP growth
could be due to various factors not captured by our model, such as technological progress.
The model-implied cumulative TFP growth (defined in equation (2.6) of Online Appendix 2.6)
is 13% (panel B) whereas it is 32% in the data. In the model, endogenous TFP growth is driven
entirely by the improved allocation of capital to entrepreneurs, as the talent distribution is
fixed over time.
    Panels C and D show that our model captures the upward trend in the credit access ratio
and the downward trend in credit access inequality across markets, and the magnitudes are
comparable to the data. As Panel F shows, the fraction of entrepreneurs increases from 14.9%
to 18.2% in the model, similar to the trend in the data. There is a strong labor transition
from farming into wage work in both the model and the data (panels G and H).31 Intuitively,
opening a local branch leads to a lower credit entry cost i,t in nearby markets, which
encourages entrepreneurs to obtain bank loans and produce more. The higher local labor
demand boosts the local wage, motivating farmers to leave the agricultural sector and become
workers.
    Our model also generates hump-shaped dynamics for the income Gini as in the data (panel
  31 A strong transition from agricultural to non-agricultural occupations is common to the early stage develop-
ment of many countries. For example, Cheremukhin et al. (2017) develop a model of structural transformation
that explains the dramatic labor force flow across the two sectors in Russia.




                                                                          28
E).32 These hump-shaped dynamics are generated by two forces in the model. First, bank
expansion increases entrepreneurs' profits and the fraction of entrepreneurs by providing
better access to finance. Because entrepreneurs already earn more than workers and farmers,
and there are relatively few of them initially, further increasing their incomes leads to a higher
Gini coefficient. Second, bank expansion results in a large labor transition as many farmers
are hired by entrepreneurs and become workers. Because farmers earn less than workers
(after wage takeoffs) and entrepreneurs, and there are many more of them initially, increasing
their income leads to a lower Gini coefficient. We decompose the drivers of income Gini
dynamics in Online Appendix 3.1.33


5.3      Regional Heterogeneity: Model vs. Data
The financial deepening caused by bank expansion directly motivates entrepreneurial activity
and business startups. We examine the goodness-of-fit for the model's out-of-sample pre-
dictions of the distribution of entrepreneurial activity and credit access conditions across
markets by 1996. In both the model and the data, we calculate the percentile rank of each
market (ranging from 0% to 100%) out of all markets in terms of the market-level fraction of
entrepreneurs or fraction of households with commercial bank loans. Figure 9 shows that
our model has a good overall fit with the data. A large fraction of Thailand is shaded mid-
light/mid-dark blue, representing regions whose percentile-rank difference (model minus
data) is less than 10%. Our model captures the high concentrations of entrepreneurial activity
and loan access around Bangkok and south and north of this area along Thailand's central
corridor, as well as the low concentrations of both in the northeast (see Online Appendix 1.4
for patterns in the data).


6      Model-Based Evaluation
We use the calibrated model to shed further light on the implications of bank expansion.
Section 6.1 provides a decomposition of growth and inequality and assesses the welfare
consequences of bank expansion across regions. Section 6.2 presents the model's implications
regarding the flow of funds across local spatial markets. Section 6.3 quantifies the credit
    32 The
         level of income Gini implied by the model is about half of that in the data due to the lack of worker
heterogeneity. Jeong and Townsend (2008) show that the standard occupation choice model does not generate a
high income Gini due to the lack of worker heterogeneity. Cagetti and Nardi (2006) introduce heterogeneity in
both working ability and entrepreneurial ability to match the high Gini coefficient of earnings.
  33 The Gini coefficient does not capture the entire distribution of income, especially the higher-order moments

and tail distributions (Guvenen et al., 2015, 2017). Our decomposition aims helps uncover forces behind the
income Gini dynamics in the model.


                                                       29
      A. Fraction of entrepreneurs (model - data)              B. Households with loans (model - data)




                                      < -0.25                                                 < -0.25
                                      [-0.25, -0.1)                                           [-0.25, -0.1)
                                      [-0.1, 0)                                               [-0.1, 0)
                                      [0, 0.1)                                                [0, 0.1)
                                      [0.1, 0.25]                                             [0.1, 0.25]
                                      > 0.25                                                  > 0.25
                                      no data                                                 no data
                                      province boundary                                       province boundary




Note: Panel A presents the percentile-rank difference in the fraction of entrepreneurs between the data and
model. In both the model and the data, we calculate the percentile rank of each market (ranging from 0%
to 100%) out of all of the markets in terms of the market-level fraction of entrepreneurs. We then depict the
percentile-rank difference (model minus data) using different colors (from light blue to dark blue). For example,
the darkest blue color indicates that the percentile in the model is more than 25% higher than that in the data,
meaning that the model overpredicts the market's fraction of entrepreneurs. Similarly, the lightest blue shows
the greatest underprediction. Panel B similarly plots the percentile-rank difference in the fraction of households
with commercial bank loans between the model and the data.


        Figure 9: Model vs. data: Fraction of entrepreneurs and household loan access.


provision and deposit mobilization channels of bank expansion.


6.1    Decomposition of Growth, Inequality, and Welfare
Panel A of Figure 10 decomposes the GDP growth from 1986 to 1996 by factor (the formulas
are presented in Online Appendix 2.6). A major part (41.5%) of the 75% cumulative GDP
growth implied by the model is attributable to labor growth, which coincides with the pattern
in panel H of Figure 8. About 19.5% of cumulative GDP growth is attributable to capital
growth, and the remainder is attributable to TFP growth.
   Panel B of Figure 10 decomposes the GDP growth by credit regime. Bank expansion
promotes GDP growth by enabling entrepreneurs who were previously excluded from the
credit market to borrow loans (extensive margin) and entrepreneurs who already had credit

                                                          30
                                      60                               80
      40
                                      50
      30                                                               60
                                      40

      20                              30                               40

                                      20
                                                                       20
      10
                                      10
                                                                        0
       0                               0
        86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96


Note: Panel A decomposes the GDP growth by factor (labor, capital, and TFP) according to a standard growth
accounting exercise. Panel B decomposes the GDP growth by credit regime as in Dabla-Norris et al. (2020).
The extensive margin refers to the GDP growth resulting from entrepreneurs obtaining credit access after bank
expansion. The intensive margin refers to the GDP growth resulting from entrepreneurs who already had credit
access expanding their production after bank expansion. The general equilibrium effect (GE) is a residual term.
Panel C decomposes the GDP growth by market, i.e., the markets without branches in 1986 versus those with
branches in 1986. The formulas for the decomposition in each panel are provided in Online Appendix 2.6.

       Figure 10: Decomposition of GDP growth by factor, credit regime, and market.


access to expand their businesses (intensive margin). The former contributes about 57.4% of
cumulative GDP growth and the latter contributes about 13.5%. The more important role
played by the extensive margin is consistent with the dramatic increase in the credit access
ratio in both the model and the data (panel C of Figure 8).
    In panel C of Figure 10, we further decompose GDP growth according to geographical
areas. Specifically, we separately consider the contribution to GDP growth of markets with
branches in 1986 and that of markets without branches in 1986. We find that the latter group
of markets accounts for all of the GDP growth, indicating the important role played by new
branch openings. The former group actually experiences slight negative growth, -2%, due to
the general equilibrium effects of higher interest rates.
    Figure 11 analyzes the income Gini dynamics within and across markets. As panel A
shows, the income inequality among entrepreneurs from different markets increases from
1986 to 1989 and decreases thereafter (i.e., the blue solid line is hump shaped). Initially,
only a few markets obtain new branches. The entrepreneurs in these markets earn much
higher income due to the lower credit entry costs than do those in markets without branches,
which increases the cross-market income inequality. As more branches are opened over time,
more entrepreneurs obtain credit access, leading to lower cross-market income inequality. By
contrast, the income inequality among workers from different markets increases steadily from
1986 to 1996 (i.e., the black dashed line is upward sloping). As we discuss in Online Appendix
3.4, workers in markets with earlier branch openings experience a wage takeoff, resulting
in higher cross-market income inequality among workers. Panel B plots the within-market


                                                       31
                       0.27                                                                 0.05
                                                     0.09
                                                              0.54
                                                                                            0.04

                       0.25                          0.085
                                                              0.53                          0.03

                                                     0.08
                                                                                            0.02
                       0.23
                                                              0.52
                                                     0.075                                  0.01


                       0.21                           0.07    0.51                           0
                           86   88   90   92   94   96            86   88   90   92   94   96


Note: Panel A plots the model-implied cross-market income Gini dynamics for entrepreneurs and workers. We
first calculate the average incomes of entrepreneurs and workers in each market and each year. We then plot
the Gini coefficients of average incomes of entrepreneurs and workers across the 1,428 markets from 1986 to
1996. Panel B plots the within-market income Gini dynamics for entrepreneurs and workers. We first calculate
the income Gini coefficients of entrepreneurs and workers within each market in each year. We then plot the
average income Gini coefficients of entrepreneurs and workers across the 1,428 markets from 1986 to 1996.

                    Figure 11: Income inequality within and across markets.


income Gini dynamics of entrepreneurs and workers. The income Gini coefficient is zero for
workers, because the same wage wi,t is paid to workers within the same market. The income
Gini coefficient of entrepreneurs within the same market decreases steadily mainly because
of the rise in the cost of capital. Bank expansion results in a higher equilibrium interest rate
for entrepreneurs (the blue solid line in panel H of Figure 14), which hurts high-income
entrepreneurs more because they use more capital in production.
    To evaluate the welfare implications of bank expansion, we follow Jones and Klenow (2016)
and calculate the growth rate of the consumption equivalent gain at the country and market
levels (see Online Appendix 2.7). The overall country-wide welfare increases by 52.3% from
1986 to 1996. As Figure 12 shows, there is large heterogeneity in welfare gains across markets.
The markets close to bank branches in 1986 (yellow dots) experience small improvements
in the standard of living. By contrast, the markets that are initially far away from branches
but obtain new branch openings (red dots) have welfare gains as large as 270%, and these
markets also generally have the largest GDP and TFP growth (see Online Appendix 3.2).


6.2    Flow of Funds
The aggregate effect presented in Figure 8 masks interesting regional heterogeneity in financial
deepening and the levels of assets and liabilities. Figure 13 zooms in on such heterogeneity
across markets. Panel A of Figure 13 shows that most markets in 1986 lacked access to bank
loans (white area) because they were far from existing branches; as a result, credit is also very
unequally distributed across markets. Such regional heterogeneity underlies the low credit


                                                       32
                                                                  existing branch (86)
                                                                  new branch (87-96)
                                                                  [0, 10%)
                                                                  [10%, 90%)
                                                                  [90%, 180%)
                                                                  [180%, 270%]
                                                                  > 270%
                                                                  province boundary




            Figure 12: Model-implied market-level welfare gains from 1986 to 1996.


access ratio and the high credit access Gini coefficient for the aggregate economy (panels C
and D of Figure 8).
    Because our model assumes free capital flows across markets, the local demand for bank
loans is not necessarily equal to the local supply of funds (i.e., deposits). Panel B of Figure
13 shows that the local demand for loans is larger than the local amounts of deposits in the
regions close to bank branches (dark/light blue), indicating that capital flows to regions with
better access to finance.34 The endogenous flow of funds implied by our model captures an
important aspect of the within-country inter-regional capital flows in Thailand (Paweenawat
and Townsend, 2019), as it contributes to the high inequality among entrepreneurs in different
regions. The rapid bank expansion over the study decade leads to a significantly higher
density of bank branches in 1996. In panel C of Figure 13, the red dots represent the newly
opened bank branches from 1987 to 1996 predicted by our model. The markets close to
these branches experience a dramatic increase in the local loan demand (exceeding 400%), as
represented by the dark blue color.
  34 The portfolio adjustment cost  (i,t ) and the credit entry cost (i,t ) are calibrated to match the regression
coefficients in Table 2. Under this calibration, opening a branch increases the local market's demand for loans
more than the increase in the amount of deposits.




                                                       33
      A. Loan demand in 1986                    B. Loan demand - deposits                C. Growth in loan demand




                         existing branch (86)                                                             existing branch (86)
                         0                                        existing branch (86)                    new branch (87-96)
                         (0, 0.1%)                                < -0.1%                                 [-20%, 0)
                         [0.1%, 0.3%)                             [-0.1%, -0.01%)                         [0, 20%)
                         [0.3%, 0.5%)                             [-0.01%, 0.01%]                         [20%, 200%)
                         [0.5%, 0.7%]                             (0.01%, 0.1%]                           [200%, 400%]
                         > 0.7%                                   > 0.1%                                  > 400%
                         province boundary                        province boundary                       province boundary




Note: Panel A plots the percentage of bank loans (i.e., local demand for loans divided by the aggregate amount
of bank loans) borrowed by entrepreneurs in each local market in 1986. Panel B plots the local excess loan
demand in 1986, which is defined as the difference between the local demand for loans and the local supply
of funds (i.e., deposits) divided by the aggregate amount of bank deposits. The red regions have excess local
supply of funds, and the blue regions have excess local demand for loans. Panel C plots the cumulative growth
in local loan demand from 1986 to 1996. The yellow dots in each panel represent bank branches in 1986 and the
red dots in panel C represent the new bank branches opened between 1987 and 1996.


      Figure 13: Model-implied loan demand and deposits across local spatial markets.


6.3    Credit Provision vs. Deposit Mobilization
As discussed in Section 3.5, bank expansion affects the economy by allowing local en-
trepreneurs to obtain loans at lower credit entry costs i,t and by increasing the supply of
funds (i.e., deposits) through lower portfolio adjustment costs  i,t . In this section, we sepa-
rately quantify these two channels. In Online Appendix 3.7, we quantify their distributional
effects and welfare implications across markets.
     The black dashed and red dotted lines in Figure 14 represent the impacts through the
credit provision and deposit mobilization channels, respectively. To isolate the credit provision
channel (black dashed line), we only allow the credit entry cost i,t to decrease with new
branch openings, as we keep each market's portfolio adjustment cost  i,t fixed at its 1986
value. Similarly, to isolate the deposit mobilization channel (red dotted line), we only allow
 i,t to change, as we keep i,t fixed at its 1986 value.
     Panel A shows that the credit provision channel alone generates GDP growth of 66%
over the decade, compared with 3% cumulative GDP growth from the deposit mobilization
channel. The deposit mobilization channel does not seem to have a substantial impact on
GDP growth for two main reasons. First, the portfolio adjustment cost  (i,t ) weakly responds
to changes in the distance from the nearest bank branch i,t in our calibration, as suggested by

                                                           34
the data (columns (3) and (4) of Table 2). Second, the impact of reducing  i,t on GDP is only
realized gradually through households' endogenous accumulation of wealth. Such transitions
are very slow because of the high credit entry costs in these markets, as we discuss in Online
Appendix 3.4.
    Comparing the three lines in panel A, we find that there is complementarity between the
two channels. Although the deposit mobilization channel alone boosts GDP little in the short
run, it amplifies GDP growth through the credit provision channel. When the two channels
are both active, the cumulative GDP growth is 75%, which is larger than the sum of each
channel's separate effect (i.e., 66%+3% = 69%). Intuitively, deposit mobilization increases the
supply of funds (i.e., loans to entrepreneurs), leading to a lower interest rate. In the absence
of the credit provision channel, most markets face high credit entry costs i,t ; thus many
talented entrepreneurs do not have credit access. As a result, most of the additional funds
provided through deposit mobilization are absorbed by less talented entrepreneurs living in
markets that already had branches in 1986, exerting a limited impact on aggregate output. By
contrast, with the credit provision channel, most markets face low i,t after bank expansion,
which allows talented entrepreneurs to borrow more and expand their businesses in response
to a lower interest rate, improving the allocation of the additional funds.35
    Nearly all of the TFP growth from bank expansion is attributable to the credit provision
channel rather than the deposit mobilization channel (panel B). The credit provision channel
generates a much more significant impact on the promotion of entrepreneurship (panel F)
and reducing the fraction of farmers (panel G). The deposit mobilization channel has only
a minor impact. Moreover, the credit provision channel significantly boosts economy-wide
credit access ratio (panel C) whereas the deposit mobilization channel has little effect on
credit access decisions.36
    Regarding the distributional implications, panel D shows that the decreasing inequality
of credit access across markets is driven entirely by the credit provision channel. As panel
E shows, the deposit mobilization channel generates a steady increase in the income Gini
because easier access to bond investment mainly benefits wealthier households, which already
earn higher incomes. Thus, the hump-shaped Gini dynamics in panel E of Figure 8 are
  35 In Online Appendix 3.8, we provide more simulations to support these intuitions, and we show that the

complementarity is, crucially, attributable to spatial heterogeneity across markets. The complementarity also
appears for other variables; not only GDP growth. In general, the quantitative impacts of this complementarity
vary across variables. For example, there is strong complementarity in boosting the credit access ratio, as
the credit access ratio decreases if the deposit mobilization channel works alone because some households
accumulate sufficient wealth in interest-bearing accounts and become self-financed entrepreneurs. However, the
credit access ratio increases from 22% to 25.7% when the deposit mobilization channel is combined with the
credit provision channel. The complementarity effect on TFP is smaller primarily because of the low level of
TFP growth implied by the model.
  36 The deposit mobilization channel affects credit access decisions indirectly by allowing households to

accumulate wealth in interest-bearing accounts, and by changing interest rates and wages in equilibrium.

                                                     35
                                                                              28
             2.2                                                                                              0.6
                                              1.3
             1.9                                                              23
                                                                                                              0.4
                                              1.2
             1.6                                                              18

                                              1.1                                                             0.2
             1.3                                                              13

              1                                1                               8                               0
               86    88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96


            0.27                              19                              50                              14

                                              18
                                                                              40                              12
            0.25
                                              17
                                                                              30                              10
                                              16
            0.23
                                                                              20                               8
                                              15

            0.21                              14                              10                               6
                86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96




Note: The blue solid line represents the baseline model of bank expansion. The black dashed line quantifies
the credit provision channel, where only the credit entry cost i,t decreases with new branch openings and
each market's portfolio adjustment cost  i,t is fixed at its 1986 value. The red dotted line quantifies the deposit
mobilization channel, where only  i,t decreases with new branch openings while i,t is fixed at its 1986 value.

      Figure 14: Credit provision and deposit mobilization channels of bank expansion.


caused by the credit provision channel. At the aggregate level, these two channels impact
the economy by shifting the supply and demand curves of aggregate capital, and they have
opposite impacts on the equilibrium interest rate (panel H).


7     Digital Banking
Recent developments in fintech are leading to a new era of smart branchless banking. For
example, India launched the Digital India program in 2015 to provide paperless, cashless
and faceless services across the country. China announced the Internet Plus plan in 2015
to encourage the development of e-commerce, industrial networks, and Internet banking.
The Hong Kong Monetary Authority approved the launch of eight digital banks in 2020. In
November 2020, Brazil launched an instant payment platform (PIX) and mandated its use
by all financial institutions and payment institutions that are licensed by the Central Bank
of Brazil and have more than 500,000 active customer accounts. The introduction of "virtual
banking" licenses has allowed non-traditional financial service providers to engage in digital
banking without physical branches. Digital banking can increase financial inclusion for retail
customers and for small and medium-sized enterprises as it lowers transaction costs.
   As a final experiment, we use our model to predict what the subsequent transitional
dynamics would be if all of the transaction costs were set at zero (i.e., i,t =  i,t = 0 for all i)


                                                                         36
forever since 1986. Figure 15 compares the implications of this digital banking experiment
(black dashed line) with those of our baseline experiment with dynamic physical bank
expansion (blue solid line). Immediately after the economy switches to digital banking, GDP
and TFP increase significantly and continue to rise, reaching 136% and 27%, respectively,
in 1996. Both the short-run and long-run impacts of introducing digital banking are much
larger than the predictions of our baseline experiment with physical branches. The credit
access ratio increases to 100% and the credit access Gini falls to zero because of the absence
of transaction costs. As panel E shows, digital banking leads to a dramatic increase in the
income Gini coefficient in the first two years because of overshooting in the equilibrium
interest rate (black dashed line in panel H). However, in the long run, digital banking leads to
much lower income inequality. The changes in many dimensions are not instantaneous, as it
takes much longer than 10 years from the introduction of digital banking for the economy to
reach its new steady state, given the underlying dynamic decisions, capital accumulation, and
other factors. We present the full transitional dynamics and welfare implications of digital
banking in Online Appendix 3.9.
    To study the spatial implications of digital banking, in panel A of Figure 16, we plot the
regional GDP relative to the national average in 1996. The variation in regional GDP across
markets is fairly small, which indicates that the initial regional disparity in 1986 does not play
an important role after the introduction of digital banking. In comparison, panel B of Figure
16 shows that the variation in regional GDP across regions for the baseline bank expansion
remains large in 1996.
    The digital banking experiment in the model captures an important aspect of CBDC
administered through the commercial banking system.37 Under this system, retail payments
can be made entirely electronically, and there is no more paper currency. As shown in Figure
15, we conduct two more counterfactual experiments to provide a model-based estimate of
the impact. The green dotted line corresponds to the experiment in which  i,t is set at zero for
all markets i since 1986 but i,t decreases according to the baseline bank expansion. In this
experiment, households do not hold currency for consumption because they can always obtain
cash by making a free portfolio adjustment in the current period, which is effectively the
same as using deposits directly to buy consumption goods. Thus, this experiment quantifies
the deposit mobilization channel of CBDC. However, in the model, entrepreneurs may still
hold some currency to purchase capital at the beginning of the following period. If, on top
of reducing  i,t to zero, we also reduce the credit entry cost i,t to zero, as in the full digital
banking experiment (black dashed line), then the economy can entirely get rid of currency,
which corresponds to the broadest interpretation of CBDC.
  37 For   example, this is how CBDC is implemented in China.



                                                     37
              2.6                                                              100
                                               1.3                                                             0.6
              2.2                                                              80

                                               1.2                             60                              0.4
              1.8
                                                                               40
              1.4                              1.1                                                             0.2
                                                                               20
               1
                                                1                               0                               0
                86    88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96


                                               21                              50
             0.28
                                                                                                               25
                                               19                              40
             0.26
                                                                                                               20
             0.24                                                              30
                                               17
                                                                                                               15
             0.22                                                              20
                                               15                                                              10
              0.2                                                              10

             0.18                              13                               0                               5
                 86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96     86   88   90   92   94   96




Note: The blue solid line represents the baseline model with bank expansion. The black dashed line represents
the hypothetical experiment of introducing digital banking unexpectedly in 1986. We set all transaction costs to
zero forever starting from 1986, i.e., i,t =  i,t = 0 for all i. We further decompose the impact of introducing
digital banking using two counterfactual experiments. In the first experiment (green dotted line), we set portfolio
adjustment costs  i,t = 0 for all i starting from 1986, and we assume that the credit entry cost i,t decreases
across markets over time according to the baseline bank expansion. In the second experiment (red dash-dotted
line), we set i,t = 0 for all i starting from 1986, and we assume that  i,t decreases across markets over time
according to the baseline bank expansion.

                                          Figure 15: Transition to digital banking.


    We can further separate out the credit effect of digital banking. The red dash-dotted line
corresponds to the experiment in which i,t is set at zero for all markets i from 1986 onward,
but  i,t decreases according to the baseline bank expansion, which quantifies the impact of
digital banking through the credit provision channel.38 These experiments reveal that relative
to the baseline bank expansion (blue solid line), making portfolio adjustments free boosts
GDP growth by 10% (from 75% to 85%). By contrast, making credit entries free increases GDP
by 30% (from 75% to 105%). Again, there is a complementarity between the two channels,
because the total impact on GDP growth is 61% (136% - 75%), which is larger than the sum
of the effects of each (10% + 30% = 40%).


8      Conclusion
The interaction between spatial heterogeneity and financial deepening is central to a wide
range of important phenomena in the process of economic development. This paper develops
    38 We
        are reluctant to term this the credit effect of CBDC, although it is in the model. In reality, there are other
forms of credit costs such as the costs of processing credit applications, and screening borrowers, etc. These
costs do not disappear with the introduction of CBDC.


                                                                          38
                     A. Digital banking                               B. Baseline bank expansion




                                                                                           existing branch (86)
                                          existing branch (86)                             new branch (87-96)
                                          [0.25, 0.5)                                      [0.25, 0.5)
                                          [0.5, 0.75)                                      [0.5, 0.75)
                                          [0.75, 1)                                        [0.75, 1)
                                          [1, 1.25]                                        [1, 1.25]
                                          > 1.25                                           > 1.25
                                          province boundary                                province boundary




Note: Panel A plots the regional GDP relative to the national average (weighted by market size i ) in 1996 for
the digital banking experiment where i,t =  i,t = 0 for all i starting from 1986. For comparison, panel B plots
the regional GDP for the baseline bank expansion.


       Figure 16: Spatial implications of digital banking and baseline bank expansion.


a spatial equilibrium model with heterogeneous households to study economic transitions
accompanied by dynamic bank expansion, a departure from typical calibration exercises based
on models without geography. To make the model computable, we propose an algorithm that
solves the combinatorial problem of bank expansion numerically.
    We apply the model to Thai data for 1986 to 1996, calibrate it, and make predictions.
At the regional level, the model's predictions of the distribution of bank branches and the
spatial concentration of enterprises and bank loans are broadly consistent with the 1996
data. At the aggregate level, the model captures the secular trends in the transition of labor
from the agricultural sector to the manufacturing sector, burgeoning entrepreneurial activity,
hump-shaped income Gini dynamics, increasing credit access ratio, and decreasing credit
access inequality. Our confidence in the quantitative exercise is enhanced by the model's
ability to capture these micro and macro facts.
    The model reveals that regional heterogeneity plays a crucial role in shaping the dynamics
of GDP and inequality and the flow of funds across local spatial markets. Moreover, there
is complementarity between the deposit mobilization and credit provision channels of bank

                                                                 39
expansion. Although the deposit mobilization channel alone plays little role in boosting
GDP growth, it significantly amplifies the impact of the credit provision channel. Finally, we
apply the model to evaluate digital banking, which greatly reduces regional heterogeneity,
quantifying the roles of deposit costs and credit costs and the complementarity between the
two.
    Our model should be viewed as a step toward better understanding bank expansion and
financial deepening across regions. For tractability, we must omit certain factors. We do
not address potential spillovers, the role of technological diffusion, or costly migration. The
framework that we propose in this paper can be enhanced in future research to clarify the
roles of these forces in spatial development.

References
Abiad, Abdul, Nienke Oomes, and Kenichi Ueda. 2008. "The quality effect: Does financial liberalization
  improve the allocation of capital?" Journal of Development Economics, 87(2): 270­282.
Agarwal, Sumit, Abhiroop Mukherjee, and S. Lakshmi Naaraayanan. 2019. "Roads and Loans." Working
  Papers.
Aguirregabiria, Victor, Robert Clark, and Hui Wang. 2016. "Diversification of geographic risk in retail bank
  networks: evidence from bank expansion after the Riegle-Neal Act." RAND Journal of Economics, 47(3): 529­572.
Ahn, SeHyoun, Greg Kaplan, Benjamin Moll, Thomas Winberry, and Christian Wolf. 2018. "When Inequality
  Matters for Macro and Macro Matters for Inequality." NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 32(1): 1­75.
Alvarez, Fernando, Andrew Atkeson, and Chris Edmond. 2009. "Sluggish Responses of Prices and Inflation to
  Monetary Shocks in an Inventory Model of Money Demand." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3): 911­
  967.
Alves, Felipe, Greg Kaplan, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2020. "A Further Look at the Propaga-
  tion of Monetary Policy Shocks in HANK." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 52(S2): 521­559.
Amaral, Pedro S., and Erwan Quintin. 2010. "Limited Enforcement, Financial Intermediation, And Economic
  Development: A Quantitative Assessment." International Economic Review, 51(3): 785­811.
Auclert, Adrien. 2019. "Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel." American Economic Review,
  109(6): 2333­2367.
Auclert, Adrien, Matthew Rognlie, and Ludwig Straub. 2020. "Micro Jumps, Macro Humps: Monetary Policy
  and Business Cycles in an Estimated HANK Model." National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER
  Working Papers 26647.
Augsburg, Britta, Ralph De Haas, Heike Harmgart, and Costas Meghir. 2015. "The Impacts of Microcredit:
  Evidence from Bosnia and Herzegovina." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 183­203.
Bandiera, Oriana, Gerard Caprio, Patrick Honohan, and Fabio Schiantarelli. 2000. "Does Financial Reform
  Raise or Reduce Saving?" The Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(2): 239­263.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan. 2015. "The Miracle of Microfinance?
  Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 22­53.
Banerjee, Abhijit V, and Andrew F Newman. 1993. "Occupational Choice and the Process of Development."
  Journal of Political Economy, 101(2): 274­98.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Esther Duflo. 2014. "Do Firms Want to Borrow More? Testing Credit Constraints
  Using a Directed Lending Program." Review of Economic Studies, 81(2): 572­607.
Baumol, William J. 1952. "The Transactions Demand for Cash: An Inventory Theoretic Approach." Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 66: 545­556.
Bayer, Christian, Ralph Luetticke, Lien Pham-Dao, and Volker Tjaden. 2019. "Precautionary Savings, Illiquid
  Assets, and the Aggregate Consequences of Shocks to Household Income Risk." Econometrica, 87(1): 255­290.
Bergquist, Lauren Falcao, Benjamin Faber, Thibault Fally, Matthias Hoelzlein, Edward Miguel, and Andres
  Rodriguez-Clare. 2020. "Scaling Agricultural Policy Interventions: Theory and Evidence from Uganda."
  Working Paper.
Black, Sandra E., and Philip E. Strahan. 2002. "Entrepreneurship and Bank Credit Availability." Journal of
  Finance, 57(6): 2807­2833.



                                                     40
Blanchard, Olivier, and Michael Kremer. 1996. "Disorganization." Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT),
   Department of Economics Working papers.
Buera, Francisco J., and Yongseok Shin. 2011. "Self-insurance vs. self-financing: A welfare analysis of the
   persistence of shocks." Journal of Economic Theory, 146(3): 845­862.
Buera, Francisco J., and Yongseok Shin. 2013. "Financial Frictions and the Persistence of History: A Quantitative
   Exploration." Journal of Political Economy, 121(2): 221 ­ 272.
Buera, Francisco J., Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin. 2011. "Finance and Development: A Tale of Two
   Sectors." American Economic Review, 101(5): 1964­2002.
Burgess, Robin, and Rohini Pande. 2005. "Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from the Indian Social Banking
   Experiment." American Economic Review, 95(3): 780­795.
Cagetti, Marco, and Mariacristina De Nardi. 2006. "Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth." Journal of Political
   Economy, 114(5): 835­870.
Cetorelli, Nicola, and Philip E. Strahan. 2006. "Finance as a Barrier to Entry: Bank Competition and Industry
   Structure in Local U.S. Markets." Journal of Finance, 61(1): 437­461.
Cheremukhin, Anton, Mikhail Golosov, Sergei Guriev, and Aleh Tsyvinski. 2015. "The Economy of People's
   Republic of China from 1953." National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER Working Papers 21397.
Cheremukhin, Anton, Mikhail Golosov, Sergei Guriev, and Aleh Tsyvinski. 2017. "The Industrialization and
   Economic Development of Russia through the Lens of a Neoclassical Growth Model." Review of Economic
   Studies, 84(2): 613­649.
Célerier, Claire, and Adrien Matray. 2019. "Bank-Branch Supply, Financial Inclusion, and Wealth Accumulation."
   Review of Financial Studies, 32(12): 4767­4809.
Corbae, Dean, and Pablo D'Erasmo. 2019. "Capital Requirements in a Quantitative Model of Banking Industry
   Dynamics." National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER Working Papers 25424.
Dabla-Norris, Era, Yan Ji, Robert M. Townsend, and D. Filiz Unsal. 2020. "Distinguishing Constraints on
   Financial Inclusion and Their Impact on GDP, TFP, and The Distribution of Income." Journal of Monetary
   Economy, forthcoming.
Desmet, Klaus, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2014. "Spatial Development." American Economic Review,
  104(4): 1211­1243.
Desmet, Klaus, Dávid Krisztián Nagy, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2018. "The Geography of Development."
   Journal of Political Economy, 126(3): 903 ­ 983.
Doepke, Matthias, and Martin Schneider. 2006. "Inflation and the Redistribution of Nominal Wealth." Journal
   of Political Economy, 114(6): 1069­1097.
Felkner, John S., and Robert M. Townsend. 2011. "The Geographic Concentration of Enterprise in Developing
   Countries." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4): 2005­2061.
Fry, Maxwell J. 1995. Money, interest, and banking in economic development. Johns Hopkins University Press.
Furman, Jason. 2016. "Financial Inclusion in the United States." Council of Economic Advisers Issue Brief.
Fuster, Andreas, Greg Kaplan, and Basit Zafar. 2021. "What Would You Do with $500? Spending Responses to
   Gains, Losses, News, and Loans." Review of Economic Studies, , (0): 1­36.
Gine, Xavier, and Robert M. Townsend. 2004. "Evaluation of financial liberalization: a general equilibrium
   model with constrained occupation choice." Journal of Development Economics, 74(2): 269­307.
Greenwood, Jeremy, and Boyan Jovanovic. 1990. "Financial Development, Growth, and the Distribution of
   Income." Journal of Political Economy, 98(5): 1076­1107.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Juan M. Sanchez, and Cheng Wang. 2010. "Financing Development: The Role of Informa-
   tion Costs." American Economic Review, 100(4): 1875­91.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Juan Sanchez, and Cheng Wang. 2013. "Quantifying the Impact of Financial Development
   on Economic Development." Review of Economic Dynamics, 16(1): 194­215.
Guvenen, Fatih. 2011. "Macroeconomics with hetereogeneity : a practical guide." Economic Quarterly, 97(3Q): 255­
   326.
Guvenen, Fatih, Fatih Karahan, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song. 2015. "What Do Data on Millions of U.S. Workers
   Reveal about Life-Cycle Earnings Dynamics?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 710.
Guvenen, Fatih, Greg Kaplan, Jae Song, and Justin Weidner. 2017. "Lifetime Incomes in the United States
   over Six Decades." National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER Working Papers 23371.
Heathcote, Jonathan, and Fabrizio Perri. 2018. "Wealth and Volatility." Review of Economic Studies, 85(4): 2173­
   2213.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2009. "Quantitative Macroeconomics with
   Heterogeneous Households." Annual Review of Economics, 1(1): 319­354.
Hirschman, Albert O. 1958. The Strategy of Economic Development. MIT Press Books, New Haven, CT: Yale
   University Press.
Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip E Strahan. 1996. "The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank Branch Deregu-
   lation." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(3): 639­70.


                                                      41
Jeong, Hyeok, and Robert M. Townsend. 2008. "Growth And Inequality: Model Evaluation Based On An
   Estimation-Calibration Strategy." Macroeconomic Dynamics, 12(S2): 231­284.
Jermann, Urban, and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2012. "Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks." American Eco-
   nomic Review, 102(1): 238­271.
Jia, Panle. 2008. "What Happens When Wal-Mart Comes to Town: An Empirical Analysis of the Discount
   Retailing Industry." Econometrica, 76(6): 1263­1316.
Jones, Charles I. 2011. "Intermediate Goods and Weak Links in the Theory of Economic Development." American
   Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(2): 1­28.
Jones, Charles I. 2013. "Misallocation, Economic Growth, and Input-Output Economics." , ed. Daron Acemoglu,
   Manuel Arellano and Eddie Dekel Vol. II of Advances in Economics and Econometrics, 419­454. Cambridge
   University Press.
Jones, Charles I., and Peter J. Klenow. 2016. "Beyond GDP? Welfare across Countries and Time." American
   Economic Review, 106(9): 2426­2457.
Kaboski, Joseph P., and Robert M. Townsend. 2011. "A Structural Evaluation of a Large-Scale Quasi-
   Experimental Microfinance Initiative." Econometrica, 79(5): 1357­1406.
Kaboski, Joseph P., and Robert M. Townsend. 2012. "The Impact of Credit on Village Economies." American
   Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(2): 98­133.
Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2014. "A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal Stimulus
   Payments." Econometrica, 82(4): 1199­1239.
Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2018. "Microeconomic Heterogeneity and Macroeconomic Shocks."
   Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(3): 167­194.
Kaplan, Greg, and Guido Menzio. 2015. "The Morphology Of Price Dispersion." International Economic Review,
   56: 1165­1206.
Kaplan, Greg, and Guido Menzio. 2016. "Shopping Externalities and Self-Fulfilling Unemployment Fluctua-
   tions." Journal of Political Economy, 124(3): 771­825.
Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2018. "Monetary Policy According to HANK."
   American Economic Review, 108(3): 697­743.
Kaplan, Greg, Giovanni L. Violante, and Justin Weidner. 2014. "The Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth." Brookings
   Papers on Economic Activity, 45(1 (Spring): 77­153.
Kaplan, Greg, Guido Menzio, Leena Rudanko, and Nicholas Trachter. 2019. "Relative Price Dispersion:
   Evidence and Theory." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 11(3): 68­124.
Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2020. "The Housing Boom and Bust: Model Meets
   Evidence." Journal of Political Economy, 128(9): 3285­3345.
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2009. "Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information Asymmetries
   With a Consumer Credit Field Experiment." Econometrica, 77(6): 1993­2008.
Kerr, William R., and Ramana Nanda. 2009. "Democratizing entry: Banking deregulations, financing constraints,
   and entrepreneurship." Journal of Financial Economics, 94(1): 124­149.
King, Robert G., and Ross Levine. 1994. "Capital fundamentalism, economic development, and economic
   growth." Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 40(1): 259­292.
Kremer, Michael. 1993. "The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   108(3): 551­575.
Lloyd-Ellis, Huw, and Dan Bernhardt. 2000. "Enterprise, Inequality and Economic Development." Review of
   Economic Studies, 67(1): 147­68.
Menzio, Guido, and Nicholas Trachter. 2015. "Equilibrium price dispersion with sequential search." Journal of
   Economic Theory, 160(C): 188­215.
Menzio, Guido, and Nicholas Trachter. 2018. "Equilibrium Price Dispersion Across and Within Stores." Review
   of Economic Dynamics, 28: 205­220.
Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2013. "Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic
   Slump." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4): 1687­1726.
Midrigan, Virgiliu, and Daniel Yi Xu. 2014. "Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-Level Data."
   American Economic Review, 104(2): 422­458.
Miller, Merton H., and Daniel Orr. 1966. "A Model of the Demand for Money by Firms." The Quarterly Journal
   of Economics, 80(3): 413­435.
Moll, Benjamin. 2014. "Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-Financing Undo Capital Misallo-
   cation?" American Economic Review, 104(10): 3186­3221.
Moll, Benjamin, Robert Townsend, and Victor Zhorin. 2017. "Economic Development, Flow of Funds
   and the Equilibrium Interaction of Financial Frictions." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
   114(24): 6176­6184.
Monte, Ferdinando, Stephen J. Redding, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2018. "Commuting, Migration, and
   Local Employment Elasticities." American Economic Review, 108(12): 3855­3890.


                                                    42
Nguyen, Hoai-Luu Q. 2019. "Are Credit Markets Still Local? Evidence from Bank Branch Closings." American
   Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(1): 1­32.
OECD. 2016. "Regional development: Policies to promote catching up." OECD Regional Outlook 2016: Productive
   Regions for Inclusive Societies, Chapter 2, 91­136. OECD Publishing.
Paulson, Anna L., and Robert Townsend. 2004. "Entrepreneurship and financial constraints in Thailand."
   Journal of Corporate Finance, 10(2): 229­262.
Paweenawat, Archawa, and Robert M. Townsend. 2019. "The Impact of Regional Isolationism: Disentangling
   Real and Financial Factors." Department of Economics, MIT Working paper.
Pitt, Mark M., and Shahidur R. Khandker. 1998. "The Impact of Group-Based Credit Programs on Poor
   Households in Bangladesh: Does the Gender of Participants Matter?" Journal of Political Economy, 106(5): 958­
   996.
Quadrini, Vincenzo. 2000. "Entrepreneurship, Saving and Social Mobility." Review of Economic Dynamics,
   3(1): 1­40.
Redding, Stephen J., and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2017. "Quantitative Spatial Economics." Annual Review of
   Economics, 9(1): 21­58.
Rysman, Marc, Robert M. Townsend, and Christoph Walsh. 2021. "Branch Location Strategies for Thai Banks
   and Access to Financial Services." Working Papers.
Samphantharak, Krislert, and Robert M. Townsend. 2009. Households as Corporate Firms. Cambridge University
   Press.
Tobin, James. 1956. "The Interest Elasticity of the Transactions Demand for Cash." Review of Economics and
   Statistics, 66: 241­247.
Townsend, Robert M., and Kenichi Ueda. 2006. "Financial Deepening, Inequality, and Growth: A Model-Based
   Quantitative Evaluation." Review of Economic Studies, 73(1): 251­293.
Wang, Olivier. 2020. "Banks, low interest rates, and monetary policy transmission." New York University
   Working Paper.




                                                      43
