                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  OLD BOYS' CLUBS AND UPWARD MOBILITY AMONG
                             THE EDUCATIONAL ELITE

                                      Valerie Michelman
                                          Joseph Price
                                      Seth D. Zimmerman

                                      Working Paper 28583
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28583


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 2021, Revised July 2021




Previously circulated under the title "The Distribution of and Returns to Social Success at Elite
Universities." We thank Ran Abramitzky, Anjali Adukia, Joseph Altonji, Marianne Bertrand, Raj
Chetty, Jeff Denning, Susan Dynarski, John Friedman, Peter Ganong, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham,
Larry Katz, Christopher Neilson, Santiago Perez, Bruce Sacerdote, and numerous seminar
participants for feedback. We thank Mckay Jensen, Jan Knuf, Nathan Kyn, Jordan Rosenthal-
Kay, Katherine Stevens, Merrill Warnick, and Jacob van Leeuwen for research assistance.
Michelman gratefully acknowledges support from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation,
awarded through the NBER, and from the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
Education, through Grant Number: R305B140048 at the University of Chicago. The opinions
expressed are those of the authors and do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S.
Department of Education. Zimmerman gratefully acknowledges support from the Richard N.
Rosett Faculty Fellowship at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Valerie Michelman, Joseph Price, and Seth D. Zimmerman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Old Boys' Clubs and Upward Mobility Among the Educational Elite
Valerie Michelman, Joseph Price, and Seth D. Zimmerman
NBER Working Paper No. 28583
March 2021, Revised July 2021
JEL No. I24,I26,J24

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper studies how exclusive social groups shape upward mobility and whether interactions
between low- and high-status peers can integrate the top rungs of the economic and social
ladders. Our setting is Harvard in the 1920s and 1930s, where new groups of students arriving on
campus encountered a social system centered on exclusive old boys' clubs. We combine archival
and Census records of students' college lives and careers with a room-randomization design
based on a scaled residential integration policy. We first show that high-status students from
prestigious private high schools perform worse academically than other students but are more
likely to join exclusive campus clubs. Club members go on to earn 32% more than other students
and are more likely to work in finance and join country clubs, both characteristic of the era's
elite. The membership premium persists after conditioning on high school, legacy status, and
even family. Random assignment to high-status peers increases participation in exclusive college
clubs, but overall effects are driven entirely by large gains for private school students. In the long
run, a 50 percentile increase in residential peer group status raises the rate at which private school
students work in finance by 40% and their membership in adult social clubs by 26%. We
conclude that social interactions among the educational elite mediated access to top positions in
the post-war United States but did not provide a path to these positions for underrepresented
groups. Turning to recent cohorts, we show that while Harvard students differ from the past in
their racial, ethnic, and gender composition, gaps in academic outcomes by high school type
persist, and elite university students from the highest-income families continue to earn more than
others.

Valerie Michelman                                 Seth D. Zimmerman
Harris School of Public Policy                    Yale School of Management
The University of Chicago                         Yale University
1307 East 60th Street                             165 Whitney Ave
Chicago, IL 60637                                 New Haven, CT 06511
vmichelman@uchicago.edu                           and NBER
                                                  seth.zimmerman@yale.edu
Joseph Price
Department of Economics
Brigham Young University
162 FOB
Provo, UT 84602
and NBER
joseph_price@byu.edu


An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28583
1     Introduction
Economic elites disproportionately come from a small number of social, educational, and busi-
ness institutions, and there is growing evidence that peer interactions at these institutions affect
access to and performance in top jobs.1 Together, these two facts suggest that upward mobility to
top rungs of the economic and social ladder may depend on whether people from lower-status
backgrounds can access elite social networks or "old boys' clubs." Though old boys' clubs are
central to qualitative accounts of elite "closure"--the idea that social groups restrict access to op-
portunity on the basis of shared traits and experiences--there is little quantitative evidence on
who can join these groups and how they shape outcomes over the long run.2 A key challenge is
the lack of data identifying actual and potential group members and tracing their life trajectories.
    This paper provides new evidence on how exclusive social groups shape upward mobility
and whether interactions between low- and high-status peers can integrate top positions in the
economy and society. We focus on elite universities, where talented lower-status students in-
teract with disproportionately high-status peers and encounter the old boys' clubs upon which
career opportunities may depend. We construct new data on Harvard students in the 1920s and
1930s, who go on to lead business and civic institutions at the dawn of the post-war "Ameri-
can Century" (Luce, 1941; Mills, 1956; Galbraith, 1958). We link records of students' social and
academic lives at college to the 1940 Census and to biographical reports compiled 25 years after
graduation, and pair these data with two research designs. Our first design takes a selection-on-
observables approach using a rich control set, including legacy status, family fixed effects, and
comparison groups of near-miss club applicants. Our second draws on a room randomization
policy in which administrators assigned students to widely varying residential peer groups.
    We have three main findings. First, students from high-status backgrounds are more likely to
join exclusive campus clubs than low-status students, but are less likely to succeed in the class-
room. Second, the labor market premium for club membership is much larger than the premium
for academic success. Third, exposure to high-status college peers pushes high-status students
towards high-status paths in their social and professional lives, but does not affect students from
less privileged backgrounds, thus reinforcing rather than reducing inequality. We conclude that
social interactions with high-status peers help pave the road to the top, but that even prolonged
close contact may fail to spark these connections across group boundaries.
    Harvard in the early 20th century has three features that make it ideal for studying exclusive
social institutions. The first is the prominence on campus of some of the best-documented and
oldest old boys' clubs in the US. Social life at Harvard centered on exclusive organizations known
as final clubs, so-called because they are the last clubs one joins as a Harvard student. These
    1 Backgrounds of elites: Miller (1950), Useem and Karabel (1986), Temin (1999), Cappelli and Hamori (2004), Reeves
et al. (2017). Top jobs: Cohen et al. (2008), Fracassi and Tate (2012), Shue (2013), Xu (2018), and Zimmerman (2019).
    2 See e.g. Weber (1922), Bourdieu (1998), Tilly et al. (1998), and Bol and Weeden (2015) or Khan (2012) for a review.




                                                           1
clubs, which Amory (1947) describes as the "be-alls and end-alls of Harvard social existence,"
are hundreds of years old and count among their members multiple US Presidents. Final clubs
still exist today, and are often described in similar terms.3
   The second feature helping our analysis is that we can observe how students from different
backgrounds interact on campus, and how these interactions depend on policy choices. By the
1920s, Harvard had attempted a variety of measures aimed at bringing to campus students from
outside its traditional constituency at high-status, high-tuition private feeder schools. Admin-
istrators supplemented these policies with residential life measures aimed at integrating social
life across class lines. Randomized room assignment was one such measure.4 Though Harvard
excluded women and limited enrollment by non-white and Jewish students, there was substan-
tial economic diversity, and residential policies pushed students from different backgrounds into
close contact with one another.
   The third helpful feature is that the lives of Harvard students in the 1920s and 1930s are
richly and publicly documented. Records held in the Harvard archives describe students' so-
cial, academic, and career outcomes. We digitize these records for students entering Harvard
between 1919 and 1935. Yearbooks and club rosters describe students' family and high school
background, their residential lives at Harvard, and their engagement in social activities. Records
of class rank divide students into groups based on academic performance. For long run out-
comes, 25th Reunion Class Reports assemble self-reports and reports from class officers into
biographical accounts of family life, occupation, and social activities. We also link the Harvard
data to Census records from 1910 through 1940, using crowdsourced family trees from the Fam-
ilySearch platform to obtain high match rates at reduced cost.
   We begin by describing how academic and social success in college vary with baseline social
status. Following historical and contemporary accounts that emphasize the importance of high
school background as a measure of pre-college social standing, we divide students by the kind
of high school they attended. We focus on eight private feeder high schools that send many
students to Harvard and are identified with high social status in qualitative accounts. Students
from these schools make up 24% of our sample.
   Students from private feeder schools are more socially engaged than other students, but do
worse in school. On average, private feeder students participate in 1.67 extracurricular activities
in their first year of college, compared to 0.85 for other students. 13.4% of private feeder students
hold activity leadership positions and 19.7% participate in social committees, compared to 4.7%
and 2.1%, respectively, for other students. In contrast with their social success, private feeder
   3 Nir (2016) writes that final clubs are the "apex of social life at Harvard," while a 2017 faculty committee described

final clubs as "impossible to escape-- even for those who wish to have nothing to do with them" (CUSGGO 2017).
   4 Harvard President Charles Eliot stated in 1903 that "it is to the last degree undesirable that colleges should be

accessible only to the well-to-do." In 1902, future President Lawrence Lowell cited integration of rich and poor
students in dormitories as "the chief value of the College . . . for the training of character" (Karabel, 2006, p45-47).



                                                            2
students are 56% more likely than other students to have grades in the lowest rank group (the
bottom 15% of the class) and 51% less likely to have grades in the top two groups (the top 8%).
   Pre-college socioeconomic status (SES) combines with early-college social and academic out-
comes to drive selection into the exclusive upper year final clubs. We document a social ladder
that starts with the full first-year class, continues into a prestigious sophomore society known as
Hasty Pudding, and finishes with a selective final club. At each rung, the share of private feeder
students rises, and the share of students with high grades falls. 73% of final club members at-
tended private feeder high schools, compared to 1% from public feeders. Ethnic diversity also
falls. The share of students with identifiable Jewish names falls from 6.6% at Harvard to 0.2% in
selective final clubs, while the share with "Colonial" surnames-- those common in 18th century
Massachusetts relative to the contemporary population-- rises sharply.
   Our second contribution is to describe the labor market premium associated with final club
membership and compare it to the academic success premium. The final club premium is much
larger than the academic success premium. Final club members in the lowest academic rank
group earn 27% more than non-members in the top two groups and are 3.3 times as likely to
have topcoded earnings, corresponding to the top 0.7 percent of the population distribution.
   The final club membership premium is not driven by selection into clubs on the basis of
high school type, high school identity, Harvard legacy status, family, or general engagement
with social life at Harvard. We identify families that sent multiple sons to Harvard during our
sample period and estimate specifications with family fixed effects. Brothers who are members
of selective final clubs earn 42% more than brothers who are not, and are 2.6 times as likely to
report topcoded incomes. Specifications comparing final club members to "near-missers" who
join Hasty Pudding but are not selected for final club membership yield similar conclusions.
   In addition to earnings levels, final club membership is associated with different career and
social outcomes 25 years after graduation. Members of selective final clubs are 2.9 times more
likely to work in finance and 49% less likely to work in medicine. Final club members are also
more likely to join organizations like country clubs-- important features of mid-century social
life (Mills, 1956; Putnam, 2000). Overall, our descriptive evidence shows that while students
from rich families tend to be socially successful, social success is distinct from wealth in its long-
run effects, and may expand gaps in long-run outcomes by baseline social status.
   Our third contribution is to assess whether policies adopted in pursuit of social cohesion on
campus affect the distribution of club membership and long-run career outcomes. Our approach
relies on a room randomization scheme for freshman dormitories that Harvard administrators
used to integrate campus social life. Students submitted housing applications indicating accept-
able prices and room types. Students could apply with roommates, so roommate assignments
were not random, but conditional on room price and occupancy, room assignments were made
by lot. Our analysis of this randomized design provides a test of both the specific policy that


                                                  3
Harvard used to promote cross-group interaction and of the general proposition that social in-
teractions shape high-stakes outcomes.
   We identify high- and low-priced peer neighborhoods based on dorm maps, and evaluate
the effect of assignment to a high-priced neighborhood on short-, medium-, and long-run out-
comes. One way to think of this research design, which leverages systematic differences in peer
neighborhoods driven by dorm layouts, is as a Moving to Opportunity experiment on the Har-
vard campus (Katz et al., 2001; Ludwig et al., 2013; Chetty et al., 2016). Consistent with archival
accounts of the assignment process, controls for randomization blocks (defined by room type
and price) eliminate the cross-sectional relationship between the average neighborhood room
price and own baseline characteristics. Neighborhood price is strongly correlated with peer at-
tributes and varies widely within randomization blocks. A 50 percentile increase in neighbor-
hood price-- well within the support of our random variation-- raises students' peer private
feeder share by 10.0 percentage points, 32.0% of the sample mean.
   We find that exposure to high-status peers helps students achieve social success in college, but
that overall effects are driven entirely by large gains for private feeder students. A 50 percentile
shift in the room price distribution raises membership in selective final clubs by 3.2 percentage
points in the full sample (34.2% of the mean). For private feeder students, the same shift raises
membership by 8.4 percentage points (37.8%), while effects for other students are a precise zero.
These effects build on similar patterns we observe starting in students' first year at college. A
50-percentile increase in neighborhood price raises the count of first-year activities by 11.2%
overall, with larger gains for private feeder students and small, statistically insignificant effects
for others. Looking across activities, effects are largest for leadership roles, where baseline gaps
in participation by high school type are also largest.
   The effects of college peers persist over the long run. 25 years after graduation, a 50 percentile
change in peer neighborhood price raises the chance that students participate in adult social
organizations by 8.7%. As with on-campus clubs, the overall long-run effects are driven entirely
by large gains (26.1%) for private feeder students, with near-zero effects for others. Turning to
occupations, a 50 percentile change in neighborhood price rank raises the share of private feeder
students in finance by 7.2 percentage points, 39.7% of the group mean. This change is offset
by small declines in academic, medical, and legal careers. For other students, these effects are
reversed: exposure to high-status peers pushes them away from finance and towards medicine.
   A thread running through our findings is that exposure to high-status peers pushes private
school students, but not other students, to act in private school-typical ways. The campus ac-
tivities, adult social organizations, and occupations towards which private school students shift
are those where private feeder students are disproportionately represented. We summarize this
behavior using standardized linear indices of the extent to which different outcomes predict that
a student attended a private feeder school. A 50 percentile change in peer neighborhood price


                                                 4
raises the private school index for first year activities by 0.24 for private feeder students. The
same shift raises the upper year club index by 0.18, the long-run social index by 0.16, and
the occupation index by 0.22. For other students, index effects are near zero for each outcome
except for the occupation index, which shifts down by 0.08. Because of its asymmetric effect on
private feeder students, exposure to high-status peers reinforces social and career segregation.
   The final part of the paper examines how outcomes for Harvard students have changed across
the 20th century. We extend our data on academic and career outcomes through the class of 1990,
for whom we observe occupation in 2015. Harvard changes profoundly over this time, enrolling
women and many more non-white students. However, cross-group differences in academic per-
formance persist. Public feeder students outperform private feeder students and Jewish students
outperform Colonial students over the full 1924-1990 period. Differences in career outcomes
change shape. Finance career choices by high school type and ethnicity converge, while gaps in
academic careers and MBA receipt emerge, and gaps in medical careers remain large.
   Overall, students from high-income families at elite universities continue to earn more than
other students at those universities. We illustrate this using public data from Chetty et al. (2020)
on earnings for students born in the 1980s who enroll at Ivy+ colleges, split by parent income
percentile. While child income is flat in parent income for most of the income distribution, it
rises steeply above the 95th percentile. Ivy+ students with parent incomes between the 99th
and 99.9th percentile earn 33% more on average than students with parents between the 90th
and 95th percentiles. Students with top 0.1% parents earn 76% more. These findings do not
prove that the social channels we document in Greatest Generation cohorts persist in the same
form today. However, they are consistent with recent descriptions of social interactions among
high-status students at elite schools affecting career outcomes (Rivera, 2016; Jack, 2019).
   Our findings contribute to several strands of work. First, a large body of research studies
how the colleges students attend affect how much they earn.5 We contribute by unpacking the
production function within elite colleges and providing evidence that the determinants of career
success are different for children from the richest families. Our within-institution results are not
in tension with the common finding that the returns to between-college differences in selectivity
are large for low-SES students. What our findings do suggest is that gains for lower-SES students
from attending elite colleges may be mediated more by professional careers (like medicine) than
by elite business jobs. This is consistent with Zimmerman (2019), who shows that the gains from
admission to elite business programs accrue only to high-SES students, while admission to med-
ical programs raises earnings across SES groups but does not increase top income attainment. A
focus on top outcomes is important because top income shares are large (Alvaredo et al., 2013,
2017) and because people in top positions set firm policies and serve as role models (Matsa and
   5 See Dale and Krueger (2002, 2014); Black and Smith (2006); Hoekstra (2009); Zimmerman (2014); Hoxby (2018);

Dillon and Smith (2017); Chetty et al. (2020); Sekhri (2020); Mountjoy and Hickman (2020); Bleemer (2020).



                                                       5
Miller, 2013; Bertrand et al., 2019). Whether policies that diversify selective universities ulti-
mately diversify top jobs may depend on social integration as well as academic match.6
    Second, our findings suggest limits on what policies expanding intergroup contact can achieve
when the stakes are high. A growing literature provides proof of concept that cooperative in-
tergroup interactions can increase cross-group socializing and survey measures of intergroup
cohesion in low- and medium-stakes settings (Carrell et al., 2019; Rao, 2019; Lowe, 2020; Mousa,
2020), consistent with Allport (1954)'s "contact hypothesis."7 We find no evidence that increased
cross-group exposure helps lower-status students access exclusive social groups. Further, high
status students assigned low status peers are no more likely to join social groups with low status
students; they just participate less in high status-typical social groups. Our results have more in
common with Zimmerman (2019)'s finding that college peers from high-SES backgrounds serve
on firm leadership teams together, but not with lower-SES peers.
    Third, this paper presents the first evidence (to our knowledge) on how residential assign-
ment at school shapes students' long-run outcomes. Many studies use college room randomiza-
tion designs to explore how peers affect outcomes measured while students are in school (Sac-
erdote, 2001; Zimmerman, 2003; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2006; Lyle, 2007; Carrell et al.,
2009; Mehta et al., 2019; Z´
                           arate, 2019; Jones and Kofoed, 2020). We elevate this work by showing
that the short-run shifts matter in the long run. Our finding that exposure to high-status peers
augments baseline group differences is consistent with previous studies of homophily in college
peer groups (Marmaros and Sacerdote, 2006; Mayer and Puller, 2008; Carrell et al., 2013).8
    Fourth, we provide quantitative evidence linking the economic literature on assimilation in
the pre-1920s "age of mass migration" with studies of a persistent Protestant elite in the post-
war period (Abramitzky et al., 2012, 2014, 2020a,b; Baltzell, 1964; Zweigenhaft and Domhoff,
1982; Davidson et al., 1995). We highlight how social institutions limited the assimilation of Jews
and Catholics into the post-war elite. Our findings help explain the sustained media (New York
Times, 1907; McWilliams, 1948; Auchincloss, 1958; Rimer, 1993; Flanagan, 2016), academic (Mar-
maros and Sacerdote, 2002; Popov and Bernhardt, 2012), and literary (Fitzgerald, 1920) footprint
of final clubs and similar groups, such as secret societies at Yale and eating clubs at Princeton.


2     Institutions
We study Harvard students in the 1920s and 1930s. This setting provides a richly-documented
vantage point on the role of social sorting in the creation of post-war elites. We start by describ-
    6 SeeRothstein and Yoon (2008a,b); Arcidiacono et al. (2016); Arcidiacono and Lovenheim (2016).
    7 Seealso Boisjoly et al. (2006), Corno et al. (2019), Finseraas and Kotsadam (2017), and Paluck et al. (2019).
   8 Shue (2013) studies classroom peers at Harvard Business School, but focuses on management practices for stu-

dents in top jobs, not on how peers effect career paths. Carrell et al. (2018) and Einio   ¨ (2019) consider the long-run
effects of primary school and military peers, respectively.



                                                           6
ing the institutions that shaped Harvard during this period, many of which persist today. We
focus our discussion on two institutional features. The first is Harvard administrators' effort
to increase the economic diversity of on-campus interactions through admissions and housing
policies while continuing to attract private school applicants. The second is the role of exclusive
private clubs in campus social life. We draw on primary sources, histories of admissions policy
(Karabel, 2006; Synott, 1979), and Amory's (1947) account of the Harvard club system.9
   Harvard administrators in the 1920s and 1930s considered both academic and social factors
when designing admissions policy. In practice, this meant trying to bring in more students from
public schools while limiting the number of Jewish students, who they viewed as socially un-
desirable and likely to make recruiting private school students more difficult.10 One policy of
this type was the "Top Seventh" plan, adopted in 1923, which guaranteed admission to any high
school student in the top seventh of his class (RPTHC 1922­23, p. 290). In 1926, unable to achieve
its goals with academic admissions requirements alone, Harvard adopted non-academic criteria
for the first time (RPTHC 1925­1926, p. 298). This approach persists: the 2020 Harvard admis-
sions office evaluates applicants on the basis of questions like "would other students want to
room with you, share a meal. . . or collaborate in a closely-knit extracurricular group?"11
   Once students were on campus, residential policy was the main lever for promoting cross-
group student interactions. Concerned that wealthy students were isolating themselves in off
campus houses, Harvard opened new dormitories for first-year students in 1914.12 Rooms at
different price levels were often in close proximity, a design feature that administrators tied to
goals of social integration (RPHC 1929­1930 p. 101). As an additional step toward this goal,
rooms were assigned at random from at least 1922 through 1941. We describe the randomization
process in Section 5.1 and present documentation in Online Appendix B.
   Administrative efforts to integrate social life through admissions and residential policy con-
trast with accounts of student life at Harvard emphasizing the importance of exclusive organi-
zations as measuring sticks for social success in college, determinants of post-college outcomes,
and drivers of inequality within the university. Key organizations from this perspective are the
Hasty Pudding Institute of 1770 and a set of upper-year student societies known as final clubs.
   To understand the importance of final clubs, it is helpful to see how students, reporters, and
historians describe them. Franklin Delano Roosevelt (Harvard class of 1904) remarked that one
   9 Amory's    work received positive reviews in popular and academic outlets upon release (Jones, 1947; Low, 1948).
  10 For   example, Harvard President Lawrence Lowell remarked that increasing numbers of Jewish students would
"not intermingle with the rest," and that "[Jews] drive away the Gentiles" (Karabel 2006 pp. 88­89, 107).
   11 Harvard College Admissions and Financial Aid. https://college.harvard.edu/admissions/apply/

what-we-look. Accessed 4/28/2020. Arcidiacono et al. (2019a,b, 2020) describe Harvard admissions institutions.
   12 This goal is clearly stated in contemporary sources. For example, College Dean Alfred Hanford reflected on the

first fifteen years of the Freshman Halls: "The man of limited means and the rich, the high school and private school
graduates, the son of the banker, and the son of the farmer were thrown together. Freshmen coming from different
schools and of varying origins were to be given an opportunity for making new contacts, social distinctions were to
be broken down, and a democratic class spirit developed." (RPTHC 1929­1930, p. 100­101).


                                                         7
of "the greatest disappointments of his life" was not being elected to his preferred club.13 Amory
described final clubs as the "be-alls and end-alls of Harvard social existence," while Nir (2016)
described final clubs as "the apex of social life at Harvard" in the New York Times. Amory calls
Hasty Pudding, a theater-focused sophomore society, a "proving ground" for final clubs that
provides "an index of social seniority almost as authoritative as the old colonial ranking."
     Qualitative accounts emphasize that these clubs expanded pre-existing inequality of oppor-
tunity by student background, in particular high school background. Amory describes how

        the question of being club material at Harvard boils down to a boy's having gradu-
        ated from one of a small number of socially correct Eastern private schools. Of the
        five hundred or so public-school graduates [...] entering Harvard each year, rare in-
        deed is the boy who manages to break into the purple pale of its club Society.... [Even
        students from the most exclusive private schools] find themselves in the position of
        waiting anxiously for the call to Harvard clubdom[.]

In 1988, faculty member Alan Dershowitz described final clubs as "where Harvard students
learn to discriminate." A 2017 faculty report stated that "final clubs reinforce existing campus
inequities" and "are at odds with the [...] view that student body diversity is essential to Harvard
College's pedagogical objectives[.]" Many clubs still do not accept female members.
     What is the appeal of final clubs? Qualitative accounts emphasize opportunities for career
advancement. Amory describes a student whose "well-connected Porcellian friends saw to it
their adopted brother had an opportunity to marry well and take a good position in an old-
line Boston firm." A student writing in the Harvard Crimson in 2020 notes that "[j]ust as being
a Harvard student grants us access to an unparalleled alumni network, so too does being a
member of one of these final clubs" (Premaratne, 2020). Mills (1956) sums up the perceived
connection between high schools, social success at Harvard, and social success later in life:

        It is the prestige of a properly certified secondary education followed by a proper
        club in a proper Ivy League college that is the standard admission ticket to the world
        of urban clubs and parties in any major city of the nation.

     We take three insights from the institutional setting. First, final clubs are arguably the primary
form taken by old boys' clubs at Harvard. Second, high school background mediates entry into
these clubs. Third, policymakers used room randomization to encourage social integration.


3      Data sources
    13 Delano
            Roosevelt ultimately joined a different final club. Roosevelts in our sample include James, Franklin, Jr.
and John, the three sons of FDR, as well as Kermit Jr., Cornelius, and Theodore III, grandsons of Theodore Roosevelt.



                                                         8
3.1     Harvard archival records

We construct microdata on the Harvard entering classes from 1919 through 1935. We digitize
and merge data from several sources, all of which are publicly available in the Harvard Archives.
This section gives an overview of the data sources we use and how we combine them. For a more
detailed description see Online Appendices B.1 and B.2.
      The first record type we draw from are contemporaneous reports of enrollment and social ac-
tivities. We define our sample universe using Freshman Registers known as "Red Books." These
are yearbooks for the freshman class, published in the spring of each academic year. The Red
Books contain information on home addresses, college addresses, high school background, and
first-year activities. We link the Red Book data to records of academic class rank. These lists
aggregate grades across all courses in an academic year and coarsen them to numerical groups
between one and six. Students who have incomplete coursework at the time of publication or
grades too low to advance are not included on the rank lists; not showing up on a list is an out-
come of interest. Harvard published lists for all non-graduating students between 1920 and 1932
and for freshmen only from 1932. Our analysis focuses on first-year grades because these are
available for more cohorts. We further link to records of upper-year club participation published
between 1920 and 1938. These tell us whether students were members of Hasty Pudding and
which final club they participated in, if any.
      The second record type we draw from are 25th Reunion Class Reports. Class officers compile
class reports 25 years after scheduled graduation (roughly age 47) using student self-reports and
administrative records. Reports contain standardized fields for family (noting those who also
attended Harvard), occupation, adult club memberships, and other honors.
      We augment the microdata with records of room attributes. We use floor maps of freshman
dorms to define residential peer groups. The maps allow us to determine whether peer groups
are organized "vertically" by stairwell or "horizontally" by floor. We describe rooms and peer
groups using price and occupancy data from pamphlets distributed to incoming students.


3.2     Census records

We merge our Harvard data to publicly-available Census records from 1910 through 1940 using
the linking methods and FamilySearch genealogical database described in Price et al. (2019). The
features of our Harvard data that allow for this merge are the parent name and birth location
fields in the pre-1934 Class Reports, as well as knowledge of approximate birth year from college
cohort. Because we rely on the pre-1934 Class Reports for the Census match, we only attempt
a match for pre-1934 students with Class Report data. FamilySearch is a wiki-style platform in
which 12 million users contribute to a shared Family Tree. We supplement the FamilySearch
data with hand linking techniques and ensure precision by hand-checking existing links.


                                                 9
3.3     Merge statistics

Table 1 reports statistics on sample size and data availability. There are 14383 individuals in
our sample universe. Almost all students report what high school they attended (98%) and their
college address (95%), except in 1926, when address was not listed. We merge 91% of Red Book
records for the 1920 through 1935 cohorts to class reports. 87% of students matched to class
reports (79% of students in the sample universe) have non-missing occupation fields.14
      We use the 1940 Census to measure post-college outcomes. To ensure students have time
to complete schooling and launch their careers, we exclude students entering college after 1930
from the Census outcome sample.15 We match 69% of students in entering cohorts from 1920
through 1930 with Class Report data to 1940 Census records. We use pre-1940 censuses to de-
scribe students' pre-college backgrounds. We match 66% of students in 1920­1933 cohorts to
pre-1940 Census records.16 For students who match to multiple pre-college records, we use the
most recent. Before 1940, census records do not include measures of income.17
      The FamilySearch data help us obtain the high match rates typically associated with hand-
linking at a cost similar to automated methods. Our match rates are higher than match rates of
10-30% for automated Census-to-Census and Census-to-patent linking (Abramitzky et al., 2020c;
Sarada et al., 2019). Compared to this baseline, our procedure falls about two-thirds of the way
to the 88% match rate achieved when hand-linking children of Union army soldiers to the 1910
census (Costa et al., 2020), often cited as a gold standard of record linking (Bailey et al., 2020).
      Though our match rates to individual datasets are high, sample sizes decline as we impose
sample restrictions and require matches to multiple data sources. For example, 9,356 students
live in on-campus rooms subject to random assignment. Of these, 5,226 (55.9%) are in the 1930
and earlier cohorts we match to Census outcome records, 3, 433 (65.7% of 5,226 ) are matched to
the 1940 Census, and 2,489 (72.5% of 3,433 ) report their wages in the Census. This issue surfaces
mainly in room-randomization analyses of Census outcomes and motivates our choice to focus
the long-run component of that analysis on outcomes observed in Class Reports.
  14 Online Appendix Figure A.1 reports how sample sizes and match rates vary across cohorts.
  15 Online Appendix Figure A.2 reports how school enrollment and labor market outcomes change with potential
experience. Six years after expected graduation (i.e., the 1930 entering cohort), less than 10% of students are in school
and more than 90% are in the labor force. Average earnings rise steadily through 16 years post-graduation.
  16 For pre-college measures, students in cohorts 1920­1930 are matched to 1910 and 1920 Census records, while

students in the 1931­33 cohorts are matched to 1910 through 1930 Census records.
  17 Some analyses of historical Census data use occupation-specific wage scores. These are essentially predictions of

income based on occupation and demographics. They are not useful in our setting because they require extrapolation
from the broader population to our highly selected sample of Harvard students. See Online Appendix B.3.




                                                           10
3.4     Categorization schemes

3.4.1     Harvard clubs and private high schools

The social outcome of primary interest to us is membership in a selective upper-year final club.
To operationalize this concept, we break final clubs into groups based on prestige following
Amory's ordered list, labeling Porcellian, A.D., Fly, Spee, Delphic, and Owl `selective final clubs.'18
      Contemporary accounts emphasize the importance of a small number of high-status, high-
priced private high schools in driving social outcomes. Combining these accounts with our
microdata, we identify the eight private boarding schools that sent the most students to Harvard
over our period, and label these institutions private feeder schools. The schools in this group
are Exeter, Andover, Milton, Middlesex, Groton, St. Paul's, St. Mark's, and St. George's. The
first seven schools sent more students to Harvard than any other private schools. The eighth,
St. George's, sent fewer students than three Boston-area day schools but is included because it is
part of the "St. Grottlesex" group emphasized in historical accounts (Amory 1947; Karabel 2006).
      Our private feeder designation has a strong basis in the historical record. However, we also
identify a broader group of private schools that includes other boarding schools and day schools,
and discuss findings for this group as well. In addition, we identify public feeder schools that
sent multiple students to Harvard over the sample period.19 Any high school that sent at least
twenty students to Harvard across our cohorts is classified as either public or private. Online
Appendix Figure A.3 displays student counts for each classified school.


3.4.2     Residential peer groups

We describe residential peer neighborhoods using the average per-occupant room price. For each
peer neighborhood in each entering cohort, we use floor plan and room price data to compute
the occupant-weighted mean room price. Then, because we are interested in relative rank within
each cohort rather than dollar values, we use the mean prices to rank neighborhoods on a zero-
to-one scale, with zero being the lowest-ranked neighborhood in a cohort and one the highest.
We assign neighborhoods with the same mean price the rank at the midpoint of the interval.


3.4.3     First-year activities, occupations, and adult organizations

To describe students' social lives during their first year in college, we enumerate common ac-
tivities and then place activities into coarse groups. Activity groups include sports, music, and
schoolwide social committees.20 We also construct summary measures of activity participation:
 18 Theremaining clubs on Amory's list and active during our period are Fox, D.U., and, starting in 1930, Phoenix.
 19 Thepublic school sending the most students to Harvard is Boston Latin. Most public feeders are near Boston.
 20 Examples of social committees include "Regatta Committee" and "finance committee.'




                                                       11
an indicator for participation in any activity, the count of total activities, and an indicator for
holding a leadership role in an activity (e.g. president of a club, team captain).
   We follow a similar procedure to describe 25-year occupation and social club outcomes us-
ing data from the Class Reports. For occupations, we create indicators for coarse job types
and identify a set of text strings associated with each. In the main text we report results for
11 relatively common categories: Finance, Accounting, Medicine, Law, Higher Education, Pri-
mary/secondary teaching, Government, Art or Publishing, Retail, Senior management, and
Middle/lower management.21 Because reported work outcomes reflect both industry (such as
investment banking or medicine) and occupation or office type ("partner" or "vice-president"),
these outcomes are not mutually exclusive. One can be a senior manager and work in finance.
We treat data for individuals in cohorts 1920­1935 who are not linked to Class Report records or
do not report work outcomes as missing.
   We divide adult clubs into three categories: social clubs, professional organizations, and
honor societies. Social clubs are gentleman's clubs (e.g. the Knickerbocker Club), country clubs
or sports clubs (e.g. the Brookline Country Club), and fraternal organizations. Professional asso-
ciations include the American Medical Association and the American Economic Association. We
treat data for those not linked to Class Reports as missing. See Online Appendix B.1 for details
of club and occupation classification.
   While qualitative reports can guide our interpretation of categorical outcomes (e.g., that work-
ing in finance was characteristic of the era's elite), we also present a data-driven alternative. We
construct private feeder indices for college activities, occupations, and adult associations. These
indices capture the extent to which a bundle of outcomes is indicative of high status and are
standardized (mean zero, standard deviation one) to facilitate cross-outcome comparisons. We
compute the indices as predicted values from regressions of an indicator for private high school
status on indicators for participation in different activities (occupations, associations) and co-
hort fixed effects, using a Lasso for variable selection and excluding one's own cohort from the
sample. See Online Appendix B.4 for details.


3.4.4    Cultural and religious background

We follow Abramitzky et al. (2020a) and Abramitzky et al. (2020b) and use names as measures
of cultural background. We construct a Jewish name index for each first and last name based
on the frequency of that name among Yiddish speakers relative to non-Yiddish speakers. For a
 21 We   include all categories with at least 100 students in index construction.




                                                           12
given (first or last) name n, the name index is computed as

                                                             # Yiddish speakersn
                                                           # Total Yiddish speakers
                    Jewish Indexn =         # Yiddish speakersn          # non-Yiddish speakersn
                                                                                                    ,
                                          # Total Yiddish speakers + # Total non-Yiddish speakers


with counts computed in the 1920 and 1930 Censuses. We use an analogous approach to con-
struct indices for Catholic names and "Colonial" names. The Catholic name index is based on
the relative frequency of names among immigrants from Italy, Ireland, and Spain. The Colonial
name index is based on the relative frequency of last names (not first names) among people born
in Massachusetts before 1800 in the 1850 Census, compared to the 1920 and 1930 population.
Online Appendix Table A.1 reports the names with the highest scores for each index.
      Continuing to follow Abramitzky et al. (2020b), we classify students as having Jewish names
if the average value of the index over their first and last name in the 1920 and 1930 Census data is
greater than 0.7. We maintain a cutoff of 0.7 for describing an individual as having a Catholic or
Colonial name. Name indices are an imperfect proxy for cultural background. However, as we
show below, they predict sorting into final clubs, matching in the marriage market, and changes
in the student body following admissions policies designed to reduce the share of Jews. Online
Appendix B.5 provides additional detail on name classification.


4      College behavior and long-run outcomes
4.1     Student background by high school type

We now turn to a descriptive analysis of the relationship between student background, social
and academic success in college, and long-run outcomes. We first describe students' pre-college
backgrounds and how they differ by high school type, our main measure of baseline social status.
      Panel A of Table 2 reports student background characteristics from Harvard sources. Overall,
46% of students come from private high schools, 24% from private feeder schools, and 23% from
public feeder high schools. 7.0% of all students have a father who attended Harvard, and 20.4%
report having a brother who attended Harvard. 6.6% of all Harvard students have names we
identify as Jewish, 5.5% have Catholic names, and 29.3% have Colonial names. The share of
students with Jewish names in our data is lower than the share of Jewish students reported in
contemporary Harvard sources, which reached roughly 25% in the early 1920s before changes
in admissions policies.22 Our interpretation is that the 0.7 cutoff in the name index used in
Abramitzky et al. (2020b) is conservative in the Harvard context.
    22 Karabelreports internal Harvard estimates of 21.6% in 1922 (p. 96) and 27.6% for the entering class of 1925
(p. 105). Shares of Jewish students fell starting in 1926, corresponding to the adoption of non-academic admissions
criteria. See section 6.5.



                                                         13
      Students from private feeder schools come from richer families with stronger Harvard ties.
14.2% of private feeder students have a Harvard father and 28.9% have a Harvard brother, com-
pared to 4.6% and 17.6%, respectively, for other students. Private feeder students are more likely
to have Colonial names (42.9% vs. 25.0%) and less likely to have Jewish names (1.3% vs. 8.3%)
than others.
      Panel B of Table 2 reports background characteristics from the Census. The picture here is
similar. Private feeder students live in homes with an average of 1.79 servants, compared to 0.16
servants for public feeder students. They are much less likely to report immigrant backgrounds
and somewhat more likely to have fathers who are doctors or lawyers.
      Once at Harvard, most students share a common residential setting. Panel C of Table 2 de-
scribe students' first year living environments. Overall, 80.0% of students live on campus. Al-
most all private feeder students live on campus (96.1%), and a large majority (74.9%) of other
students do as well. Many of the students living off campus are from Boston and live at their
home address. On average, private feeder students live in rooms that are ranked 14 percentiles
higher in the own-room price distribution than other students and in peer groups that are ranked
10 percentiles higher. However, the IQRs for peer group ranks in the two groups mostly overlap,
consistent with qualitative reports that residential life at Harvard pushed together students from
different backgrounds. Section 5 discusses residential peer groups in more detail.


4.2     Social vs. academic success in college

Private feeder students do worse in the classroom than other students. This is illustrated in Panel
D of Table 2. As first-year class rank rises from the lowest rank group (rank 6) to the highest (rank
1), the share of students from private feeder schools falls sharply. Students from private feeder
schools are twice as likely as other students to be in the bottom rank group, and less than half as
likely to be in the top rank group.23
      Private feeder students are much more successful outside the classroom. Panels E and F of
Table 2 report the shares of students engaging in different first-year and upper-year activities.
Private feeder students are 1.5 times more likely to participate in at least one activity than other
students in their first year at college (70.7% vs. 46.8%), and participate in twice as many activities
on average (1.67 vs. 0.85). Cross-group differences are even more pronounced for leadership
activities. Private feeder students are three times as likely to have leadership roles (like team
captain) and 4.2 times more likely to be members of social committees.
  23 Private
           feeder students and other students are similarly likely to not show up in the class rank data, indicating
incomplete or non-passing grades.




                                                        14
4.3     The social "funnel" and selection into final clubs

Initial gaps in activity participation and social leadership persist through to exclusive upper-year
clubs. 39.3% of private feeder students join the Hasty Pudding sophomore society compared to
7.7% for other students. 13.6% of students join a final club of any kind, with a 36.9% rate for
private feeder students and a 6.2% rate for other students. 7.0% of students join a selective final
club. The 21.4% rate for private feeder students is nearly nine times the rate for other students.
      Columns 4 and 5 of Table 2 describe the "funnel" into selective final clubs, with Hasty Pud-
ding membership as an intermediate step. 91% of Hasty Pudding members attended private
schools, and 62% attended private feeder schools. Less than 1% of Hasty Pudding members
have Jewish names, and 47% have Colonial names.24 Hasty Pudding members are 63% more
likely to have grades in the lowest rank group than students in the full sample and are 35% as
likely to have grades in the highest two groups. However, they are more than four times as likely
to lead first-year social committees. 44% of Hasty Pudding members go on to join selective final
clubs, more than six times the population rate.
      Sorting into selective final clubs is even more extreme. 95% of final club members attended
private high schools, and 73% attended private feeders. Out of 941 students in final clubs, we
classify two as having Jewish names, and both appear to be false positives.25 51% have Colonial
surnames. In terms of grades, we observe zero final club members in the top rank group, and
they are 84% more likely to have grades in the bottom rank group than the population as a whole.
Consistent with qualitative reports, membership in the Hasty Pudding is close to a prerequisite
for joining a selective final club: 95% of final club members were also Hasty Pudding members.
      Supplemental analyses describe how pre-college characteristics interact with academic and
social performance early in college to shape upper-year club membership. Our findings reflect
the sorting on high school type, grades, and cultural background documented in Table 2. The
additional insight is that final club membership hinges on the combination of private feeder back-
ground with first year social leadership. See Online Appendix B.6.1 for details.


4.4     The boys' club premium

We now turn to long-run outcomes. Table 3 describes long-run outcomes by high school type.
We observe large differences in adult associations, occupations, and earnings outcomes by high
school type. Looking at occupations, what stands out is that private feeder students are more
likely to work in finance than other students (17.5% vs. 7.7%) and are less likely to work in
medicine, law, or higher education. Private feeder students are more likely to join country clubs
  24 Online Appendix Figure A.4 shows how final club membership varies across the distribution of the name indices.
  25 Oneis Harry E.D. Pollock, who was born in Utah and attended an east coast private school before becoming
an archaeologist (Society for American Archaeology, 1983). The other is Samuel Cabot Jr., whose father attended
Harvard, and who appears to have been a member of the well-known Cabot family in Boston (Jensen, 1972).


                                                        15
and gentleman's clubs, but less likely to join fraternal orders or professional associations. Pri-
vate feeder students and other students are similarly likely to report non-zero wage income, but
private feeder students report an average earnings of $2957, 10% more than other students. They
are 41% more likely to report at least $50 of non-wage income, and 62% more likely to report the
maximum value of earned income, $5,000. The topcode value corresponds to the top 0.7 percent
of the earnings distribution for men aged 27­37 in the 1940 Census.
      Social success in college predicts long-run outcomes. Columns 4 and 5 of Table 3 display adult
outcomes for Hasty Pudding and Final club members. Selective final club members are 72.1%
percent more likely to belong to social clubs as adults than the full population, 2.6 percent more
likely to work in finance, and 1.9 times less likely to work in medicine. Final club members have
wage income that is 29.2% higher than the population average, and are 2.4 times more likely to
have topcoded wage income. Outcomes for Hasty Pudding members fall between those for the
full population and those for final club members, but are generally closer to final club members.
      The strong relationship between final club membership and labor market success contrasts
with what we see for academic performance. Panels A, B, and C of Figure 1 display income
measures from the 1940 Census split by first-year academic rank group and membership in a
selective final club. Because the top rank group is small and few students in selective final clubs
have high grades, we pool rank groups 1 and 2 into one group, and omit cells with fewer than
twenty observations. Panel A shows that students in selective final clubs earn about $851 more
than other students in the same academic rank group, 32% of the no-club mean. In contrast,
conditional on club membership, the relationship between first-year grades and earned income
is flat. Panels B and C show that students in selective final clubs are also more likely to have
topcoded wage income and to report non-wage income across all rank groups.


4.5     Assessing selection effects

Final club members might have high earnings for reasons other than club membership. This
section assesses the role of selection on different margins in driving the final club premium.
      The first explanation we consider is selection on the basis of high school type. This story
seems plausible: we have already seen that most club members attended private feeder schools,
and most private feeder students come from wealthy families. However, it is hard to reconcile
with the data. Panels D through F of Figure 1 repeat Panels A through C, but split by both club
membership and high school type. Panels D and E show that the gap in earnings by club mem-
bership is not diminished by controls for school type. This contrasts with findings for unearned
income. Panel F shows that private feeder students are more likely to report having unearned
income than non-feeder students with the same club membership status.
      What about selection on other attributes? We conduct a series of analyses that test stories
about selection on the basis of high school identity, family background, and social engagement.

                                                  16
These specifications have the form

                               Yi = Si  s + Ri  r + Xi  x + c(i) + ei .                           (1)

Yi is an outcome of interest for individual i, Si is final club membership, Ri is academic rank
group, and Xi are additional controls that vary across specifications. c(i) are cohort fixed effects.
Class rank is in rank-group units with the sign reversed so that positive coefficients indicate
that earnings outcomes rise with academic standing. Table 4 presents our results. Each panel
corresponds to a different outcome and each column to a different specification.
   We first test for balance on selection into the earnings sample. We place an indicator for
successful match to a wage record in the 1940 Census on the left side of equation 1. These
results are in Panel A Table 4. The sample is all enrolling students, so non-matches may arise
from failure to match to Class Reports, failure to match from Class Reports to the census, or
non-reporting of census wage income. The relationship between wage match and covariates of
interest is in general economically small and differs statistically from zero at the five percent
level in only one out of 16 cases. This limits concerns about differential censoring.
   We next consider earned income, reported in Panel B of Table 4. Column 1 shows a baseline
specification with controls for private feeder status and class rank, but not final club member-
ship. Before controlling for final club membership, we observe a sizeable private school premium
of $294, or 11% of the non-private feeder mean.
   Column 2 adds an indicator for membership in a selective final club. This specification corre-
sponds to our first selection story-- selection on high school type. As we saw in Figure 1, there is
a large final club membership premium even after conditioning on high school type. Students in
selective final clubs earn $778 more than other students, a 29% premium above the non-member
mean. This is 16 times the size of the academic rank group premium. The private feeder earnings
premium falls by half once we control for membership in a selective final club.
   We next consider selection on family attributes beyond high school type. Column 3 adds Cen-
sus controls for family attributes: fixed effects for father's occupation, fixed effects for father's
and mother's state or non-US country of birth, family size, parental presence, home ownership,
the presence of domestic employees, and whether the home was on a farm. The restriction to
observations where these data are available reduces the sample size by about half. The rela-
tionship between final club membership and earnings, however, remains essentially unchanged.
The academic success premium also remains small. In contrast, the coefficient on private feeder
school falls to zero. In other words, controlling for both social success at college and pre-college
attributes fully accounts for private school students' earnings advantage.
   We conduct additional tests of selection on pre-college attributes using covariates from the
Harvard records. Column 4 limits the sample to students from private feeder schools and adds



                                                 17
fixed effects for each high school, as well as for Harvard legacy status. The final club earnings
premium remains large, and the academic success premium remains small.
   Column 5 controls directly for family fixed effects. We limit the sample to families who send
more than one son to Harvard during our sample period.26 These regressions essentially com-
pare the smart brother in each family to the popular brother. The final club premium is larger
in these specifications than in the others we estimate, equal to 42% of the brothers' sample mean
for earnings and 156% of the mean for topcodes. The class rank premium remains close to zero.
It is hard to explain the final club premium with differential selection across families.
   Column 6 considers a different story: that the observed final club premium reflects a return
to social engagement in general and accrues to individuals who would like to join a selective
final club, whether they succeed or not. We restrict the sample to Hasty Pudding members, who
are engaged with Harvard high society, but differ in whether they make the jump to the top tier.
The final club premium remains large within this group, despite the fact that the comparison
group is socially successful in its own right. The earnings gap between final club members and
near-missers suggests that social engagement does not explain the success premium.
   Panels C and D of Table 4 repeat the same set of specifications for two additional outcomes:
an indicator that a student's earned income is topcoded at the Census maximum of $5,000, and
an indicator that the student has at least $50 in unearned income. The patterns for topcoded
earnings are very similar to those we observe for wage earnings. The final club premium is large
and persists across all specifications we consider, while the academic success premium is near
zero. High topcode rates for final club members suggest that our earnings specifications may
tend to understate the true final club premium.
   Results for non-wage income differ in two ways from those for earned income. The first is
that the private feeder premium is large across all specifications. It is not diminished as much
by the inclusion of additional controls. The second is that while the final club premium for
unearned income is large in columns 2, 3, 4, and 6, it is negative and imprecisely estimated in
specifications in column 5 that include family fixed effects. Our interpretation is that unearned
income is more closely tied to family background than is earned income. While there may be a
final club premium for unearned income, the evidence is not as strong as for earned income.
   This descriptive analysis establishes three facts. First, the social success premium is large rel-
ative to the academic success premium. Second, differences in social success account for much
of the difference in earned income by private school background. Third, the social success pre-
mium is hard to explain with selection on the basis of family attributes or engagement with
social institutions at Harvard. Results in Online Appendix B.6 show that similar results hold
when we impute income on the basis of home value, when we impute income values for oc-
cupations where business income may be particularly important, and when we use third-year
 26 Students   in these families are disproportionately from private feeder schools. See Online Appendix B.6.


                                                          18
rather than first-year class rank. A question this analysis leaves open is the extent to which the
final club premium reflects a return to pre-existing social skills versus a return to social skills or
networks acquired in college. Understanding the causal role of peer inputs in college is the focus
of section 5.


4.6     Occupations and adult social outcomes

In addition to income, social success predicts career paths and social engagement in the long run.
Panels A and B of Figure 2 show how the shares of students working in finance and medicine
25 years after graduation vary with class rank and final club membership.27 Students in final
clubs are more likely to go into finance than others in the same rank group. In the lowest rank
group, 31% of club members pursue finance careers compared to 14% of non-members. Rates of
finance careers decline with class rank regardless of membership status. The reverse is true for
medicine: rates are higher for non-members, and rise with academic rank. Panel C of Figure 2
shows how adult participation in social organizations varies with academic and social outcomes
at Harvard. Selective final club members are nearly twice as likely to participate in adult social
organizations like country clubs, gentleman's clubs, and fraternal organizations. Participation in
such organizations is weakly related to grades.
      As was the case with income, differences in long run career and social outcomes by social
success are not simply the product of selection into final clubs on the basis of high school type.
The lower row of graphs in Figure 2 displays the same outcomes as the upper row, but split by
both club membership and high school type. Within high school type, final club members are
more likely to pursue a finance career at all levels of academic achievement, and less likely to
work in medicine at all but the lowest achievement levels. Both private feeder and other students
who are final club members are more likely to join social organizations as adults.


5      Random room assignment in the short- and long-run
5.1     Peer groups and room prices

We use room randomization to assess whether increased residential contact with higher-status
neighbors can spark social success at college and alter students' long-run career and social trajec-
tories. This exercise tests both the general proposition that social interactions shape high-stakes
medium- and long-run outcomes and the specific policy that Harvard (and many other univer-
sities) uses to promote cross-group interaction on campus.
      Room randomization worked as follows. Freshman rooms were assigned different prices,
depending on size, occupancy, and quality. First-year students were asked to fill out a hous-
    27 Online   Appendix Figure A.5 shows parallel results for other career types and for professional organizations.


                                                             19
ing application indicating their acceptable price and number of roommates. Room assignments
were then made "by lot, from rooms of the price indicated in the application blank," except that
"students coming in considerable numbers from any one school are distributed among the vari-
ous halls, and the cheapest rooms are reserved for men of limited means." Randomization took
place at the level of the room, not the individual, because students wanting to live in the same
room could apply together.28
   With this design in mind, our experimental specifications take the form

                                   Yi =  0 +  1 RPp(i) + r(i) + h(i) + ei .                                     (2)

Yi is an outcome for student i, RPp(i) is the price rank of i's residential dormitory neighbor-
hood p(i ), r(i) are randomization block fixed effects, and h(i) are indicator variables for each
feeder high school (public or private). Following the randomization design, we define the r(i)
as fully-saturated interactions between entering cohort, room price, and room occupancy. When
computing standard errors, we allow for clustering at the level of realized peer group p(i ). We
consider alternate approaches to inference in Section 5.7.
   This specification gives rise to experiments of the following form: two pairs of students apply
for rooms of occupancy size two and price $175 per student. One pair is assigned to a peer
neighborhood where the other rooms are more expensive and the neighborhood average price
is $240 per student, and the other to a room where the other rooms are less expensive and the
neighborhood average price is $125 per student. We then compare outcomes across the pairs.
Online Appendix Figure A.6 presents a map of peer neighborhood prices and gives an example
of one such experiment.
   The identities of "high-priced" and "low-priced" neighborhoods are predetermined by ob-
servable and systematic differences in floor plans. They do not depend on the outcomes of
assignment. This contrasts with many roommate and classmate designs, which rely on fluctu-
ations in group-level means across ex ante indistinguishable units. Our approach has more in
common with "Moving to Opportunity" designs, in which treatment is the opportunity to relo-
cate to a wealthier neighborhood (Katz et al., 2001; Ludwig et al., 2013; Chetty et al., 2016). As
in studies of MTO, we do not rely on peer attributes for our econometric analysis other than to
describe how assignment to a high-priced neighborhood alters peer composition.29
   A corollary to this point is that our experimental specifications identify the effect of assign-
ment to a higher-priced neighborhood, as mediated by a variety of peer attributes and individual
behaviors. These specifications do not identify the specific peer attributes that alter student out-
  28 See
       Online Appendices B.1.5 and B.1.6 for documentation.
  29 Ourstrategy is therefore not subject to the Angrist (2014) weak instruments critique, which applies to settings
where differences in mean attributes across peer groups disappear as group size grows large. Our focus on predeter-
mined, systematic differences in neighborhood attributes is what Angrist (2014) recommends.



                                                        20
comes, nor do they reveal how the short- and medium-run effects of assignment (such as final
club membership) individually contribute to long-run outcomes like career paths. As we discuss
below, neighborhood price is strongly correlated with a variety of measures of the socioeconomic
status of neighborhood peers. We use the phrase "exposure to high-status peers" to mean be-
ing placed in residential proximity to fellow students who are higher status along a variety of
measures, observable and potentially unobservable.


5.2     Peer groups and randomization blocks

The first step in our analysis of the room-randomization quasi-experiment is to describe the
distribution of first-year students on campus. 80.0% of first-year students live on campus, of
whom 89% live in freshman halls that are part of the randomization scheme.30 The rightmost
column of Tables 2 and 3 report descriptive statistics for this sample. Campus residents are more
likely to come from private feeder schools and less likely to come from Massachusetts, but overall
there is broad coverage across high school type and other background characteristics. Students
in the freshman halls live in residential peer groups that are generally integrated by room price
and high school background. As an example, Panel A of Figure 3 plots the distribution of own
room prices by high school type for the 1928 entering cohort. Private school students tend to live
in higher-priced rooms, but the distributions overlap except at the very bottom and very top.
      Residential peer groups are modest in size and highly heterogeneous even for students living
in rooms with similar prices. Panel B of Figure 3 displays a histogram of residential peer group
sizes. Mean group size is 9.7, with the middle 50% of the distribution falling between 7 and
12. Panels C and D of Figure 3 show the variation in peer attributes within groups defined by
own room price. Panel C displays the mean and 90­10 spread of peer neighborhood price rank
by ventile of the own-price distribution within each year. Peer mean room rank rises steadily
through roughly the fiftieth percentile of the own-price distribution, at which point it plateaus.
Except for the bottom-most ventile of the own-price distribution, students at each level of the
own-price distribution experience a wide range of residential peer price levels. As shown in the
right panel of the graph, the same is true for peer private high school shares. There are students
in the top ventile of the own-price distribution whose peer groups consist entirely of students
not from private feeder schools, and students in the bottom-most ventile whose peers are almost
half private feeder school students. This heterogeneity is consistent with administrators' stated
goal to integrate residential life by student background.
      Turning to the randomized design, we first show that there is wide variation in peer group
assignments within randomization blocks. Panel A of Figure 4 shows the distribution of block
sizes. The average block consists of 34.1 individuals; the 25th percentile of the block size dis-
  30 These numbers exclude students in the 1926 cohort for whom we do not have address records. Students were

sometimes assigned to other housing when there was excess demand for spots in freshman halls.


                                                     21
tribution is 11 and the 75th percentile is 52. Panels B and C describe how peer neighborhood
attributes vary within block. In both panels, each vertical unit represents an individual. Indi-
viduals are sorted vertically by randomization blocks, with blocks in Panel B (C) sorted by the
maximum value of neighborhood mean price (neighborhood private high school share) in the
block. The shaded area for each individual corresponds to the range between the minimum and
maximium value of neighborhood price (neighborhood private high school share) in the block.
      Panel B shows that within-block variation spans nearly the entire range of peer neighbor-
hood prices. The vertical lines show the 10th and 90th percentiles of the neighborhood price
distribution. There are blocks in which prices range from the maximum price to the median,
and many that span the middle 50% of the distribution. The only region of the neighborhood
price space over which there is little within-block variation is the very bottom of the distribution.
The cheapest rooms at Harvard are physically separated from the rest; students asking for the
cheapest rooms cannot be placed in high- or even mid-priced peer neighborhoods. The right
graph shows that most blocks span a wide range of neighborhood private high school shares,
with many blocks spanning the full range of possible shares, from zero to one. Overall, 24% of
within-year variance in peer neighborhood price and 67% of within-year variance in peer private
feeder share occurs within randomization blocks.


5.3     Balance tests and first stage effects

For the residential randomization design to provide evidence on the effects of exposure to high-
status peers, assignment to more expensive rooms within a randomization block must affect
the peer environment but be uncorrelated with students' baseline characteristics. Results re-
ported in Panel A of Table 5 show that controlling for randomization blocks eliminates the strong
cross-sectional relationship between neighborhood price rank RPp and predetermined individ-
ual characteristics. We estimate versions of Equation 2 with the individual covariates Xi listed
in the rows as the dependent variable and expanding sets of fixed effects as we move from left
to right. Each cell reports estimates of the effect of RPp . Recall that RPp is a rank variable that
ranges from zero to one, so coefficients can be interpeted as the change in the dependent variable
associated with moving from the lowest-ranked peer neighborhood in a cohort to the highest.
      The first column of Table 5 reports estimates from specifications which control only for entry
year dummies, i.e., not for randomization blocks. Students at the bottom of the peer neigh-
borhood price distribution differ dramatically from those at the top. Students at the top of the
distribution pay $207 more on average for their rooms (94.2% of the sample mean), are 39.6 per-
centage points more likely to have attended a private school, and 29.0 percentage points more
likely to have attended a private feeder school. They are 7.9 percentage points (94.6% of the sam-
ple mean) more likely to have a Harvard father and 11.7 percentage points (50.8% of the sample
mean) more likely to have a Harvard brother. They are less likely to report southern or eastern

                                                  22
European heritage and more likely to have fathers who are doctors or lawyers. We reject the joint
null of no relationship between neighborhood price and own attributes at the p < 0.001 level.
   The second column of Table 5 adds fixed effects for each interaction of per-occupant price
and entering cohort, while the third column adds the full set of randomization block fixed ef-
fects and main feeder high school dummies as in Equation 2. With the addition of block controls
the relationship between neighborhood mean price and own attributes becomes economically
and statistically insignificant. Note that price per student effects in columns two and three and
the private feeder effect in column three are mechanically zero due to the control set. After con-
trolling for per-occupant price by cohort blocks, we cannot reject the null that all effects are zero
(p=0.933). This null relationship persists when we add the full set of randomization blocks and
high school dummies (p=0.635). Our findings are consistent with primary source descriptions of
the assignment process as conditionally random.
   Panel B of Table 5 reports the relationship between neighborhood price rank and links to
other data sources. These outcomes are downstream of room assignment and in principle could
be affected by it. However, after conditioning on randomization block, we do not observe a
relationship between neighborhood price rank and links to Class Report or census data sources.
This result mitigates concerns related to differential censoring.
   Students assigned to higher-priced neighborhoods have higher-status peers. Panel C of Table
5 reports estimates of Equation 2 with peer mean attributes on the left hand side. When measur-
ing neighborhood mean attributes for student i, we leave out individual i and other students in
i's room. Conditional on randomization block and high school fixed effects, students assigned
to the highest-price neighborhoods have peer private high school shares that are 28.0 percentage
points higher (on an in-sample mean of 59.0) than students assigned to the lowest-price neigh-
borhoods, and private feeder high school peer shares that are 20.0 percentage points higher (on
a mean of 31.2), conditional on randomization block. These effects are precisely estimated, with
standard errors of 3.3 and 3.2, respectively. A 50 percentile increase in peer neighborhood rank--
easily within the support of observed random variation-- increases peer private feeder share by
32.0% of the sample mean. We see similar effects across other student attributes. Peer legacy
shares are 6.3 percentage points higher, and peer eastern European immigrant shares are 4.9
percentage points lower. Exposure to rooms in the top 50% and top 10% of the room price distri-
bution also rises dramatically.
   The in-college and post-college outcomes of residential peers also change with RPp . We report
these findings in Panel D of Table 5. These estimates should be interpreted cautiously because
they capture both differences in peer background across groups and endogenous social effects
(Manski, 1993). Conditional on randomization blocks and high school dummies, a zero-to-one
increase in neighborhood rank raises the mean count of first-year activities residential peers
participate in by 0.34, the share of peers participating in social activities by 0.05, and the peer


                                                 23
activity index by 0.30. It raises the mean peer academic rank group by 0.16, corresponding to
reduced academic achievement. It raises the share of peers joining selective final clubs by 0.11--
our main measure of social success. Residential peers are more likely to report finance careers,
have a higher peer occupation index, and higher wage income. Our overall interpretation of
Table 5 is that this is a promising setting for learning about the effects of exposure to high-status
peers. Assignment to higher-priced residential neighborhoods is conditionally uncorrelated with
predetermined student attributes but produces large changes in peer environment in terms of
pre-college background, in-college activities, and post-college careers.


5.4     Social and academic success at college

Table 6 reports the effects of assignment to higher priced peer neighborhoods on social and aca-
demic outcomes while at college. We present separate estimates for the full sample, for private
feeder students, and for other students. The `Test' column reports p-values from statistical tests
of the null that effects for private feeder students and other students are equal.
      Placement in a higher-priced peer neighborhood raises participation in social activities while
in college. Panel A of Table 6 reports effects of peer neighborhood price on freshman extracurric-
ular activities. A change in peer neighborhood rank from zero to one raises the share of students
who report any activity by 7.0 percentage points (SE=3.4; relative to a residential sample mean
of 60.5%), the activity count by 0.284 (SE=0.111; mean of 1.267), and the percent of students re-
porting leadership roles in any activity by 4.3 percentage points (SE=2.0; mean of 8.4%). The
aggregate effect of changes in quantity and type of activities is to raise the activity private high
school index by 0.207 standard deviations (SE=0.082), equal to 34.2% of the gap in activity in-
dex between private feeder students and other students in the full sample. Effects on activities
by type suggest increases in participation in social committees (4.9 percentage points) as a key
channel for increased participation.
      The full sample effects are entirely driven by students from private feeder schools. A zero-to-
one change in neighborhood rank raises the count of activities that private feeder school students
participate in by 0.650 (SE=0.222 ), and the private school activity index by 0.479 (SE=0.170).
The activity types that drive the index effect for private feeder students are leadership positions
and schoolwide social committees. In particular, social committee participation rises by 18.4
percentage points (SE=5.7) with a one-unit change in room rank. For students not from private
feeder schools, the effects of placement in higher-priced peer neighborhood on any activity, the
count of activities, activity leadership, and all specific activity types are economically small and
not statistically different from zero at conventional levels. The p-values from tests of the null
of equal effects for private feeder and other students are roughly 0.01 for the summary activity
count and activity index measures.
      We do not find evidence that private feeder students assigned to higher-status residential peer

                                                  24
groups shift away from activities with lower-status students. Effects are positive or near zero
across the board, even for activities where the share of private feeder students is relatively low,
such as music or those in the "other activities" category. For these students, placement in high-
priced neighborhoods leads to increased participation in high-status activities, not substitution
between activities.
   We now turn to our main measure of social success in college: selective upper year final clubs.
Results for final clubs are very similar to those for first-year activities. We report our findings
in Panel B of Table 6. A one-unit change in room rank raises the rate at which students in the
pooled sample join selective final clubs by 6.5 percentage points (SE=2.1; on a full sample mean
of 9.5). This effect is again driven entirely by a 16.8 percentage point effect for private feeder
students (SE=5.6), with precise zero effects for other students. We reject the null of equal effects
across the two groups (p=0.004).
   We see small negative effects for private feeder students on participation in less selective final
clubs, suggesting that some of the increase in selective final club participation is an intensive
margin effect (i.e., participating in a more exclusive club rather than a less exclusive one). Hasty
Pudding participation and the upper-year club index also rise for private feeder students but not
for other students. Statistical tests of differences between the effects for private feeder students
and other students reject the null at p-values of roughly 0.05 for both outcomes.
   The social effects we see are economically large. A fifty percentile increase in peer neighbor-
hood price rank raises the count of activities private feeder students participate in by 18.9% of
the sample mean in that group and 49.1% of the gap between private feeder and other students.
The equivalent figures for social committees are 50% and 66.7%; for selective final clubs they are
37.8% and 45.1%.
   Panel A of Figure 5 uses a binscatter graph to show how the gap in selective final club mem-
bership by high school type grows as randomized exposure to high-status peers increases. We
regress final club membership and neighborhood price rank on randomization block and high
school fixed effects as in equation 2, splitting the sample by high school type. We then plot the
mean selective final club residual against the neighborhood price rank mean residual at each
decile of its distribution. To capture level differences across high school types, we add the sam-
ple mean of selective final club membership back to the residuals for each group. For private
feeder students, final club membership rates grow steadily with neighborhood price rank. For
other students, club membership rates stay flat at a lower level. The gap between the two groups
grows by about two thirds as we move from the bottom decile to the top decile of the within-
block neighborhood rank distribution. This corresponds to a roughly 50 percentile increase in
neighborhood rank.
   In contrast to our findings for social activities, assignment to a higher-priced peer neighbor-
hood has no effect on academic rank. Results reported in Panel C of Table 6 show that the effects


                                                 25
of assignment to higher-priced peer neighborhoods on academic rank group membership are
close to zero in most cases and not statistically significant at conventional levels.31 The effect of
assignment to higher-priced peer neighborhoods on a continuous class rank measure is also near
zero. Panel B of Figure 5 shows that the gap between private feeder students and their better-
performing peers from other school types is stable across the distribution of neighborhood rank.
      We do see evidence that assignment to a higher-priced neighborhood raises the rates at which
students show up in the rank lists, indicating that they do not have incomplete or non-passing
grades. In the full sample, a fifty percentile change in neighborhood rank raises the rate of list
appearance by 3.7 percentage points, 4.6 percent of the sample mean. We observe effects of
similar size for private feeder and other students. Overall, we interpret these results as evidence
that higher-status peers do not generally affect grades but may modestly reduce the risk of very
bad academic outcomes or failure to complete a term on time.


5.5     Adult social lives and career paths

Twenty-five years after graduation, assignment to higher-priced peer neighborhoods raises adult
participation in social organizations, but again only for private feeder students. Panel A of Table
7 reports the effects of residential peer group rank on participation in adult social organizations.
In the full sample, a zero-to-one change in peer neighborhood rank raises the rate of membership
in any adult social organization by 6.7 percentage points (SE=3.6, sample mean of 38.0%). The
full-sample increase reflects the combination of a 24.2 percentage point increase for private feeder
students (SE=6.7) and a zero effect for others. We reject the null that the two effects are equal
(p=0.003). A 50 percentile change in peer neighborhood price raises rates of participation in
adult social clubs for private feeder students by 26.1% of their sample mean and 100.1% of the
gap by high school type. Panel C of Figure 5 shows the dramatic increase in the gap in adult
social club participation by high school type as one moves from the bottom to the top of the
distribution of random variation in neighborhood price rank.
      Within the social organization category, increased participation rates for private feeder stu-
dents are driven mostly by country clubs, for which participation rates rise by by 21.9 percentage
points (SE=6.6). We see no effects for membership in professional or honor societies. These find-
ings again parallel descriptive results from Table 3 showing that members of selective final clubs
were more likely to participate in adult social clubs but not professional or honor societies.
      Exposure to higher-status peers causes students from private feeder schools to pursue careers
with higher private school shares but pushes other students in the opposite direction. We report
these findings in Panel B of Table 7. Focusing first on the occupation private high school index,
we see an effect near zero in the full sample. This reflects offsetting effects for private feeder
 31 The   rank group indicators we take as outcome variables here include unranked students as zero values.



                                                         26
students and other students. For private feeder students, a zero-to-one change in peer neigh-
borhood price raises the occupation index by 0.450 (SE=0.181). For other students it lowers that
index by 0.165 (SE=0.093). The p-value from a test that these two effects are equal is 0.002.
      Finance is the key driver of shifts in the private school index. Assignment to a higher-priced
neighborhood raises the share of private feeder students going into finance by 14.4 percentage
points (SE=5.8), on a base of 18.1% in the residential sample. Recall that finance is the occupation
with the largest share of private feeder students. Exposure to higher status peers decreases the
rates at which other students go into finance. A test of the null that the finance effect is the
same for private feeder students and other students returns a p-value of 0.002. There are smaller
shifts across other occupations, with private feeder students shifting away from medicine, higher
education, and teaching, and other students shifting towards medicine. Both private feeder
and other students shift modestly towards an aggregated "business" category, which includes
upper/lower management, accounting, and retail.32
      As with social outcomes, effects on occupational outcomes are economically large. A 50 per-
centile increase in peer mean room price raises the share of private feeder students pursuing
finance careers by 39.7% of their sample mean and 80.4% of the gap by high school type. For the
occupation index, this effect is equal to 69.9% of the gap by high school type. Panel D of Figure 5
shows how the gap in the occupation index increases for private feeder students and decreases
for others as neighborhood price rank increases. As was the case for short- and long-run social
outcomes, exposure to higher-status peers tends to expand gaps by baseline social status.33


5.6     Census outcomes

We next estimate the effects of residential peer neighborhood on outcomes from the 1940 Census.
Sample restrictions required by the census match procedure reduce sample size by roughly two
thirds relative to specifications with Class Report outcomes. This smaller sample produces con-
fidence intervals that are too large to be informative. We report our findings in Panel C of Table
7. To take one example, the standard error of our estimate of the effects of a one-unit change in
peer price rank on wage income topcoding for private feeder students is 9.9 percentage points.
Given our point estimate of approximately zero, the 95% CI spans increases and decreases in
  32 This shift is driven by senior management and accounting for private feeder students, and by lower management

for other students. See Online Appendix Table A.2.
   33 The decrease for low-status students differs somewhat from zero effects for this group we observe in most other

domains. One possible rationale for shift away from private school typical careers among non-private feeder students
is social identity theory (Tajfel et al., 1971; Goette et al., 2006, 2012), which argues that making group distinctions
salient can produce group-favoring behavior and expand cross-group gaps. Looking across different outcomes, we
see some support for this idea, in the form of modest (though typically statistically insignificant) shifts away from
private feeder typical behaviors such as social committee participation and Hasty Pudding membership. Exposure to
high-status peers also modestly reduces marriage rates for lower-status students (see section 5.8 below) . However,
the presence of null effects on most other outcomes for lower-status students and the difficulty of ruling out other
causal channels argues for a cautious interpretation of this finding.


                                                          27
topcode rates of close to 20 percentage points in each direction, on a private feeder sample mean
of 25.0%, so we cannot rule out a doubling in topcode rate or a fall to near zero.
      A more informative approach is to combine outcomes from the Class Reports with outcomes
from the 1940 Census to construct an earnings index that captures how much we might expect
census earnings to change based on the shifts in occupation and adult social outcomes that we
observe in the Class Reports. Using the set of students matched to both census earnings records
and Class Report occupation, we regress earnings from the 1940 Census on indicators for each
broad occupation and adult social activity category. As with our private school indices, we select
covariates using a Lasso, using EBIC for model selection. Our index is predicted values from this
regression, which we can compute for all students in the Class Report occupation sample, not
just those matched to the census. Units are dollars. We place this Class Report earnings index on
the left hand side of equation 2.
      This approach can be thought of as a Harvard-specific version of the occupation indices of-
ten used to analyze historical census records (Olivetti and Paserman, 2015; Feigenbaum, 2018a;
Saavedra and Twinam, 2020; Abramitzky et al., Forthcoming).34 At minimum, it provides insight
into whether the kinds of shifts in Class Report outcomes we see in response to exposure to high-
status peers are associated with higher earnings in the cross section. Under additional (strong)
assumptions, it may provide a guide to what we would see if we could observe earnings for
more students in our Harvard sample. These assumptions are a) that the relationship between
earnings and Class Report outcomes for students not matched to the census are the same as those
who are matched, and b) that earnings responses to shifts in Class Report outcomes induced by
peer environment affect earnings as in the cross section
      We report our findings in the bottom row of Table 7. A 50-percentile shift in peer neighbor-
hood rank raises the Class Report earnings index for private feeder students by $64 (SE=24). The
effect for other students is a precise zero. While our sample of census-matched students in the
room randomization analysis is small and yields imprecise estimates, the shifts we see in Class
Report outcomes are generally associated with higher earnings.


5.7     Alternate modeling choices

Additional analyses explore the sensitivity of our quasi-experimental findings to alternate mod-
eling decisions. Online Appendix Tables A.3 through A.6 show that our findings are similar
when we exclude high school fixed effects or when we both exclude high school fixed effects
and limit the randomization blocks to interactions between per-occupant price and year, drop-
ping interactions with occupant count. As suggested by the balance analysis in Table 5, year-
  34 Recall that standard occupation scores are poorly suited to our highly-selected Harvard context because the busi-

ness and finance careers that Harvard students pursue are poorly categorized in Census data. See section 3.3 and
Online Appendix B.3.



                                                         28
specific room price dummies are the key controls. Online Appendix Tables A.7 and A.8 report
findings for alternate definitions of the private feeder group and for private non-feeder schools.
Our findings for private feeders are similar when we consider more or less expansive group defi-
nitions. Effects for private non-feeder students are similar to those for other non-feeder students.
Online Appendix Tables A.9 and A.10 report results that drop the 1919, 1920, and 1921 entering
cohorts. These students arrived on campus before the first reference to the room-randomization
scheme we find in primary source documents, so it is possible they were subject to a different
procedure. Dropping them does not affect our findings. Online Appendix Tables A.11 and A.12
report results using randomization inference as opposed to clustered standard errors to conduct
statistical tests; our results are unaffected. Finally, Online Appendix Figure A.7 displays results
from specifications in which we replace our linear measure of peer neighborhood rank with
dummies for terciles of rank, measuring the effects of placement in the second or third tercile of
neighborhood price rank relative to the first. We observe rising effects across terciles on selective
social and career outcomes for private feeder students, while the effects for students not from
private feeder schools are near zero across all outcomes.


5.8     Mechanisms and heterogeneous effects

To better understand the pathways through which residential peers shape long-run outcomes
and the students who are most affected, we consider a variety of additional intermediate out-
comes and sample splits. We summarize our findings here. See Online Appendix B.8 for details.
      Academic achievement. The shifts in social and career outcomes that we observe for private
feeder students are driven by students who are also academic high achievers. The shift towards
finance careers comes from relatively high achieving high status students who otherwise would
have become doctors or professors, not from lower-achieving students.
      The Great Depression. The students in classes of 1930 and later graduated into the teeth of the
Great Depression, which could affect the importance of social ties for early-career job finding
(Kramarz and Skans, 2014). However, we see little evidence that the effects of residential peers
vary with the timing of Depression exposure.
      Major choice and career intent. School peers may shape long run outcomes by changing aca-
demic specialization in college, by changing career goals at the time of college completion, or
by changing how careers play out conditional on specialization and goals. Consistent with Sac-
erdote (2001), we find no evidence that exposure to high-status peers changes students' major
choices. We observe some evidence of modest effects on stated career intent at the time of grad-
uation. Changes in career paths due to residential peer assignment appear to come mostly from
changes in outcomes conditional on specialization and goals.
      The marriage market. Exposure to high-status residential peers may also shape outcomes in the
marriage market. Historical accounts of Harvard social clubs such as Amory (1947) describe their

                                                  29
importance in the marriage market, and studies in other settings emphasize the importance of
marriage for the intergenerational transmission of social status (Ager et al., 2019). We document
strong assortative matching on religious/cultural background. We then show that assignment
to high-status residential peers raises the chances that high-status students marry wives with
Colonial maiden names, increasing marital assortativity.


6      Harvard students across the 20th century
6.1     The long-run Harvard time series

Our main results speak to the role of old boys' clubs and interactions between high-status peers
in the formation of American elites among Greatest Generation cohorts who reach their career
peaks in the middle of the 20th century. This section extends the descriptive analysis through
Generation X and Millenial cohorts in the 2010s labor market. The goal is to understand how
patterns of Harvard enrollment, academic performance, and career choice have changed, and
what this says about upward mobility among the educational elite across the 20th century.
      We extend the time series for key outcomes through the present. To describe student at-
tributes, we use Freshman Red Books for each graduating class through 2015. For academic and
career outcomes, we link the Red Books to 25th Reunion Class Reports digitized at five years
intervals through 1990; i.e., 1945, 1950, and so on. Census outcomes are not available over this
longer period, but Latin honors at graduation and career descriptors are. We use first names to
classify students on the basis of gender and extend our race/ethnicity classification scheme to in-
clude Black, Latino, and Asian students based on names and hand-codes of headshots. Because
hand-coding is costly, we code only three out of every five years after 1955.35 Because fashions
in first names may change over time, the race/ethnicity codes in the long-run series use only
surnames. We retain the same set of private feeder schools for the long-run analysis, while ex-
tending our classification of public feeder schools to include schools that send more students to
Harvard after the conclusion of our main sample period in the 1930s. Finally, to make cross-time
comparisons more straightforward, we classify medical and law careers based on the receipt of
MD and LLB/JD degrees rather than stated occupation.
      Online Appendix B.9 discusses details of data construction and presents evidence that the
data allow for consistent cross-time comparisons of group outcomes. Several pieces of evidence
indicate the data we construct is of high quality. We match publicly reported aggregate statistics
on academic honors, gender mix, and the share of Asian students almost exactly. Shares of
under-represented minority (URM) students also closely follow published aggregates through
    35 We
        code three year blocks surrounding each five year interval; e.g. 1989, 1990, and 1991 for the 1990 block,
followed by 1994, 1995, and 1996 for the 1995 block, and so on. We drop non-coded cohorts from analyses of
race/ethnicity.


                                                       30
the 1980s, though they fall below published aggregates after 1990 (i.e., beyond our main analysis
sample). Shares of students pursuing different graduate degrees over time are similar to survey
reports in Goldin and Katz (2008), and we see little evidence of differential reporting across
groups. In sum, these data capture the big-picture trends in other data sources, extend the time
horizon on available aggregates, and allow for new comparisons of outcomes across groups.


6.2     Harvard diversifies

Harvard became a dramatically more diverse institution in terms of gender and race/ethnicity
between the classes of 1924 and 2015. Table 8 describes the gender and race/ethnicity of Harvard
students in four blocks, each 20 to 25 years long. Panel A of Table 8 reports statistics for Harvard
students as a whole. We start observing female students in our data in the class of 1975. By
the early 2000s, the class is split evenly between men and women. The share of students with
Jewish surnames rises after World War II, then falls again in the modern era. The share of Asian
students and URM students is near zero through the late 1960s, then rises sharply. These gains
are offset by falling shares of white students with Colonial names, from 27% before World War
II to 6% in the 1990s and later.
      As reported in Panels B and C of Table 8, students from private feeder and public feeder
high schools diversifies roughly in parallel with the broader population, though Colonial stu-
dents continue to be over-represented and Jewish students under-represented at private feeders.
These shifts take place in the context of a declining share of students from private feeder schools
overall, coinciding with the university's increasing national footprint (Hoxby, 2009). The frac-
tion of Harvard students from private feeder high schools falls from 24% in the pre-war period
to 9% in the 1970s and 1980s to 4% in the 1990s and 2000s.


6.3     Grades and career paths over time

We next consider academic performance, taking Latin honors at graduation as our measure of in-
terest. Because nearly 80% of students graduate with some kind of honors degree by the late 20th
century, we use a definition of academic high achievement that includes only students awarded
a magna or summa cum laude degree. By this definition, the share of academic high achievers rises
from 8% in the mid 1920s to 33% in the late 1980s.36
      There are persistent differences in academic performance by high school type and race/ethnicity.
Panel A of Figure 6 shows that students from public feeder high schools outperform students
from private feeder high schools over the full 1924-1990 period. Panel B of Figure 6 shows that
students with Jewish surnames outperform students with Colonial surnames over the full period
as well. In more recent cohorts, Asian students are more likely to graduate with high honors than
 36 Healy   (2001) attributes the increase in honors degrees to grade inflation during the Vietnam War.


                                                          31
other students, and URM students are less likely. Table 9 reports the share of honors graduates
for three 20-year blocks, splitting by school type and race/ethnicity, as well as gender. We ob-
serve no difference in the share of high honors graduates by gender.
      We next describe the evolution of career choices by high school type. Our first result here
is that the shares of students pursuing finance careers by high school type and race/ethnicity
converge over time. Panels C and D of Figure 6 show a steady decline in the finance gap between
private and public feeder schools, and between students with Jewish and Colonial surnames.
For the classes between 1970 and 1990, the shares of students pursuing finance by race/ethnicity
cluster between 6.3% (for Jewish students) and 11.1% (for Colonial students), with rates for other
white students, URM students, and Asian students all between 8.7% and 10.8%.
      Other cross-group differences in career paths persist. Within finance, there are stark differ-
ences by gender, with 10.9% of men in the classes of 1970 through 1990 going into finance com-
pared to 4.4% of women (Panel E of Figure 6). Gaps in other career paths emerge. For example,
Panel F of Figure 6 show that private feeder students become much more likely to pursue MBA
degrees in the 1980s. Results in Table 9 show an emerging gap in academic careers by high school
type after 1945, and a persistent Jewish-Colonial gap in medical careers over the entire sample
period. Gaps career outcomes by academic performance are fairly stable. Students graduating
with high honors are less likely to go into finance or get MBAs and more likely to go into higher
education or law over the full sample period.


6.4     Income mobility for recent cohorts

Given the increasing diversity and shifting career paths we document, to what extent does family
background continue to predict child income for students at elite universities? We address this
question using data from Chetty et al. (2020). These data describe the joint distribution of parent
and child income for children born between 1980 and 1982, split by university type. We focus
on the Ivy+ tier, which consists of the eight Ivy League universities (including Harvard), Duke,
Stanford, MIT, and UChicago.
      Panel A of Figure 7 displays the histogram of parent income among students at Ivy+ uni-
versities. As reported in Chetty et al. (2020), Ivy+ students are drawn disproportionately from
the top of the income distribution. 2.2% come from the top 0.1% of the parent income distribu-
tion, 14.5% from the top 1%, and 68% from the top quintile. Understanding the child-parent SES
gradient within Ivy+ universities requires zooming in on high parent incomes.
      Panels B and C of Figure 7 show that, within Ivy+ universities, the children of the richest
parents have much higher incomes than other children. The figures display mean income and
(age-adjusted) top 1% share for children within bins defined by parent income percentile. We
limit the sample to the top quintile of the parent income distribution, and show separate points
for each percentile within the top 5% of that distribution, as well for as the top 0.1%.

                                                  32
      Mean earnings for children are fairly flat between the 80th and 95th percentiles of the par-
ent income distribution, which accounts for 26.9% of Ivy+ student enrollment. Ivy+ students
with parents between the 80th and 90th percentile of the income distribution earn $135,000 on
average, similar to the $132,000 average for students with parents between the 90th and 95th per-
centiles.37 Starting around the 95th percentile, the slope ticks up. Students with parents between
the 99th and 99.9th percentiles earn $176,000 on average, 33% more than students with parents in
the 90-95th percentiles. Students with parents in the top 0.1% earn an average of $233,000, 76%
more than students from 90th-95th percentile parents. For top 1% income shares, the story is sim-
ilar. Roughly 25% of students from top 1% parents are in the top 1% of the income distribution
themselves, 40% higher than for students from 90-95th percentile parents.38
      The gaps in top income shares between Ivy+ students from top 1% parents and other Ivy+
students among 1980s birth cohorts are similar to the differences by high school type that we
observe in the historical Harvard data. In our main analysis sample, 24.6% of Harvard students
from private feeder schools have incomes in the top 1% of the earnings distribution for men
in their birth cohorts ($3945 or higher), 62% higher than the 15.2% for other Harvard students.
Private feeder attendance and parent income are not perfect proxies for one another. However,
these findings do indicate that gaps in child outcomes by parent income for older Millenials are
large in historical terms-- i.e., they are of similar size those generated by the extensive social,
academic, and career differences we document among Greatest Generation cohorts.


6.5     University institutions and policies

This section summarizes how various university institutions and policies may mediate the long-
run patterns that we observe. See Online Appendix B.10 for details.
      Admissions policy. That students from high-status backgrounds tend to perform less well aca-
demically than others is consistent with available data on admissions standards. Students from
privileged backgrounds appear to have retained substantial admissions advantages over the 20th
century. Karabel reports that in 1940 only one out of 77 applicants from the elite private schools
was rejected, compared to 14 out of 59 applicants from Boston Latin (p. 174). Arcidiacono et al.
(2019b) reports that applicants who are legacies, likely donors, or children of faculty (LDC) are a)
  37 This relationship remains flat if we extend the graph to lower income percentiles; mean income for the 32% of
children at Ivy+ schools from families outside the top quintile is $116,000. See Online Appendix Table A.13 for details.
   38 These findings may appear to differ from results reported in Chetty et al. (2020), who describe a linear relation-

ship between average child income rank and parent income rank across the income distribution. In fact, our findings
are consistent with Chetty et al. (2020). The linear relationship between average child percentile and parent income
percentile at the top of the income distribution coexists with the sharp rise in average income and top 1% shares that
we observe because the share of children not working at all also increases sharply at the top of the income distribu-
tion. Online Appendix Figure A.8 and Table A.13 replicate the linear rank-rank relationship across the distribution,
and show how rising shares of non-working children at the very top of the parent income distribution balance out
increasing top income shares when taking averages across ranks.



                                                          33
less likely to come from disadvantaged backgrounds, and b) much more likely to be admitted to
Harvard than other students whose academic performance is better. An LDC student in the third
decile of Harvard's academic performance index is more likely to be admitted than a non-LDC
student in the 10th decile. The 19% LDC share in recent Harvard cohorts is similar to the 24%
private feeder share in our main sample period.
     Our data span the introduction of non-academic admissions criteria in 1926. As shown in
Online Appendix Figure A.9, the number of students with Jewish names fell by roughly one
third following this change.
     Academic success. We observe a final club membership premium that is much larger than the
academic success premium. A comparison to Goldin and Katz (2008) suggests that the returns to
academic performance at Harvard may have risen over time, but that the social success premium
we observe is large even compared to returns to academic success for recent cohorts.
     Field of study. Descriptive analyses show that majoring in economics offers a sizeable earnings
return and a path to finance careers for 1920s and 1930s cohorts. This is consistent with recent ev-
idence from Harvard and elsewhere (Goldin and Katz, 2008; Bleemer and Mehta, Forthcoming).
However, major choice does not mediate the effect of final club membership on career outcomes.
The academic path towards finance is separate from the social path in the cohorts we study.
     Sports participation. Intercollegiate sports were central to social life at Harvard in the period
we study.39 Shulman and Bowen (2011) show that recent cohorts of college athletes tend to
have lower grades than other students, but are more likely to follow business career paths and
earn more than other students. We observe the same patterns among Harvard students in the
1920s and 1930s. Descriptively, roughly 50% of the earnings premium associated with sports
participation can be explained by athletes' social success.


7      Conclusion
This paper shows how social interactions at Harvard shaped the business and civic elite in the
post-war United States. Our key finding is that the benefits of exposure to high-status peers
accrue only to students from high-status backgrounds. Even prolonged residential contact with
high-status peers is not sufficient to help lower-status students access exclusive old boys' clubs
and the career and social outcomes with which club membership is correlated.
     Our results are consistent with the broad point that social factors are an important determi-
nant of labor market success (Granovetter, 1973; Deming, 2017; Lleras-Muney et al., 2020) and
highlight the extent to which these factors may expand baseline differences across social groups.
    39 TeddyRoosevelt-- who attended Groton, graduated from Harvard, and was a member of the Porcellian final
club-- argued for the importance of college sports for leadership development: "Exactly as one kind of man sneers at
college work because he does not think it bears any immediate fruit in money-getting, so another type of man sneers
at college sports because he does not see their immediate effect for good in practical life" (Roosevelt, 1900).


                                                        34
Our exercise contributes in three ways: 1) by testing the general proposition that social inter-
actions shape high-stakes outcomes, 2) by showing that social interactions among educational
elites did shape the composition of the US elite at an important historical juncture, and 3) by
evaluating the specific policies that Harvard used at the time to promote cross-group interaction
on campus, and that many institutions continue to use today.
      A large body of social science research emphasizes the importance of inclusive institutions
and competition between different groups of elites for economic growth (Acemoglu and Robin-
son, 2000, 2006, 2008, 2012), as well as the consequences of ingroup bias for efficiency (Alesina
and Ferrara, 2005; Hjort, 2014; Fisman et al., 2017). Elite universities have a potentially important
role to play in identifying talented students from underrepresented groups and helping them
access influential positions in the economy and society. However, our findings suggest that ex-
panding formal access to elite higher education beyond its traditional constituencies may not by
itself integrate the old boys' clubs upon which access to at least some top social and economic
positions seems to depend. What policymakers at universities and beyond can do to promote
broader access to these groups is a subject for future work.


References
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson, "Do immigrants assimilate more
  slowly today than in the past?," American Economic Review: Insights, 2020, 2 (1), 125­41.

  , Leah Platt Boustan, and Dylan Connor, "Leaving the enclave: Historical evidence on im-
  migrant mobility from the industrial removal office," Technical Report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research 2020.

  ,     , and Katherine Eriksson, "Europe's tired, poor, huddled masses: Self-selection and eco-
  nomic outcomes in the age of mass migration," American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (5), 1832­
  56.

  ,     , and   , "A nation of immigrants: Assimilation and economic outcomes in the age of mass
  migration," Journal of Political Economy, 2014, 122 (3), 467­506.

  ,     , Elisa J´                    erez, "Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants in the US
                 acome, and Santiago P´
  over Two Centuries," American Economic Review, Forthcoming.

                            erez, "Linking individuals across historical sources: A fully au-
  , Roy Mill, and Santiago P´
  tomated approach," Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History,
  2020, 53 (2), 94­111.




                                                 35
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson, "Political losers as a barrier to economic develop-
  ment," The American Economic Review, 2000, 90 (2), 126­130.

   and      , "Economic backwardness in political perspective," American Political Science Review,
  2006, 100 (1), 115­131.

   and      , "Persistence of Power, Elites, and Institutions," The American Economic Review, 2008,
  98 (1), 267­93.

  and     , Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty, Crown Business, 2012.

Ager, Philipp, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson, "The intergenerational effects of a
  large wealth shock: White southerners after the Civil War," Technical Report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research 2019.

Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara, "Ethnic diversity and economic performance," Journal
  of economic literature, 2005, 43 (3), 762­800.

Allport, Gordon Willard, "The nature of prejudice," 1954.

Altonji, Joseph G, Peter Arcidiacono, and Arnaud Maurel, "The analysis of field choice in
  college and graduate school: Determinants and wage effects," in "Handbook of the Economics
  of Education," Vol. 5, Elsevier, 2016, pp. 305­396.

Alvaredo, Facundo, Anthony B. Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez, "The Top 1
  Percent in International and Historical Perspective," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Septem-
  ber 2013, 27 (3), 3­20.

  , Lucas Chancel, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman, "Global Inequality
  Dynamics: New Findings from WID.world," American Economic Review, May 2017, 107 (5),
  404­09.

Amory, Cleveland, The Proper Bostonians, Vol. 1, EP Dutton, 1947.

Angrist, Joshua D, "The perils of peer effects," Labour Economics, 2014, 30, 98­108.

Arcidiacono, Peter and Michael Lovenheim, "Affirmative action and the quality-fit trade-off,"
  Journal of Economic Literature, 2016, 54 (1), 3­51.

  , Esteban M Aucejo, and V Joseph Hotz, "University differences in the graduation of mi-
  norities in STEM fields: Evidence from California," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (3),
  525­62.



                                                   36
  , Josh Kinsler, and Tyler Ransom, "Divergent: The Time Path of Legacy and Athlete Admis-
  sions at Harvard," Working Paper 26315, National Bureau of Economic Research September
  2019.

  ,     , and   , "Legacy and Athlete Preferences at Harvard," Working Paper 26316, National
  Bureau of Economic Research September 2019.

  ,     , and   , "Asian American Discrimination in Harvard Admissions," Working Paper 27068,
  National Bureau of Economic Research April 2020.

Auchincloss, Kenneth, "The Final Clubs: Little Bastions of Society In a University World that
  No Longer Cares," Harvard Crimson, November 1958.

Bailey, Martha, Connor Cole, Morgan Henderson, and Catherine Massey, "How Well Do Au-
  tomated Linking Methods Perform? Lessons from US Historical Data," Journal of Economic
  Literature, December 2020, 58 (4), 997­1044.

Baltzell, Edward Digby, The protestant establishment: Aristocracy & caste in America, Yale Univer-
  sity Press, 1964.

Baumol, William J, "Entrepreneurship: Productive, Unproductive, and Destructive," Journal of
  Political Economy, 1990, 98 (5 Part 1), 893­921.

Bertrand, Marianne, Sandra E Black, Sissel Jensen, and Adriana Lleras-Muney, "Breaking the
  glass ceiling? The effect of board quotas on female labour market outcomes in Norway," The
  Review of Economic Studies, 2019, 86 (1), 191­239.

Black, Dan A and Jeffrey A Smith, "Estimating the returns to college quality with multiple
  proxies for quality," Journal of labor Economics, 2006, 24 (3), 701­728.

Bleemer, Zachary, "Top percent policies and the return to postsecondary selectivity," Unpub-
  lished Manuscript, 2020.

      and Aashish Mehta, "Will Studying Economics Make You Rich? A Regression Discontinuity
  Analysis of the Returns to College Major," American Economic Journal: Applied, Forthcoming.

Boisjoly, Johanne, Greg J Duncan, Michael Kremer, Dan M Levy, and Jacque Eccles, "Empathy
  or antipathy? The impact of diversity," American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (5), 1890­1905.

Bol, Thijs and Kim A Weeden, "Occupational closure and wage inequality in Germany and the
  United Kingdom," European Sociological Review, 2015, 31 (3), 354­369.

Bourdieu, Pierre, The state nobility: Elite schools in the field of power, Stanford University Press,
  1998.

                                                 37
Bowden, Witt, "War and Postwar Wages, Prices, and Hours, 1914-23 and 1939-44," Bulletin 852,
  United States Bureau of Labor Statistics 1946.

Cappelli, Peter and Monika Hamori, "The path to the top: Changes in the attributes and careers
  of corporate executives, 1980-2001," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2004.

Carrell, Scott E, Bruce I Sacerdote, and James E West, "From natural variation to optimal policy?
  The importance of endogenous peer group formation," Econometrica, 2013, 81 (3), 855­882.

  , Mark Hoekstra, and Elira Kuka, "The long-run effects of disruptive peers," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2018, 108 (11), 3377­3415.

  ,   , and James E West, "The impact of college diversity on behavior toward minorities,"
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2019, 11 (4), 159­82.

  , Richard L Fullerton, and James E West, "Does your cohort matter? Measuring peer effects
  in college achievement," Journal of Labor Economics, 2009, 27 (3), 439­464.

Cattaneo, Matias D, Richard K Crump, Max H Farrell, and Yingjie Feng, "On binscatter," arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1902.09608, 2019.

Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner, and Danny Yagan, "Income
  segregation and intergenerational mobility across colleges in the united states," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2020.

  , Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F Katz, "The effects of exposure to better neighborhoods
  on children: New evidence from the Moving to Opportunity experiment," American Economic
  Review, 2016, 106 (4), 855­902.

Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy, "The small world of investing:
  Board connections and mutual fund returns," Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116 (5), 951­
  979.

Committee on Unrecognized Single-Gender Social Organizations (CUSGSO), "Final Report
  of the Committee on Unrecognized Single-Gender Social Organizations," Technical Report,
  Harvard University September 2017.

Corno, Lucia, Eliana La Ferrara, and Justine Burns, "Interaction, stereotypes and performance:
  Evidence from South Africa," Technical Report, IFS Working Papers 2019.

Costa, Dora L, Noelle Yetter, and Heather DeSomer, "Wartime health shocks and the post-
  war socioeconomic status and mortality of union army veterans and their children," Journal of
  Health Economics, 2020, 70, 102281.

                                                38
Dale, Stacy Berg and Alan B Krueger, "Estimating the payoff to attending a more selective
  college: An application of selection on observables and unobservables," The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 2002, 117 (4), 1491­1527.

   and    , "Estimating the effects of college characteristics over the career using administrative
  earnings data," Journal of human resources, 2014, 49 (2), 323­358.

Davidson, James D, Ralph E Pyle, and David V Reyes, "Persistence and change in the Protes-
  tant establishment, 1930­1992," Social Forces, 1995, 74 (1), 157­175.

Deming, David J, "The growing importance of social skills in the labor market," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1593­1640.

Dillon, Eleanor Wiske and Jeffrey Andrew Smith, "Determinants of the match between student
  ability and college quality," Journal of Labor Economics, 2017, 35 (1), 45­66.

    ¨ Elias, "Mixing the Rich and Poor: The Impact of Peers on Education and Earnings," Tech-
Einio,
  nical Report 2019.

Feigenbaum, James J., "Multiple Measures of Historical Intergenerational Mobility: Iowa 1915
  to 1940," The Economic Journal, 06 2018, 128 (612), F446­F481.

Feigenbaum, James J, "Multiple measures of historical intergenerational mobility: Iowa 1915 to
  1940," The Economic Journal, 2018, 128 (612), F446­F481.

Finseraas, Henning and Andreas Kotsadam, "Does personal contact with ethnic minorities af-
  fect anti-immigrant sentiments? Evidence from a field experiment," European Journal of Political
  Research, 2017, 56 (3), 703­722.

Fisman, Raymond, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikrant Vig, "Cultural Proximity and Loan Out-
  comes," American Economic Review, February 2017, 107 (2), 457­92.

Fitzgerald, F Scott, This side of paradise, Scribner & Sons, 1920.

Flanagan, Caitlin, "Why Harvard shouldn't push its all-male final clubs to go co-ed," Washington
  Post, April 2016.

Folkman, Tyler, Rey Furner, and Drew Pearson, "GenERes: A Genealogical Entity Resolution
  System," in "2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW)" IEEE
  2018, pp. 495­501.

Fracassi, Cesare and Geoffrey Tate, "External networking and internal firm governance," The
  Journal of finance, 2012, 67 (1), 153­194.


                                                  39
Galbraith, John Kenneth, The affluent society 1958.

Glaeser, Edward L, Bruce I Sacerdote, and Jose A Scheinkman, "The social multiplier," Journal
  of the European Economic Association, 2003, 1 (2-3), 345­353.

Goette, Lorenz, David Huffman, and Stephan Meier, "The impact of group membership on co-
  operation and norm enforcement: Evidence using random assignment to real social groups,"
  American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (2), 212­216.

  ,   , and    , "The impact of social ties on group interactions: Evidence from minimal groups
  and randomly assigned real groups," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2012, 4 (1),
  101­15.

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F Katz, "Transitions: Career and family life cycles of the educa-
  tional elite," American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (2), 363­69.

Granovetter, Mark S, "The Strength of Weak Ties," American Journal of Sociology, 1973, 78 (6),
  1360­1380.

Harvard University, "Adopt Lot System for Senior Rooms," The Harvard Crimson, December
  1924.

Healy, Patrick, "Matters of Honnor: Harvard's honors fall to the merely average," Boston Globe,
  October 2001.

Hjort, Jonas, "Ethnic divisions and production in firms," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014,
  129 (4), 1899­1946.

Hoekstra, Mark, "The effect of attending the flagship state university on earnings:               A
  discontinuity-based approach," The review of economics and statistics, 2009, 91 (4), 717­724.

Hoxby, Caroline M, "The changing selectivity of American colleges," Journal of Economic perspec-
  tives, 2009, 23 (4), 95­118.

  , "The productivity of US postsecondary institutions," Productivity in Higher Education, 2018,
  pp. 1­60.

Jack, Anthony Abraham, The privileged poor: How elite colleges are failing disadvantaged students,
  Harvard University Press, 2019.

Jensen, Michael C., "The Cabots of Boston," The New York Times, March 1972.

Jones, Howard Mumford, "Boston, Seen Through a "State of Mind"," Oct 1947.



                                                 40
Jones, Todd R and Michael S Kofoed, "Do peers influence occupational preferences? Evidence
  from randomly-assigned peer groups at West Point," Journal of Public Economics, 2020, 184,
  104154.

Karabel, Jerome, The chosen: The hidden history of admission and exclusion at Harvard, Yale, and
  Princeton, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2006.

Katz, Lawrence F, Jeffrey R Kling, and Jeffrey B Liebman, "Moving to opportunity in Boston:
  Early results of a randomized mobility experiment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001,
  116 (2), 607­654.

Khan, Shamus, "The sociology of elites," Annual Review of Sociology, 2012, 38, 361­377.

                                  ¨ Skans, "When strong ties are strong: Networks and
Kramarz, Francis and Oskar Nordstrom
  youth labour market entry," Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (3), 1164­1200.

Levine, Steven B., "The Rise of American Boarding Schools and the Development of a National
  Upper Class," Social Problems, 1980, 28 (1), 63­94.

Lleras-Muney, Adriana, Matthew Miller, Shuyang Sheng, and Veronica T Sovero, "Party On:
  The Labor Market Returns to Social Networks and Socializing," Working Paper 27337, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research June 2020.

Low, Josiah O., "The Proper Bostonians. Cleveland Amory," American Journal of Sociology, 1948,
  53 (5), 395­396.

Lowe, Matt, "Types of contact: A field experiment on collaborative and adversarial caste inte-
  gration," 2020.

Luce, Henry R, "The american century," Life Magazine, February 1941.

Ludwig, Jens, Greg J Duncan, Lisa A Gennetian, Lawrence F Katz, Ronald C Kessler, Jeffrey R
  Kling, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu, "Long-term neighborhood effects on low-income families: Ev-
  idence from Moving to Opportunity," American economic review, 2013, 103 (3), 226­31.

Lyle, David S, "Estimating and interpreting peer and role model effects from randomly assigned
  social groups at West Point," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2007, 89 (2), 289­299.

Manski, Charles F, "Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem," The
  review of economic studies, 1993, 60 (3), 531­542.

Marmaros, David and Bruce Sacerdote, "Peer and social networks in job search," European eco-
  nomic review, 2002, 46 (4-5), 870­879.


                                                  41
  and    , "How do friendships form?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (1), 79­119.

Matsa, David A and Amalia R Miller, "A female style in corporate leadership? Evidence from
  quotas," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5 (3), 136­69.

Mayer, Adalbert and Steven L Puller, "The old boy (and girl) network: Social network forma-
  tion on university campuses," Journal of public economics, 2008, 92 (1-2), 329­347.

McWilliams, Carey, "Equality or Fraternities? The Role of Secret Societies in Democratic Edu-
  cation," Commentary, May 1948.

Mehta, Nirav, Ralph Stinebrickner, and Todd Stinebrickner, "Time-Use and Academic Peer
  Effects in College," Economic Inquiry, 2019, 57 (1), 162­171.

Miller, William, "The recruitment of the American business elite," The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 1950, pp. 242­253.

Mills, C. Wright, The power elite, Oxford University Press, 1956.

Mountjoy, Jack and Brent Hickman, "The Returns to College (s): Estimating Value-Added and
  Match Effects in Higher Education," University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Eco-
  nomics Working Paper, 2020, (2020-08).

Mousa, Salma, "Building social cohesion between Christians and Muslims through soccer in
  post-ISIS Iraq," Science, 2020, 369 (6505), 866­870.

Murphy, Kevin M, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny, "The allocation of talent: Implica-
  tions for growth," The quarterly journal of economics, 1991, 106 (2), 503­530.

New York Times, "Initiate Young Roosevelt," New York Times, February 1907.

Nir, Sarah Maslin, "Are Final Clubs Too Exclusive for Harvard?," The New York Times, August
  2nd 2016.

Olivetti, Claudia and M. Daniele Paserman, "In the Name of the Son (and the Daughter): In-
  tergenerational Mobility in the United States, 1850-1940," American Economic Review, August
  2015, 105 (8), 2695­2724.

Paluck, Elizabeth Levy, Seth A Green, and Donald P Green, "The contact hypothesis re-
  evaluated," Behavioural Public Policy, 2019, 3 (2), 129­158.

Philippon, Thomas, "Financiers versus engineers: Should the financial sector be taxed or subsi-
  dized?," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2010, 2 (3), 158­82.



                                                 42
Popov, Sergey V and Dan Bernhardt, "Fraternities and labor-market outcomes," American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Microeconomics, 2012, 4 (1), 116­41.

Premaratne, Reshini, "What the Social Scene at Harvard Could Be," Harvard Crimson, April
  2020.

Price, Joseph, Kasey Buckles, Jacob Van Leeuwen, and Isaac Riley, "Combining Family History
  and Machine Learning to Link Historical Records," Working Paper 26227, National Bureau of
  Economic Research September 2019.

Putnam, Robert D, "Bowling alone: America's declining social capital," in "Culture and poli-
  tics," Springer, 2000, pp. 223­234.

Rao, Gautam, "Familiarity does not breed contempt: Generosity, discrimination, and diversity
  in Delhi schools," American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (3), 774­809.

Reeves, Aaron, Sam Friedman, Charles Rahal, and Magne Flemmen, "The decline and persis-
  tence of the old boy: Private schools and elite recruitment 1897 to 2016," American Sociological
  Review, 2017, 82 (6), 1139­1166.

Rimer, Sara, "Harvard Journal; All-Male Club Opens Its Door Warily," New York Times, October
  1993.

Rivera, Lauren A, Pedigree: How elite students get elite jobs, Princeton University Press, 2016.

Roosevelt, Theodore, "Character and success," Foundations magazine, 1900.

Rothstein, Jesse and Albert H Yoon, "Affirmative action in law school admissions: What do
  racial preferences do?," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2008.

   and Albert Yoon, "Mismatch in law school," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research 2008.

Saavedra, Martin and Tate Twinam, "A machine learning approach to improving occupational
  income scores," Explorations in Economic History, 2020, 75, 101304.

Sacerdote, Bruce, "Peer effects with random assignment: Results for Dartmouth roommates,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (2), 681­704.

Sarada, Sarada, Michael J Andrews, and Nicolas L Ziebarth, "Changes in the demographics of
  American inventors, 1870­1940," Explorations in Economic History, 2019, 74, 101275.

Sekhri, Sheetal, "Prestige Matters: Wage Premium and Value Addition in Elite Colleges," Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Applied Economics, July 2020, 12 (3), 207­25.

                                                 43
Shue, Kelly, "Executive networks and firm policies: Evidence from the random assignment of
  MBA peers," Review of Financial Studies, 2013, 26 (6), 1401­1442.

Shulman, James L and William G Bowen, The game of life: College sports and educational values,
  Vol. 62, Princeton University Press, 2011.

Social Security Administration, "Beyond the Top 1000 Names," 2021.

Society for American Archaeology, "Harry Evelyn Dorr Pollock, 1901­1982," American Antiq-
  uity, 1983, 48 (4), 782.

Stinebrickner, Ralph and Todd R Stinebrickner, "What can be learned about peer effects us-
  ing college roommates? Evidence from new survey data and students from disadvantaged
  backgrounds," Journal of public Economics, 2006, 90 (8-9), 1435­1454.

Synott, Martha Graham, The half-opened door: Discrimination and Admissions at Harvard, Yale, and
  Princeton, 1900-1970 number 80, Contributions in American History, 1979.

Tajfel, Henri, Michael G Billig, Robert P Bundy, and Claude Flament, "Social categorization
  and intergroup behaviour," European journal of social psychology, 1971, 1 (2), 149­178.

Temin, Peter, "The stability of the American business elite," Industrial and Corporate Change, 1999,
  8 (2), 189­209.

Tilly, Charles et al., Durable inequality, Univ of California Press, 1998.

Useem, Michael and Jerome Karabel, "Pathways to top corporate management," American So-
  ciological Review, 1986, pp. 184­200.

Weber, Max, Economy and society: An outline of interpretive sociology, Vol. 1, Univ of California
  Press, 1922.

Xu, Guo, "The costs of patronage: Evidence from the british empire," American Economic Review,
  2018, 108 (11), 3170­98.

Z´
 arate, Rom´      es, "Social and Cognitive Peer Effects: Experimental Evidence from Selec-
           an Andr´
  tive High Schools in Peru," 2019.

Zimmerman, David J, "Peer effects in academic outcomes: Evidence from a natural experiment,"
  Review of Economics and statistics, 2003, 85 (1), 9­23.

Zimmerman, Seth D., "The returns to college admission for academically marginal students,"
  Journal of Labor Economics, 2014, 32 (4), 711­754.



                                                  44
  , "Elite colleges and upward mobility to top jobs and top incomes," American Economic Review,
  2019, 109 (1), 1­47.

Zweigenhaft, Richard L and G William Domhoff, Jews in the Protestant establishment, VNR AG,
  1982.




                                              45
Figures

     Figure 1: Labor market outcomes by academic performance and final club membership




Labor market outcomes by academic performance and membership in a selective final club. Outcome types are listed
in panel titles. Panels A­C depict earnings by freshman academic rank group and selective final club membership.
Panels D­F present the same outcomes but also divide students by high school type. Because of small sample sizes in
rank group 1, we collapse groups 1 and 2. We do not display groups with fewer than 20 students. Sample: students
from cohorts 1920­1930 who matched to the 1940 census (and, for Panels A, B, D, and E, who reported wage income).
Wage income is earnings in dollars. "Topcoded" is an indicator equal to one if a student reports the maximum wage
income value of $5,000. "Non-wage" is an indicator equal to one if a student reports having at least $50 of non-wage
income.




                                                        46
Figure 2: Adult career and social outcomes by academic performance and final club membership




Career outcomes and adult social outcomes by academic performance and membership in a selective final club. Out-
come types come from Class Report data and are listed in panel titles. Panels A­C depict adult outcomes for students
by freshman academic rank group and selective final club membership. Panels D­F present the same outcomes but
also divide students by high school type. We collapse groups 1 and 2 and do not display groups with fewer than
20 students. Sample: students from cohorts 1920­1934 who matched to a Class Report; for occupations we further
restrict to students with non-missing occupation data.




                                                        47
                             Figure 3: Dorm room prices and peer attributes




Panel A: Histogram of dorm price per student by student high school type for 1928 entering cohort. Panel B: his-
togram of the peer neighborhood size (summing over all rooms). Panel C: Mean, 10th, and 90th percentiles of peer
neighborhood mean price rank by own room price rank. Panel D: Mean, 10th, and 90th percentiles of peer neigh-
borhood private high school share by own room price rank, excluding own room. Each dot in panels C and D
corresponds to the mean value of the listed statistic within a ventile of the own-room price distribution. The plus
signs are the 10th and 90th percentiles within each ventile.




                                                        48
         Figure 4: Randomization block size and within-block variation in peer attributes




Panel A depicts a student-weighted histogram of randomization block size. Panels B and C depict the range of mean
neighborhood room rank (B) and private school share (C) across neighborhoods within each randomization block.
Blocks are sorted vertically by maximum room rank (B) or private school share (C) with vertical height equal to the
cumulative number of students. Private feeder shares exclude individuals in the reference room. Blocks are defined
by interactions between year, room size, and per-occupant room price. In panel A dashed lines denote 25th and 75th
percentiles. In panels B and C dashed lines denote 10th and 90th percentiles. We exclude blocks with fewer than nine
students from panels B and C.




                                                        49
Figure 5: Key outcomes by within-block decile of peer neighborhood price and high school type




Binscatter plots showing the listed outcome by decile of peer neighborhood price rank, within randomization block.
We obtain these graphs by regressing the vertical- and horizontal-axis variables on randomization block and large
high school fixed effects separately by high school type. We then plot the conditional mean of the residuals for out-
come variables against residual neighborhood price rank in each decile. We add sample means back to outcome
variables to capture level differences by high school type. Outcome variables by panel as follows. Panel A: member-
ship in selective final club. Panel B: first-year academic class rank. Reverse coded so that six is the highest rank and
one is the lowest, with higher values corresponding to better academic performance. Panel C: membership in social
clubs 25 years after graduation. Panel D: Occupation status index, 25 years after graduation. See section 3.4.3 for
index definition. See section 5 for analysis details.




                                                          50
                             Figure 6: Grades and career outcomes over time




Student shares and graduation honors by student group. Left graph in each panel is the share of students in the listed
group. Right panel is shares of students in each group graduating with "high honors," defined as magna or summa
cum laude. Horizontal axis in all panels is graduating class year. HS type, race/ethnicity, and gender classifications
available for each graduating class from 1923 through 2020. Honors designations available for each class from 1923
through 1939 and then at five years intervals from 1940 through 1990. Points display means over all years within
2.5 years on either side of the centered value. For example, the 1982.5 datapoint is an average of 1980 and 1985 class
years, and the 1987.5 datapoint is an average of 1985 and 1990 class years. Panel A splits by high school type and
also provides full-sample shares. Panel B splits by race/ethnicity. "White" is defined as non-URM, non-Asian, non-
Jewish, non-Colonial students. "URM" category is Black and Hispanic students. Jewish and Colonial categories are
based on last name indices. Panel C splits by gender. See section 6.1 for details.




                                                         51
      Figure 7: Child's outcomes by parent income for Ivy+ students in 1980s birth cohorts




Childrens' outcomes by parent income percentile for students in 1980-82 birth cohorts who enroll in Ivy+ colleges.
Data are from Chetty et al. (2020). Horizontal axis in all panels is parent income percentile. Ivy+ colleges are the eight
Ivy League schools plus Duke, Stanford, MIT, and UChicago. Outcomes by panel are as follows. Panel A: histogram
of parent income rank. Panel B: mean child income (1000s of USD). Panel C: share of children with top 1% incomes in
age cohort. In panels B and C, points below the 95th percentile are means within centered five percentile bins. Points
at the 95th percentile and above are one-percentile bins, with the top percentile split into a 99-99.9 percentile point
and a top 0.1 percentile point.




                                                           52
Tables

                                         Table 1: Data availability by source
                   Data type                     Share non-missing                 Universe                 N
                   A. Match rates within available cohorts
                   Freshman Red Book                    1.000                 Cohorts 1919-35               14383
                   High school                          0.984                 Cohorts 1919-35               14383
                   Campus address                       0.950              Cohorts 1919-25; 1927-35         13629
                   25 year Class Report                 0.911                 Cohorts 1920-35               13820
                   Class Report occupation              0.793                 Cohorts 1920-35               13820
                   1940 Census                          0.647                 Cohorts 1920-30               8851
                   Pre-Harvard census                   0.619                 Cohorts 1920-33               11800

                   B. Match rates conditional on Class Report availability
                   Class Report occupation              0.871             Cohorts 1920-35 in Class Report   12592
                   1940 Census                          0.685             Cohorts 1920-30 in Class Report   8350
                   Pre-Harvard Census                   0.662             Cohorts 1920-33 in Class Report   11039

Match rates by data source and/or data type. The second column presents the share of students in the listed sample universe who
have the data described in the first column. The third column describes the relevant universe. Cohorts for whom a particular data
source was unavailable are excluded from the universe. The fourth column presents the number of students in the relevant universe.
The universe in Panel A is students in Freshman Red Books, for listed cohorts. The universe in Panel B is students in Freshman Red
Books who are matched to Class Report records, again for listed cohorts.




                                                                 53
                 Table 2: Family background and college outcomes for Harvard students
                                     All       Private feeder   Non-private   Hasty Pudding      Sel. Fin. Club   Randomized
  A. Demographics
  Have high school data             0.984          1.000           0.979           0.979             0.981           0.983
  Any private high school           0.464          1.000           0.290           0.909             0.949           0.589
  Private feeder                    0.241          1.000           0.000           0.616             0.733           0.313
  Any public feeder                 0.226          0.000           0.298           0.019             0.012           0.080
  From MA                           0.509          0.455           0.526           0.473             0.439           0.387
  From NY                           0.172          0.254           0.146           0.249             0.293           0.218
  Have Harvard father               0.070          0.142           0.046           0.179             0.216           0.087
  Have Harvard brother              0.204          0.289           0.176           0.362             0.402           0.230
  Jewish name                       0.066          0.013           0.083           0.006             0.002           0.038
  Catholic name                     0.055          0.028           0.063           0.030             0.014           0.037
  Colonial name                     0.293          0.429           0.250           0.468             0.510           0.333

  B. Census childhood household demographics
  Have Census pre-Harvard            0.619         0.708           0.592           0.728             0.743           0.650
  S or E Eur. immg. gen. 1-2         0.098         0.011           0.127           0.006             0.009           0.051
  Have father's occupation           0.690         0.649           0.703           0.663             0.668           0.680
  Father's occupation: Doctor        0.103         0.127           0.095           0.084             0.063           0.121
  Father's Occupation: Lawyer        0.115         0.166           0.099           0.189             0.176           0.141

  C. First-year campus location
  Have address data                 0.950          0.995           0.936           0.998             0.999           1.000
  Live on campus                    0.800          0.961           0.749           0.983             0.987           1.000
  Have room attributes              0.712          0.906           0.650           0.933             0.919           1.000
  Room price per occupant           209.2          234.3           198.1           231.3             232.7           212.9
  Peer neighborhood price           213.9          227.9           207.5           227.6             233.9           213.8
  25th pctile neighborhood rank     0.256          0.359           0.217           0.386             0.444           0.256
  75th pctile neighborhood rank     0.711          0.768           0.691           0.768             0.805           0.711

  D. Academic class rank groups
  Rank group 1                      0.018          0.008           0.021           0.004             0.000           0.018
  Rank group 2                      0.069          0.040           0.078           0.027             0.023           0.064
  Rank group 3                      0.155          0.104           0.171           0.088             0.069           0.151
  Rank group 4                      0.242          0.217           0.250           0.204             0.197           0.242
  Rank group 5                      0.375          0.437           0.356           0.448             0.451           0.376
  Rank group 6                      0.141          0.194           0.125           0.229             0.259           0.149
  Not ranked year 1                 0.208          0.215           0.205           0.138             0.130           0.207

  E. First-year activities
  Have any activity                 0.526          0.707          0.468            0.868             0.918           0.605
  N activities                      1.046          1.672          0.848            2.473             2.791           1.267
  Activity leadership position      0.064          0.134          0.042            0.224             0.269           0.084
  Sports                            0.367          0.549          0.310            0.728             0.791           0.430
  Social                            0.083          0.197          0.047            0.358             0.481           0.108
  Music                             0.133          0.163          0.123            0.208             0.187           0.156
  First-year activity index         0.000          0.532          -0.169           1.120             1.499           0.158

  F. Upper-year social clubs
  Hasty Pudding                     0.153          0.393          0.077            1.000             0.950           0.209
  Sel. Fin. Club                    0.070          0.214          0.025            0.435             1.000           0.095
  Any final club                    0.136          0.369          0.062            0.744             1.000           0.185
  Upper-year club index             -0.000         0.721          -0.229           2.137             2.779           0.151
  N                                 14383          3466           10917            2053               941            9356
Descriptive statistics across sample definitions. Columns are samples, rows are variables, cells display variable means unless oth-
erwise specified. Columns as follows. All: full Red Book sample universe. Private feeder: students who attended private feeder
high schools. All non-private: all students not in the private feeder category. See main text for more on high school groups. Ran-
domized: students living in on-campus housing with price and occupancy records in a randomization block with more than one
room. See Section 5 for more on room randomization. Panel A: Demographic variables from Red Books. Panel B: Demographics
from pre-college Census records. We exclude the 1919, 1934, and 1935 cohorts from this sample due to data availability. Panel C:
Campus address data from Red Books and merged room characteristics; 1926 entering class omitted. D: Academic first-year class
rank groups; one is highest achievement, six is lowest. Panel E: College activities from Red Books. Panel F: Membership in upper
year social clubs. 1935 cohort excluded due to data availability. See text for details.

                                                                 54
                                 Table 3: Adult outcomes for Harvard students
                                  All    Private feeder    Non-private     Hasty Pudding     Sel. Fin. Club   Randomized
     A. Adult associations
     Any social club             0.343        0.449           0.308             0.549            0.590            0.380
     Country club                0.242        0.363           0.203             0.459            0.490            0.287
     Gentleman's club            0.112        0.210           0.081             0.293            0.367            0.138
     Fraternal order             0.103        0.078           0.111             0.062            0.054            0.091
     Any honor/prof group        0.369        0.311           0.387             0.323            0.320            0.362
     Adult association index     0.000        0.411           -0.133            0.694            0.894            0.115

     B. Occupations
     Have occupation            0.871         0.858           0.875             0.896            0.883            0.864
     Finance                    0.101         0.175           0.077             0.212            0.259            0.119
     Accounting                 0.108         0.119           0.105             0.109            0.098            0.106
     Medicine                   0.091         0.060           0.101             0.053            0.049            0.081
     Law                        0.123         0.099           0.130             0.113            0.102            0.124
     Higher ed.                 0.070         0.048           0.078             0.035            0.036            0.072
     Teach                      0.080         0.071           0.083             0.067            0.065            0.074
     Government                 0.034         0.028           0.035             0.035            0.038            0.034
     Art/pub                    0.074         0.074           0.074             0.070            0.067            0.077
     Senior management          0.213         0.236           0.205             0.257            0.281            0.230
     Low management             0.119         0.106           0.123             0.115            0.107            0.116
     Retail                     0.137         0.127           0.140             0.126            0.124            0.130
     Occupation index           -0.000        0.275           -0.087            0.389            0.543            0.064

     C. Adult census
     In school                  0.030         0.026           0.031             0.021            0.021            0.030
     In labor force             0.954         0.952           0.954             0.953            0.952            0.948
     Wage income                 2747         2957             2682             3346             3549             2858
     Has wage income            0.726         0.712           0.731             0.720            0.715            0.725
     Non-wage inc. 50+          0.503         0.645           0.457             0.669            0.732            0.557
     Wage inc. 5000+            0.174         0.246           0.152             0.357            0.418            0.210
     N                          14383         3466            10917             2053              941             9356
Descriptive statistics across sample definitions. Columns are samples, rows are variables, cells display variable means. Columns as
follows. All: Full Red Book sample universe. Private feeder: students who attended private feeder high schools. All non-private:
All students not in the private feeder category. See main text for more on high school groups. Randomized: Students living in
on-campus housing with price and occupancy records in a randomization block with more than one room. See Section 5 for more
on room randomization. Panel A: Adult social club and professional association data from 25th Anniversary Class Reports. Cohort
1919 excluded. Panel B: Occupation data from 25th Anniversary Class Reports. Cohort 1919 excluded. Panel C: Adult outcomes
from the 1940 census. Cohorts 1919 and 1931­35 excluded due to data availability. See main text for details.




                                                               55
    Table 4: Labor market outcomes by academic performance in first year and social success
                                          Baseline   Final clubs   Census controls   High school FEs   Family FEs   Applicant pool
              A. Has earnings
              Private feeder               0.012        0.016           -0.006                                          -0.048
                                          (0.014)      (0.015)         (0.024)                                         (0.032)
              Class rank                   0.000        0.000           0.006             0.006           0.008          0.005
                                          (0.005)      (0.005)         (0.008)           (0.012)         (0.022)       (0.015)
              Selective final club                      -0.020          -0.012            -0.058          0.005         -0.071
                                                       (0.024)         (0.038)           (0.032)         (0.100)       (0.031)
              Have Harvard father                                                         0.010
                                                                                         (0.031)
              Sample mean                  0.480       0.480            0.524             0.501          0.504          0.504
              Observations                 7113        7113             3388               1659          1026           1123

              B. Earnings (dollars)
              Private feeder                294         143              -34                                              89
                                            (56)        (58)             (88)                                           (126)
              Class rank                     39          50               67               -12            -20             62
                                            (20)        (19)             (30)              (44)          (107)           (61)
              Selective final club                      778              711               658           1250            449
                                                        (94)            (150)             (129)          (632)          (120)
              Have Harvard father                                                           -16
                                                                                          (120)
              Sample mean                  2771         2771            2760              2974            2970          3362
              Observations                 3417         3417            1737               831            291           566

              C. Topcoded earnings flag
              Private feeder               0.092        0.047           0.003                                           0.033
                                          (0.016)      (0.016)         (0.024)                                         (0.040)
              Class rank                   -0.008       -0.004          0.004             -0.027         -0.006         0.012
                                          (0.006)      (0.005)         (0.008)           (0.013)         (0.031)       (0.019)
              Selective final club                      0.231           0.226             0.185           0.371         0.130
                                                       (0.031)         (0.048)           (0.041)         (0.147)       (0.039)
              Have Harvard father                                                         0.008
                                                                                         (0.036)
              Sample mean                  0.181       0.181            0.184             0.252          0.237          0.359
              Observations                 3417        3417             1737               831            291            566

              D. Non-wage earnings flag
              Private feeder             0.176          0.141           0.066                                           0.118
                                        (0.017)        (0.018)         (0.027)                                         (0.037)
              Class rank                 0.005          0.007           0.002             0.024            0.001        0.011
                                        (0.006)        (0.006)         (0.010)           (0.013)         (0.032)       (0.016)
              Selective final club                      0.175           0.135             0.076           -0.175        0.128
                                                       (0.027)         (0.043)           (0.035)         (0.139)       (0.035)
              Have Harvard father                                                         0.041
                                                                                         (0.034)
              Sample mean                  0.511       0.511            0.500             0.644          0.616          0.675
              Observations                 4611        4611             2343              1120            513            754


Estimates of equation 1. Panels correspond to outcome variables, columns correspond to specifications, and rows correspond to
covariates. With each panel, each column reports estimates from a single specification. All specifications restrict to students in the
1920­30 entering cohorts who are matched to records of first-year academic rank group. Panels B and C additionally restrict to
students who report wage earnings in the 1940 Census, and Panel D to students matched to the 1940 Census (regardless of whether
they report wage earnings). Outcome variables are as follows. Panel A: "Has Earnings" is an indicator equal to one if a student is
matched to the 1940 Census and reports wage earnings. Panels B and C: "Earnings" is 1940 Census wage earnings in dollars, and
"Topcoded" is an indicator for whether a student reports the maximum possible earnings value of $5,000. Panel D: "Non-wage"
is an indicator for whether a student reports at least $50 of non-wage earnings. All specifications include cohort fixed effects (not
reported). Moving across columns, specifications differ as follows. Baseline: private feeder and class rank controls. Final clubs:
adds indicator for selective final club membership. Census controls: adds controls for father's occupation, father's and mother's
state or non-US country of birth, family size, parental presence, home ownership, presence of domestic employees, and farm status;
sample is restricted to students for whom these records are non-missing. High school FEs: restricts the sample to students who
attended private feeder high schools and includes fixed effects for each high school. Family FEs: restricts the sample to students
from families where multiple brothers attended Harvard during our sample period, and includes family fixed effects. Applicant
pool: includes only students who are members of the Hasty Pudding club. See text for details. The sign on class rank groups is
reversed in all specifications so that coefficients reflect the effect of a one rank group improvement in academic performance. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors for the Family FEs are clustered at the family level.




                                                                          56
                                            Table 5: Test of room randomization
                                                              Year FEs          Price * Year FEs        Block FEs
                   A. Balance test
                   Room price per occupant                 206.7     ( 3.3)        ­         ­          ­         ­
                   Any private high school                 0.393    (0.024)     -0.044    (0.037)    -0.064    (0.032)
                   Private feeder high school              0.295    (0.021)      0.022    (0.035)       ­         ­
                   Have HS code                            0.295    (0.022)     -0.024    (0.034)    -0.030    (0.031)
                   From MA                                -0.057    (0.021)      0.008    (0.036)     0.028    (0.035)
                   From NY                                 0.083    (0.017)     -0.027    (0.029)    -0.037    (0.030)
                   Have Harvard father                     0.071    (0.011)      0.005    (0.019)     0.016    (0.022)
                   Have Harvard brother                    0.109    (0.018)      0.007    (0.028)    -0.004    (0.031)
                   Jewish name                            -0.014    (0.008)      0.005    (0.013)     0.013    (0.015)
                   Catholic name                          -0.031    (0.008)     -0.008    (0.012)    -0.006    (0.013)
                   Colonial name                           0.104    (0.019)      0.004    (0.031)    -0.014    (0.032)
                   S or E Eur. immg. gen. 1-2             -0.053    (0.014)     -0.004    (0.018)    -0.000    (0.020)
                   Have father's occupation               -0.075    (0.027)     -0.009    (0.047)    -0.035    (0.051)
                   Father's occupation: Doctor             0.034    (0.024)      0.032    (0.042)     0.030    (0.045)
                   Father's Occupation: Lawyer             0.110    (0.024)     -0.016    (0.045)    -0.023    (0.051)

                   Joint balance test [p-value]           [0.000]              [0.933]              [0.598]

                   B. Links to other data sources
                   Class report link                       0.003    (0.010)     -0.012    (0.016)    -0.012    (0.017)
                   Have occupation                        -0.001    (0.014)     -0.020    (0.024)    -0.008    (0.027)
                   1940 Census                             0.029    (0.014)      0.027    (0.022)     0.034    (0.027)

                   C. Peer and neighborhood attributes
                   Private HS peer share                   0.368    (0.024)      0.304    (0.031)     0.280    (0.033)
                   Feeder HS peer share                    0.270    (0.021)      0.219    (0.028)     0.200    (0.032)
                   Legacy share                            0.062    (0.012)      0.063    (0.015)     0.063    (0.018)
                   E Eur. peer share                      -0.050    (0.014)     -0.050    (0.015)    -0.049    (0.016)
                   Share rooms > median price              1.143    (0.018)      0.800    (0.018)     0.786    (0.018)
                   Share rooms > 90th pctile price         0.309    (0.016)      0.436    (0.016)     0.472    (0.018)

                   D. Endogenous peer outcomes
                   Peer mean acad. rank                    0.389    (0.058)     0.264     (0.072)    0.157     (0.076)
                   Peer activity index                     0.308    (0.049)     0.305     (0.065)    0.299     (0.072)
                   Peer mean activity count                0.303    (0.066)     0.293     (0.085)    0.336     (0.094)
                   Peer mean social act.                   0.055    (0.014)     0.061     (0.018)    0.054     (0.021)
                   Peer more sel. final                    0.136    (0.014)     0.128     (0.019)    0.110     (0.021)
                   Peer occ. index                         0.375    (0.050)     0.495     (0.068)    0.435     (0.075)
                   Peer mean finance                       0.107    (0.015)     0.143     (0.021)    0.128     (0.023)
                   Peer mean wage inc.                     361.8     (95.2)     419.9     (132.9)    358.9     (143.7)
                   N                                       9343                 9356                 9343

Coefficients on peer neighborhood price rank from regressions of the form given in equation 2. The sample consists of students
in non-singleton randomization blocks. Rows are dependent variables. Standard errors clustered at peer neighborhood level in
parentheses to the right of point estimates. Each pair of columns corresponds to a different control set. "Year FEs": controls are
year dummies only. "Price X Year FEs": controls for all interactions between per-occupant price and year dummies. "Block FEs":
controls for all interactions between per-occupant price, year dummies, and room occupancy, as well as indicators for each private
feeder high school and other large feeder schools. Panel A: Room attributes and predetermined student characteristics. Harvard
family data is from Class Reports. Immigrant and father occupation variables are from Census data; non-matched individuals are
excluded from those rows. "Joint test" is test of the null hypothesis that all coefficients in Panel A are zero. Panel B: Matches to later-
life data sources. Panel C: Predetermined attributes of students and rooms in the assigned neighborhood. Peer attribute statistics
omit one's own room. "Share of rooms>median price" is the share of rooms in the assigned neighborhood with a price above the
median; "Share of rooms >90th ptile price" is the share of rooms with a price above the 90th percentile. Panel D: Endogenous peer
outcomes, realized freshman year or later. See text for detailed definitions of variables.




                                                                    57
                          Table 6: Peer neighborhood effects on short-run outcomes
                                                               All      Private    Non-private      Test
                             A. First-year activities
                             Have any activity                 0.070     0.080         0.064       0.820
                                                              (0.034)   (0.057)       (0.043)
                             N activities                      0.284     0.650         0.108       0.030
                                                              (0.111)   (0.222)       (0.124)
                             Activity leadership position      0.043     0.099         0.012       0.070
                                                              (0.020)   (0.044)       (0.021)
                             Social                            0.049     0.184         -0.028      0.000
                                                              (0.024)   (0.057)       (0.023)
                             Sports                            0.029     0.086         -0.007      0.229
                                                              (0.035)   (0.064)       (0.043)
                             Music                             0.047     0.094         0.030       0.295
                                                              (0.027)   (0.052)       (0.033)
                             Other activities                  0.021    -0.027         0.059       0.184
                                                              (0.031)   (0.058)       (0.035)
                             First-year activity index         0.207     0.479         0.029       0.018
                                                              (0.082)   (0.170)       (0.088)
                             N                                 9343      2828           6367

                             B. Upper-year social clubs
                             Selective final club              0.065     0.168         0.001       0.004
                                                              (0.021)   (0.056)       (0.017)
                             Less selective final club        -0.028    -0.074         -0.007      0.208
                                                              (0.020)   (0.050)       (0.021)
                             Hasty Pudding Inst. 1770          0.019     0.106         -0.018      0.070
                                                              (0.029)   (0.062)       (0.030)
                             Upper-year club index             0.122     0.358         -0.021      0.047
                                                              (0.078)   (0.176)       (0.078)
                             N                                 8589      2606           5845

                             C. First-year academic rank
                             Rank group 1                     -0.000    -0.012         0.002       0.504
                                                              (0.011)   (0.015)       (0.015)
                             Rank group 2                      0.018     0.017         0.014       0.929
                                                              (0.016)   (0.025)       (0.021)
                             Rank group 3                      0.022     0.006         0.029       0.639
                                                              (0.024)   (0.039)       (0.030)
                             Rank group 4                     -0.008     0.089         -0.054      0.011
                                                              (0.030)   (0.046)       (0.036)
                             Rank group 5                      0.022    -0.067         0.073       0.049
                                                              (0.032)   (0.061)       (0.039)
                             Rank group 6                      0.021     0.014         0.006       0.883
                                                              (0.023)   (0.046)       (0.027)
                             Rank listed year 1                0.073     0.047         0.070       0.702
                                                              (0.029)   (0.051)       (0.035)
                             Class rank year 1                 0.024     0.100         0.019       0.707
                                                              (0.104)   (0.180)       (0.129)
                             N                                 7035      2089           4799

Coefficients on peer neighborhood price rank from regressions of the form given in equation 2. The first three columns denote
samples. Rows are outcome variables. All specifications include randomization block and dummies for large feeder high schools;
see section 5.1 for details."Test" column reports the p-value from a test of the null that the coefficients reported in the private and
non-private columns are equal. Panels A and B report first-year activity outcomes and upper-year club outcomes. "First-year
activity index" and "upper-year club index" are the standardized indices of the association between activities and private high
school background described in section 3.4.3. Other variables are indicators for a given activity type unless stated otherwise. Panel
C describes academic outcomes in the first year. Class rank is a continuous variable from one through six, with one the best and six
the worst. The other outcomes are dummies for having grades in the listed rank group and being listed at all. Sample sizes vary
across panels due to data availability. Private and non-private column sample sizes add up to slightly less than the "all" column
sample size because there is no variation in peer neighborhood assignment for private-feeder or non-private-feeder students within
some randomization blocks; students in these blocks are omitted from split sample regressions. Standard errors clustered at peer
neighborhood level.


                                                                 58
                          Table 7: Peer neighborhood effects on long-run outcomes
                                                             All        Private   Non-private   Test
                                A. Adult associations
                                Any social club             0.067        0.242       -0.004     0.003
                                                           (0.036)      (0.067)     (0.046)
                                Country club                0.073        0.219       0.006      0.005
                                                           (0.032)      (0.066)     (0.040)
                                Gentleman's club            0.019        0.053       0.003      0.421
                                                           (0.026)      (0.056)     (0.028)
                                Fraternal order             0.002        0.021       -0.002     0.639
                                                           (0.022)      (0.037)     (0.029)
                                Any honor/prof group       -0.014        0.039       -0.025     0.387
                                                           (0.032)      (0.060)     (0.041)
                                Prof. Association          -0.021        0.033       -0.037     0.344
                                                           (0.032)      (0.060)     (0.040)
                                Honor society              -0.017        0.020       -0.020     0.357
                                                           (0.019)      (0.035)     (0.024)
                                Adult association index     0.139        0.329       0.041      0.134
                                                           (0.077)      (0.171)     (0.087)
                                N                           8178         2480         5548

                                B. Occupation choice
                                Finance                     0.016        0.144       -0.052     0.002
                                                           (0.025)      (0.058)     (0.028)
                                Medicine                    0.002       -0.018       0.017      0.426
                                                           (0.023)      (0.034)     (0.030)
                                Higher ed.                 -0.018       -0.026       -0.023     0.953
                                                           (0.021)      (0.034)     (0.028)
                                Law                        -0.032       -0.009       -0.036     0.640
                                                           (0.027)      (0.044)     (0.035)
                                Business                    0.066        0.070       0.046      0.791
                                                           (0.040)      (0.077)     (0.049)
                                Teach                      -0.014       -0.017       -0.005     0.796
                                                           (0.021)      (0.038)     (0.027)
                                Government                  0.004        0.012       0.009      0.932
                                                           (0.015)      (0.031)     (0.018)
                                Art/pub                    -0.005       -0.017       0.008      0.565
                                                           (0.021)      (0.035)     (0.027)
                                Occupation index            0.055        0.450       -0.165     0.002
                                                           (0.081)      (0.181)     (0.093)
                                N                           7039         2097         4795

                                C. Adult income
                                Wage income                 -26.1       -440.5       191.0      0.138
                                                           (191.4)      (367.8)     (236.3)
                                Wage inc. 5000+             0.020       -0.029       0.073      0.369
                                                           (0.050)      (0.099)     (0.061)
                                Non-wage inc. 50+           0.053        0.081       0.044      0.753
                                                           (0.052)      (0.099)     (0.064)
                                Class Report wage index      33.5        128.8        -17.1     0.011
                                                            (26.8)       (48.1)      (33.8)
                                N                            2396         697         1611
Coefficients on peer neighborhood price rank from estimates of equation 2. Rows: outcome variables. All specifications include
randomization block and high school FEs. The first three columns are samples."Test" column: p-value from a test that the coeffi-
cients in the private and non-private columns are equal. Panel A: adult social clubs. Sample: students matched to Class reports.
Panel B: Occupation outcomes. Sample: matches to Class Reports w/ non-missing occupation. Table A.2 disaggregates "business"
occupation category. "Adult association index" and "Occupation index:" standardized indices of association between adult out-
comes and private high school background. See section 3.4.3. Other variables: indicators for listed outcomes. Panel C: 1940 Census
income. Sample: Census-matched students in 1920­30 cohorts with non-missing outcome variable. "Class report wage index:"
earnings-weighted index of Class Report variables. Sample for this variable is as in Panel B. See section 5.6. Subsample sizes add up
to less than the "All" column sample size because there is no variation in neighborhood assignment within some high school type
by randomization blocks. Standard errors clustered at peer neighborhood level.




                                                                   59
                              Table 8: Harvard demographics over the long run

                                                 1923-1944   1945-1966     1967-1990     1991-2015
                          A. All
                          Male                     1.000        1.000         0.720         0.539
                          Jewish                   0.140        0.169         0.194         0.134
                          Colonial                 0.273        0.185         0.098         0.058
                          Other white              0.569        0.621         0.569         0.513
                          URM                      0.014        0.017         0.084         0.102
                          Asian                    0.004        0.007         0.054         0.193

                          Share                   1.000        1.000         1.000         1.000
                          N w/ race codes         19095        20897         17944         16627
                          B. Private feeder HS
                          Male                     1.000        1.000         0.825         0.529
                          Jewish                   0.046        0.077         0.116         0.121
                          Colonial                 0.403        0.315         0.190         0.097
                          Other white              0.542        0.591         0.602         0.535
                          URM                      0.007        0.013         0.048         0.068
                          Asian                    0.002        0.004         0.044         0.179

                          Share                    0.240        0.173         0.085         0.043
                          N w/ race codes          4519         3543          1490           711
                          C. Public feeder HS
                          Male                     1.000        1.000         0.682         0.508
                          Jewish                   0.271        0.282         0.289         0.204
                          Colonial                 0.178        0.119         0.073         0.055
                          Other white              0.520        0.569         0.503         0.460
                          URM                      0.027        0.023         0.063         0.063
                          Asian                    0.004        0.008         0.073         0.218

                          Share                    0.229        0.190         0.154         0.132
                          N w/ race codes          4324         3895          2689          2159


Demographic characteristics of Harvard students over timel, by high school type. Columns are time periods, split by graduating
class. Panels are samples. "All" is all students, "Private feeder" and "Public feeder" restrict the sample by high school type.
Within each panel the "Male" through "Asian" rows are shares of the listed variable with the sample defind by the panel. Data
are based on combinations of name indices and visual codes; see section 6.1 for details. Gender codes are based on first names
for graduating classes of 1975 and later; gender is imputed as male in the period before coeducation. Jewish students are those
with Jewish surnames. "Colonial" students are those with colonial surnames. URM (under-represented minority) groups Black and
Hispanic students. "Other white" are students who are not Black, Hispanic, or Asian, and who do not fall into the Colonial and
Jewish surname categories. "Share" is the share of students from the sample defined in the full Harvard sample, and N is number
students in the sample.




                                                             60
                                                        Table 9: Long run trends in grades and career paths

                         All      Male      Female     Priv. Fdr.    Pub. Fdr.     Jewish     Colonial     Other white      URM      Asian     High hon.      Not high hon.
        A. 1924-1940
        High hon.       0.090     0.090                   0.051        0.102        0.155       0.065          0.083        0.134                 1.000            0.000
        Finance         0.103     0.103                   0.176        0.059        0.059       0.137          0.097        0.065                 0.059            0.103
        Higher ed.      0.077     0.077                   0.053        0.072        0.077       0.068          0.080        0.120                 0.233            0.070
        MD              0.090     0.090                   0.058        0.134        0.145       0.073          0.082        0.155                 0.074            0.091
        JD              0.153     0.153                   0.143        0.146        0.224       0.129          0.147        0.155                 0.213            0.147
        MBA             0.066     0.066                   0.075        0.070        0.065       0.074          0.063        0.056                 0.030            0.070

        N              11500      11500        0          2755          2763        1555        3347           6365          184       36          769             7585
        B. 1945-1965 (5-year intervals)
        High hon.     0.148      0.148                    0.101        0.143        0.241       0.103          0.135                              1.000            0.000
        Finance       0.115      0.115                    0.166        0.079        0.094       0.138          0.115                              0.051            0.123
        Higher ed. 0.169         0.169                    0.129        0.204        0.246       0.127          0.161                              0.378            0.137
        MD            0.154      0.154                    0.104        0.205        0.239       0.091          0.148                              0.160            0.153
        JD            0.173      0.173                    0.164        0.151        0.218       0.131          0.173                              0.236            0.162
        MBA           0.095      0.095                    0.104        0.097        0.085       0.099          0.098                              0.050            0.103
61




        N               3818      3818         0           735          726          671         773           2322          30        14          545             3073
        C. 1970-1990 (5-year intervals)
        High hon.     0.300     0.295        0.315        0.234        0.333        0.411       0.237          0.274        0.184     0.365       1.000            0.000
        Finance       0.096     0.109        0.044        0.141        0.090        0.063       0.111          0.108        0.087     0.093       0.060            0.110
        Higher ed. 0.171        0.161        0.208        0.126        0.205        0.220       0.159          0.158        0.103     0.193       0.274            0.127
        MD            0.169     0.169        0.169        0.107        0.164        0.211       0.117          0.148        0.189     0.282       0.203            0.154
        JD            0.218     0.228        0.184        0.165        0.212        0.245       0.195          0.215        0.245     0.160       0.287            0.189
        MBA           0.132     0.139        0.107        0.172        0.138        0.118       0.139          0.139        0.142     0.094       0.088            0.151

        N               3184      2522        653          262          522          733         334           1745          195       161         941             2156

     Shares of students obtaining graduating honors and pursuing various career paths, by demographic background and over time. Panels split by graduating class. All cells are
     shares of students in the category defined by the row variable for the sample defined by the column. "Share" is the fraction of students falling into the column category, and
     "N" is the count of students for whom we observe occupation data. "All" is the full sample. "Male" and "Female" columns split by gender. Gender codes are based on first
     names for graduating classes of 1975 and later; gender is imputed as male in the period before coeducation. Private feeder and public feeder columns split by HS type. URM
     students are defined as Black and Hispanic. Jewish and Colonial categorizations are based on last names. "Other white" columns consists of non-Asian, non-URM, non-Jewish,
     and non-Colonial students. Race/ethnicity splits are for US students only. All data come from Red Book records linked to Class Report records. Red Books are available in
     every year. Class Report data are available every before 1940 and then every five years thereafter. See section 6.1 for details
