                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           REAL AND PRIVATE-VALUE ASSETS

                                    William N. Goetzmann
                                     Christophe Spaenjers
                                    Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh

                                      Working Paper 28580
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28580


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




This paper is written for a special issue of the Review of Financial Studies on real and private-
value assets. Goetzmann and Spaenjers served as the organizers of a conference on the topic at
the Yale School of Management in January 2020, with Van Nieuwerburgh acting as the
sponsoring RFS Editor. We would like to thank the conference program committee members for
their feedback on the submissions, and Leigh Ann Clark and Electra Ferriello for logistical
support. We are also thankful to Dragana Cvijanovic, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Ralph Koijen,
Matthijs Korevaar, Cameron LaPoint, Candy Martinez, Tarun Ramadorai, Jacob Sagi, Eva
Steiner, and Johannes Stroebel for valuable comments on this paper. Michael Leahy provided
valuable research assistance. Any remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by William N. Goetzmann, Christophe Spaenjers, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Real and Private-Value Assets
William N. Goetzmann, Christophe Spaenjers, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 28580
March 2021
JEL No. E01,G0,R0,Z11

                                          ABSTRACT

Real and private-value assets--defined here as the sum of real estate, infrastructure, collectibles,
and non-corporate business equity--is an investment class worth an estimated $85 trillion in the
U.S. alone. Furthermore, private values can affect pricing in many other financial markets, such
as that for sustainable investments. This paper introduces the research on real assets and private
values that can be found in this special issue. It also reviews recent advances--and suggests new
research directions--on a number of topics in the real assets space that we believe to be
particularly important and exciting.

William N. Goetzmann                             Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
School of Management                             Columbia University
Yale University                                  Graduate school of Business
Box 208200                                       Uris Hall, office 809
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                         3022 Broadway
and NBER                                         New York, NY 10027
william.goetzmann@yale.edu                       and NBER
                                                 svnieuwe@gsb.columbia.edu
Christophe Spaenjers
HEC Paris - Department of Finance
1 rue de la Libération
78351 Jouy en Josas cedex
France
spaenjers@hec.fr
    Financial assets are contractual claims to benefits that flow from ownership or promises from

income-producing entities. By contrast, the owner of a real asset has the right to possess and

personally enjoy a particular piece of durable physical property that is typically unique (or at

least in limited supply and subject to heterogeneity in quality). Ownership also gives the right to

contract over the use of this property. The most well-known real asset type is of course real estate,

be it residential, commercial, or agricultural. Other important real asset categories are physical

infrastructure, and collectibles such as artworks.1

    When can durable physical objects be considered assets? Commercial real estate and infrastruc-

ture projects yield cashflows, and acquirers' intention is clearly to earn a return commensurate with

the risks they are taking. By contrast, one might treat a cabin in the woods or an oil painting as

simply a consumption good for which one pays a price and then enjoys a service flow. However,

when a residential structure or a collectible is purchased with an expectation of a (possible) future

resale--when there is an anticipated dimension of time with attendant concern for the object's

financial risk and return--then it becomes an asset.

    The price formation and trading process of real assets is unlike that for publicly traded equities.

Real assets are characterized by infrequent trading in search and auction markets, market values

that are hard to pin down exactly, and investment returns that can only be estimated with noise.

Moreover, for assets such as owner-occupied housing and works of art, the use value derived

from ownership is non-monetary and non-tradable, and is private in the sense that it depends on

the identity of the owner. For private-value assets, any two potential buyers will be willing to

pay different amounts--reflecting differences in preferences and relative wealth--even when they

have identical resale strategies and agree on future monetary cashflows. Because of the illiquidity

of the markets in which these assets are traded, variation in private values can translate into

systematic differences in transaction prices and thus financial returns between market participants.
   1 Commodities are a well-established asset category on their own, and falls outside of the scope of our analysis. Many
commodity markets are relatively liquid; trading often happens through financial contracts such as futures; and the
notions of uniqueness and heterogeneity are not as relevant as for the assets discussed in this paper. We also do not
cover research on secondary markets for durable consumer goods (e.g., cars) or capital equipment (e.g., aircraft); see
Gavazza and Lizzeri (2021) for a recent review of the literature.




                                                           1
Heterogeneity in beliefs about the future dynamics of private preferences--driving potential

resale revenues and thus the common-value component of an asset--can further amplify the price

uncertainty at any point in time.

   Real assets are not the only type of investments with private-value components. In particular,

the non-pecuniary private benefits from running one's own business may be an important part of

the utility flow from entrepreneurship. Non-corporate businesses also share the aspect of illiquidity

with the real assets mentioned before.

   We here thus define "real and private-value assets" (RPVA) as the sum of real estate, infras-

tructure, collectibles, and non-corporate business equity. Not only are such assets pervasive, they

represent a significant fraction of the economy. Both institutional and household portfolios have

substantial sums of money invested in RPVA. In Section 1 of this paper, we attempt a rough

quantification for the United States, which arrives at an aggregate asset class value of $85 trillion.

   Private values can also be of importance for the pricing of more traditional financial assets.

We can think, for example, of distributions of idiosyncratic preferences around the ESG or impact

features of businesses--and how these increasingly impact investment decisions and valuations.

   The existing body of published research arguably does not measure up to the importance of

RPVA and of the role of private values in asset pricing more generally, even if much progress is

currently being made. The Review of Financial Studies therefore decided to sponsor a conference and

special issue on the topic. The idea was to simultaneously showcase the current work in the area

and to stimulate new research, as explained in more detail in Section 2.

   The current article, authored by the sponsoring RFS Editor and the two organizers of the

conference, serves as the introduction to the special issue. In Section 3, we present the eleven

original research articles in this issue. We organize our discussion around three research themes:

the measurement of risk, return, and liquidity of real assets; drivers of variation in valuations and

investment behavior; and private values in other asset markets. In Section 4, we identify a number

of research topics that we believe to be particularly promising areas for future work.




                                                  2
1   Size of the Real and Private-Value Asset Class

It is fiendishly difficult to arrive at a precise and internally consistent assessment of the total size

of the RPVA class. All methods agree, however, that the asset class is large and growing. Table

1 compiles our--admittedly rough--estimate of its size in the United States, based on the latest

available data. The bottom line is that RPVA is a $85 trillion asset class. Appendix A contains the

data sources and details of the calculations. Here is a summary of how we arrived at our headline

numbers:


Residential real estate.   Residential real estate is relatively straightforward to value. According to

the Financial Accounts of the United States, it is worth $31.2 trillion in 2020.Q3.


Commercial real estate. The aggregate value of commercial real estate (CRE) assets, including

multi-family rental housing, is much harder to measure. We use Financial Accounts data on real

estate values held by the non-financial corporate, non-financial non-corporate, non-profit, and

equity REIT sectors. This delivers an aggregate U.S. CRE market value of $32.8 trillion.

    Table 1 also provides a breakdown into the various subsectors of CRE. We use private (i.e., non-

government-owned) fixed asset data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) to decompose the

CRE value derived from the Financial Accounts into its subsectors. Industrial real estate includes

warehouses and manufacturing structures. Many manufacturing structures are owned by end users

and rarely trade. Health care includes hospitals, many of which may not trade much either, and

which are sometimes classified as social infrastructure instead.

    Our estimate exceeds numbers provided by the CRE industry, which tend to be based on

"investable" assets. The third column of Table 1 reports one such estimate based on Koijen and

Van Nieuwerburgh (2021) for the four main CRE sectors, using data from Real Capital Analytics

(RCA). They construct price indices based on all CRE transactions from 2001 until 2020 over $10

million, and then value the stock of all CRE assets that ever traded over this 20-year period as of

the end of 2019. The RCA assets add up to $4.7 trillion, an estimate that excludes many assets that



                                                   3
never trade, such as office and manufacturing properties owned and used by the corporate sector.


Agricultural real estate.         Agricultural real estate (land and structures) is worth an estimated $2.6

trillion in 2020 according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Farmland, like other commercial

property, is income-producing. However, like for housing, some fraction of its value may have

private-value components associated with patrimony, intergenerational ownership, and status.


Infrastructure.        The next category of real assets is infrastructure. The World Economic Forum

(2014) defines infrastructure as "the physical structures--roads, bridges, airports, electrical grids,

schools, hospitals--that are essential for a society to function and an economy to operate." Many

infrastructure assets are owned by governments (around 75% according to a report by RARE (2013)).

We focus on privately-held assets in the U.S., and use BEA data to arrive at an estimated value of

$6.9 trillion for 2019. Table 1 provides a breakdown into various subcategories. Our measure of

social infrastructure covers educational, vocational, and religious structures, but excludes hospitals,

which we classified as commercial real estate.


Collectibles. For collectibles, we rely on Vorsatz (2020), who estimates the total float of different

collectible types based on wealth distribution data and high net worth individuals' reported

collectibles ownership. We get to an aggregate value of jewelry, fine art, antique furniture, and

classic cars owned by U.S. households of $5.5 trillion.2 Table 1 reports the estimates for the different

components. Goetzmann and Whitaker (2021) use U.S. estate tax records from 2013 to arrive at

a year-2020 value for fine art between $1.5 and $2.0 trillion, which is similar to the $1.8 trillion

estimate reported here.


Non-corporate business equity. Finally, we include private business wealth. According to the

Financial Accounts, household-owned equity in non-financial non-corporate businesses (such as

sole proprietorships and partnerships) is worth $12.7 trillion as of 2020.Q3. However, a substantial

portion of this estimate represents a claim to real estate assets that are already included in our
  2 This   is a conservative estimate as we exclude coins, stamps, wine, and other types of collectibles.


                                                             4
                 Table 1: Aggregate value of RPVA in the U.S. (in billions of USD)
    Asset type                                  Aggregate Subtype RCA data                                Period
    Residential real estate                         31,232                                               2020.Q3
    Commercial real estate                          32,793                                               2020.Q3
      Multifamily                                                 7,027        1,453
      Office                                                      6,305        1,519
      Retail                                                      7,015          916
      Industrial                                                  5,167          811
      Hospitality                                                 3,466
      Health care                                                 3,522
      Student housing                                               291
    Agricultural real estate                          2,569                                                  2020
    Infrastructure                                    6,901                                                  2019
      Power                                                       2,433
      Electrical transmission equipment                             564
      Communication                                                 702
      Transportation                                                515
      Water, sewage, and waste treatment                            185
      Petroleum and gas                                           1,350
      Mining                                                        148
      Social infrastructure                                       1,004
    Collectibles                                      5,457                                                  2017
      Precious jewelry                                            2,156
      Fine art                                                    1,798
      Antique furniture                                             684
      Classic cars                                                  819
    Non-corporate business equity (excl. CRE)         6,055                                              2020.Q3
    Total                                           85,008


commercial real estate measure. To avoid double-counting, we subtract the $6.6 trillion in real estate

equity owned by the non-financial non-corporate business sector to arrive at a value of $6.1 trillion.3

    Another way to emphasize the importance of RPVA is to compute their share in household

portfolios. If we consider real estate, consumer durable goods, and non-corporate business equity

as RPVA for this exercise, then the asset class is worth $50 trillion of household wealth in 2020.Q3,

up from $30 trillion in 2012. This represents 38% of overall household assets--a share that has

remained fairly constant over the past decade.4
   3 To
      compute the sector's real estate equity, we subtract its total loans from its real estate assets.
   4 Weinclude durables in this calculation as a proxy for collectibles. We include all $12.7 trillion of non-corporate
business equity since the double-counting issue does not arise here. Data are from the Financial Accounts of the
United States, Table B.101.h for the household sector, for 2020.Q3. This share understates the fraction of RPVA in
household portfolios since some of their corporate equity, mutual fund, and pension fund holdings reflect real estate and



                                                           5
    Gomes et al. (2021) review the available evidence on household balance sheets around the world.

They report that shares of real assets are even higher in developing economies than in developed

markets--pointing to an "asset tangibility preference" potentially related to the use of real assets as

collateral or as a way to ease intergenerational transfers. Similarly, a survey of Barclays (2012) shows

that financial motivations for holding art and other collectibles are more important in emerging

economies. More research on the drivers of RPVA holdings in global household portfolios is

warranted.



2    The Yale-RFS Conference and Special Issue

To stimulate new research and showcase important work in the area, the Review of Financial Studies

decided to sponsor a conference and special issue on the topic of "Real and Private-Value Assets".

The conference was held on January 31, 2020 at the Yale School of Management, and co-sponsored

by the International Center for Finance. The program committee was co-chaired by the authors of

this article.

    To allow authors sufficient time to develop new work, a first announcement for the conference

went out in January 2019. The final submission deadline was October 15, 2019. We received exactly

100 submissions. Of these, 73 papers were submitted under the dual submission rules of the RFS.

About 75 papers were sent out for review by a committee of 14 experts. Each paper received two

reviews. Based on the review scores and thematic fit with the conference, the program co-chairs

chose eight papers for inclusion on the conference program.

    Six of the eight papers at the conference were dually submitted to the RFS. In addition, the

sponsoring RFS Editor independently selected six more papers that were dually submitted to

proceed to formal submission to the RFS. All twelve of these papers went through the regular RFS

paper review process, independent from the conference evaluation. Paper acceptance decisions

were made solely by the RFS Editor, based on the recommendations of two referees. Six of the

papers in this issue originate from this dual submission process.
infrastructure investments.


                                                   6
      In addition, the RFS received several more papers that were not submitted to the conference but

were thematically a good fit for the special issue. Some of these manuscripts were already under

review prior to the conference. Five of the papers in this issue are such regular RFS submissions,

including a paper co-authored by one of the conference organizers (Chambers et al., 2021).



3     Research in This Special Issue

In this section, we briefly present the papers included in this special issue, highlighting their

contributions along three dimensions: the measurement of risk, return, and liquidity in real asset

markets; drivers of variation in valuations and investment behavior; and private values in other

asset markets.


3.1     Measurement of risk, return, and liquidity in real asset markets

Historically, the evaluation of the investment characteristics of real assets has typically taken place

through the construction of market-wide price and total return indices. One challenge that this

literature has faced is to control for time-series variation in the quality of the underlying assets--

think of the overall improvements in the average quality of housing over time. Prior research

has also struggled to estimate average net income yields for housing, as data on actually realized

cashflows are hard to obtain. Two papers in this issue, namely Eichholtz et al. (2021) and Chambers

et al. (2021), aggregate from detailed asset-level archival data on property prices and income to

asset-class return estimates. Using different empirical settings, both papers come to the conclusion

that the return estimates in Jordà et al. (2019), which are based on aggregate housing market

statistics, may be biased upwards. Eichholtz et al. find geometric average annual real total returns

of 2.8% and 4.8% for Paris (1871­1943) and Amsterdam (1900­1979)--respectively 1.4% and 2.3%

below the estimates of Jordà et al. (2019) for the same locations and time periods. Using data from

Oxford and Cambridge University college portfolios over the period 1901-1983, Chambers et al.

report an annualized real total return for U.K. housing of 2.3%--a difference of 2.4% with Jordà

et al. (2019).

                                                   7
   Driven by a growing awareness that most household investors in real assets do not hold

diversified portfolios, and that indices are not investible (Chambers et al., 2020), there is also

increasing attention to asset-level rather than index-level risk measures. Two papers in this issue

discuss the idiosyncratic risk associated with real estate investments: Giacoletti (2021) for housing

and Sagi (2021) for commercial real estate. Both papers start from the idea that the combination of

an illiquid asset market and variation in subjective valuations must lead to substantial transaction-

specific risk. Hence, property values do not follow a random walk, and the variance of property-level

capital gains does not scale with the holding period. Sagi builds a search model formalizing this

idea, and shows that it fits patterns in commercial real estate transaction data well. Giacoletti

documents evidence in favor of a causal effect of illiquidity on transaction price dispersion. He

also shows that idiosyncratic risk accounts for two thirds of total property-level capital gain risk for

2-year holding periods, but only 45% for 15-year holds. The mean Sharpe ratio on individual houses

is just 0.44 for a 2-year holding period, although this increases to 0.57 after 15 years. This compares

to a Sharpe ratio estimate of 0.79 when ignoring idiosyncratic risk. Disregarding asset-level capital

gains risk thus leads to a biased view on real estate's risk-return trade-off.

   Giacoletti and Sagi study real estate, but transaction-specific risk is likely to be important in

other real asset markets as well. For example, Lovo and Spaenjers (2018) construct an auction

model for artworks in which variation in bidder types is a source of idiosyncratic risk that does

not disappear even as the holding period converges to zero. The search model of Sagi, like the

auction model of Lovo and Spaenjers (2018), implies that asset owners are more likely to resell

quickly if an investor with a much higher valuation comes along. This highlights the crucial role

played by arbitrageurs in real asset markets. It also suggests a selection bias in observed returns in

real asset markets, where resale decisions and reserve prices are endogenous, at least over short

horizons. As such, these theoretical contributions relate to an econometric literature that aims to

correct repeat-sales estimators of art and housing returns for selection bias (Goetzmann and Peng,

2006; Korteweg et al., 2016; Korteweg and Sorensen, 2016), and can hopefully inform future work in

this area.


                                                   8
    Another, related insight following from these papers is that there is never a single, unambiguous

market value for an artwork or a house, but that one should think of a menu of possible combinations

of (expected) prices and speed of execution ("time on the market"). Recognizing the transactional

frictions in real asset markets should thus help in developing measures of liquidity (see, for example,

Kotova and Zhang (2020)).

    While Giacoletti and Sagi focus on idiosyncratic price dispersion, Eichholtz et al. perform an

asset-level decomposition of the variance of total real estate returns. The total return consists of

both the capital gain and the income yield. They find that, while in the short term total return risk

is mostly driven by idiosyncratic capital gains, income yield risk becomes an increasingly important

component of property-level risk for longer investment horizons. Overall, a better understanding

of time-series and cross-sectional variation in the components of property-level returns and risk

should also help in studying and modeling, first, how income yields and capital gains correlate

with each other and with local housing market characteristics (e.g., Eisfeldt and Demers (2015)),

and, second, to what extent different types of risk are priced (e.g., Han (2013); Peng and Thibodeau

(2017), Eiling et al. (2020)).

    A related interesting question is whether returns compensate investors for bearing the risk that

is present in nearby cashflows or in cashflows that will materialize in the distant future. This is

the central focus of the paper by Giglio et al. (2021). Using data on freeholds and (very) long-term

leaseholds for the U.K. and Singapore, it deduces that the expected return for cash flows more than

100 years in the future is only 2.6%. This long-run return estimate is substantially below the average

return on housing of about 6% that they compute based on various data sources for recent decades

for a number of different locations. Hence, they conclude that the term structure of housing returns

must be downward sloping. This confirms the evidence for the equity market (van Binsbergen et al.,

2012).

    Finally, we want to emphasize that several papers in this issue study the investment charac-

teristics of property types other than housing. For commercial real estate, there of course exists a

long literature studying the properties of REIT returns (see Van Nieuwerburgh (2019) for a recent


                                                  9
example). This literature mostly focuses on aggregate indices. Also, the fact that equity REITs

are (modestly) levered and trade in public stock markets affects their liquidity and risk-return

characteristics. Ghent et al. (2019) recently reviewed the properties of both public and private U.S.

commercial real estate indices going back to the 1970s. In this issue, Chambers et al. find that both

commercial and agricultural real estate outperformed housing over the first eight decades of the

twentieth century in the U.K., with agricultural (commercial) real estate exhibiting relatively high

capital gains (income yields). Sagi focuses on asset-level risk and return in the commercial real estate

market, using transactions data from the NCREIF. Andonov et al. (2021), also in this issue, study

the investment performance of commingled closed-end infrastructure funds, and report relatively

low risk-adjusted returns. This is consistent with Gupta and Van Nieuwerburgh (2021), who find

similarly poor risk-adjusted performance for both infrastructure and real estate private equity funds.

Andonov et al. also find that these funds on average fail to match the long-term stable income

yields of the underlying infrastructure assets, do not add much diversification to investor portfolios,

and have a risk profile more similar to that of other private equity investments. We return to their

question of how to best structure investments in infrastructure, and any other real assets for that

matter, for long-term institutional investors later in this article.


3.2   Drivers of variation in valuations and investment behavior

As highlighted in the previous subsection, the combination of market illiquidity on the one hand

and heterogeneity in subjective valuations between market participants on the other hand can lead

to dispersion in acquisition prices. One reason for variation in the willingness-to-pay by investors

can be heterogeneity in private preferences or "tastes". Adams et al. (2021), speaks directly to

this issue by documenting international, culture-driven differences in preferences for male rather

than female art. In their large sample of historic auction prices, art produced by women sold at

a discount at auction, controlling for a variety of other factors. This discrepancy was larger in

countries with higher levels of gender inequality metrics. Their evidence is not merely historical.

Experiments reported by the authors provide additional evidence that hypothetical works of art are


                                                   10
valued less when they are identified as being made by women. The paper ties in with a growing

literature looking at the market's evaluation of female artists (Bocart et al., 2018; Cameron et al.,

2019).

   Also Andonov et al. highlight the importance of investor preferences. They argue that ESG con-

siderations of public pension infrastructure investors can partially explain their underperformance.

Such investors thus seem willing to trade off financial returns against non-pecuniary benefits, in a

way similar to impact investors in the venture capital industry (Barber et al., 2021). Variation in

preferences is more likely to have an effect on investor prices and returns in illiquid markets.

   In addition to differences in preference-driven private values, heterogeneity in beliefs about

resale values can drive variation in investor behavior in markets for durable assets. Pénasse et al.

(2021) build a speculative art trading model with short-sale constraints and fluctuating differences

in beliefs in the spirit of Hong et al. (2006). They then study the effects of the negative shock to

the expected (future) asset supply (or "float") caused by an artist's premature death. The model

predicts permanent increases in both prices and trading volume as both the value and the frequency

of exercise of the "resale option" associated with art ownership go up. Comparing auction price

and volume trends for artists that died unexpectedly to those for otherwise similar artists that lived

longer, they find evidence in support of these predictions.

   The earlier mentioned-paper of Giglio et al. highlights another important source of (cross-

sectional and time-series) variation in beliefs about the common-value component of residential

real estate, namely climate change risk assessment. They find that transaction prices of properties

in flood zones correlate negatively with a "climate attention index" constructed from real estate

listings. The paper belongs to a fast-growing literature on the pricing of climate risk, explored in

the March 2020 issue of the Review of Financial Studies on "Climate Finance" (cf. Hong et al. (2020)

and the references therein). Much of this literature focuses on housing and its exposure to sea

level rise and wildfire risk. While the early evidence on the effect of climate risk exposure on

housing values is mixed (Bernstein et al., 2019; Murfin and Spiegel, 2020), Garnache (2020) and

Eichholtz et al. (2019) document lower prices for residential and commercial real estate, respectively,


                                                  11
when disaster risk is more salient. Other recent papers focus explicitly on heterogeneity in beliefs

between agents. For example, Bernstein et al. (2021) provide empirical evidence of the importance

of residential sorting based on climate change beliefs, and Baldauf et al. (2020) show that houses in

"climate change believer neighborhoods" sell at a discount. Keys and Mulder (2020) highlight the

differences in beliefs between "optimistic" sellers and "pessimistic" buyers.

      The horizon-decomposition of housing returns inferred from very long-horizon leaseholds, as

highlighted above, combined with the fact that housing values respond to climate risk, makes

housing a suitable asset to infer the discount rates to be applied to climate mitigation investment.

Such investments have uncertain benefits that accrue in the distant future, and how to discount

these benefits is an issue of both great importance and confusion. Since such investments are hedges

and the damages from climate change that they offset are largest in the near term, Giglio et al.

argue that nearby benefits should be discounted at very low rates and further-out benefits at higher

(but still very low) rates. These discount rates change the cost-benefit calculus on climate change

mitigation investments relative to the received wisdom on discount rates in Nordhaus (2013).

      Finally, Han et al. (2021) focus on how financial constraints affect equilibrium behavior of sellers

and buyers. Using a regression discontinuity design in the empirical part and a search model in

the theoretical part of the paper, they show how regulatory changes on downpayment constraints

have subtle effects on the various price segments of the housing market. A macro-prudential policy

aimed at curbing price growth in Toronto in the $1 million housing market segment backfired

because it generated bidding wars in the segment just below the $1 million cutoff.


3.3     Private values in other asset markets

Private values are not just relevant for real assets. Bellon et al. (2021) consider the utility that

individuals derive from owning their private business. The authors exploit a quasi-natural experi-

ment in which certain households receive large cash windfalls from mineral right claims, while

others do not. The windfalls result in the creation of more incorporated businesses (businesses

with employees), helping to overcome liquidity constraints. The windfalls also allow already


                                                    12
non-incorporated individuals to remain self-employed for longer. The latter effect does not seem to

be driven by the alleviation of financial constraints, but rather by a demand for the non-pecuniary

or private benefits of being self-employed (Moskowitz and Vissing-Jørgensen, 2002; Hurst and

Pugsley, 2011).

    Finally, we want to highlight that private values may affect investment decisions--and thus,

potentially, valuations--outside the RPVA class. We already mentioned the recent research on the

non-pecuniary benefits derived by impact investors in private equity and venture capital. But even

liquid financial assets' valuations may be affected by the non-financial preferences of investors.

Bauer et al. (2021) survey investors in a Dutch pension fund, who were given a vote on whether

the fund should focus more on sustainability issues. The proposal received strong support. This

support appeared to be mainly driven by investors' social preferences rather than a belief that

sustainability is good for financial performance. A follow-up survey showed that investors' support

did not weaken after they learned about the actual implementation of the sustainable investment

policy. The findings of the paper are consistent with recent lab experiments showing that investors'

moral preferences affect their valuations and allocations (Bonnefon et al., 2019; Humphrey et al.,

2020).



4   Moving Forward

In this final section of our paper, we outline some, in our view, particularly exciting research areas

that hold promise for much additional work in the near future. Our goal is not to give an exhaustive

overview of all current research on RPVA. Instead, we focus on a selective set of issues related to

the ownership and trading of real assets. We thus largely ignore research related to, e.g., private

values in financial assets, the financing of real asset acquisitions, or the effect of macro factors and

credit cycles on price levels in real asset markets. For housing, the latter literature is surveyed in

Davis and Van Nieuwerburgh (2014) and Guerrieri and Uhlig (2016).




                                                  13
4.1     Price formation and return heterogeneity in real estate markets

Realistic models of search and bargaining.        Real assets are the quintessential illiquid assets, trad-

ing infrequently and in thin markets due to the uniqueness of each asset's physical characteristics

and the heterogeneity in investors' subjective valuations--which is in turn due to heterogeneity in

preferences, financial constraints, and beliefs about future fundamentals. Han and Strange (2015)

review the existing literature on search in housing markets. It strikes us as an important task to

build richer search and matching models that can be confronted with detailed asset-level data (asset

features, buyer and seller characteristics, time on the market, transaction price, etc.). Some papers

have recently pushed in the direction of modeling real-world features of housing markets. Ngai and

Tenreyro (2014) study the effects of seasonality in housing market thickness (and thus in the quality

of buyer-seller matches). Piazzesi et al. (2020) focus on geographical segmentation in search. Arefeva

(2020) builds a dynamic search model that accounts for bidding wars between potential home

buyers with heterogeneous valuations. Burnside et al. (2016) present a model of social dynamics

in which agents' beliefs about housing market fundamentals change through meetings with other

agents; Bailey et al. (2018) use social network data demonstrating the empirical relevance of this

mechanism. Data from online platforms are helpful to understand the drivers of actual search

behavior (e.g., Piazzesi et al., 2020; Gargano et al., 2020).

      Researchers have also started to use search models to analyze the commercial real estate market.

The paper by Sagi included in this issue is a prime example. Badarinza et al. (2020) analyze how

affinity with counterparties can mitigate cross-border contracting frictions--leading to a matching

of buyers with counterparties of the same (or proximate) nationality. Ghent (2020) focuses on

market segmentation by liquidity preferences--explaining why delegated investors concentrate

their commercial real estate investments in the most liquid markets. There is scope for much more

work in this area, in particular as new empirical work documents variation in preferences (e.g.,

         c et al. (2020)) or transaction prices (e.g., Spaenjers and Steiner (2020)) across different
Cvijanovi´

investor types in the commercial real estate space.




                                                    14
The geography of real estate investing.     One group of real estate investors that has been studied

increasingly is foreign or non-local buyers. These investors have been blamed for pushing up house

prices, aggravating existing housing affordability issues. Favilukis and Van Nieuwerburgh (2021)

build a spatial equilibrium model of a city to quantify the effect of an out-of-town inflow on local

residents' welfare and house prices. Empirical work by Chinco and Mayer (2016), Badarinza and

Ramadorai (2018), Barcelona et al. (2019), Davids and Georg (2020), Gorback and Keys (2020), and

Li et al. (2020) shows that investment demand from out-of-town or out-of-country buyers can drive

up local house prices, which gives an interesting contrast with earlier papers on the effects of

immigration (Saiz and Wachter, 2011; Sá, 2015).

   Asymmetric information is a key characteristic of real estate markets (Garmaise and Moskowitz,

2004; Kurlat and Stroebel, 2015; Stroebel, 2016), and may be particularly important in cross-border

transactions. Foreign home buyers may try to lower asymmetries by searching in "preferred

habitats" with high proportions of same-nationality households (Badarinza and Ramadorai, 2018).

Agarwal et al. (2019a) focus on ethnic matching between buyers and sellers. Agarwal et al. (2019c)

and Badarinza et al. (2020) emphasize the importance of investors' nationalities in commercial real

estate transactions, highlighting the roles of learning and trust, respectively, when transacting under

asymmetric information. There are natural connections between this work and an emerging body of

research in the trade literature recognizing the importance of informational frictions (e.g., Chaney

(2014)). The international finance literature rarely considers cross-border trade in RPVA. Taking

into consideration the specific trading costs and market illiquidity in this asset class strikes us an

important direction for future work in international finance.

   Non-local investors may differ from local ones on other dimensions than their information set

alone. For example, Cvijanovi´
                             c and Spaenjers (2020) argue that wealthy out-of-country buyers in

the Paris housing market realize lower capital gains because of their lower bargaining intensity, not

because of higher information asymmetries.




                                                  15
Inequality in housing markets. A growing literature studies the role of housing for the dynamics

of inequality. Real estate assets and mortgage debt occupy a pre-eminent place in the household

wealth portfolio, especially for middle-class households. House price and mortgage rate dynamics

therefore trigger large shifts in that part of the wealth distribution (Rognlie, 2016; Knoll et al., 2017;

Bach et al., 2020; Fagereng et al., 2020; Kuhn et al., 2020). The wealth-building aspect of home

ownership, emphasized in Sodini et al. (2017), contributes to rising financial wealth inequality

when house prices go up. Existing research also suggests that the location of upbringing (Chetty

et al., 2016; Miller and Soo, 2021), as well as home ownership and housing returns (Cooper and

Luengo-Prado, 2015; Lovenheim and Mumford, 2013; Been et al., 2021; Hacamo, 2021), may have

important intergenerational effects. The full impact of parental experiences in real estate markets

remains to be uncovered.

   Long-standing issues of racial and ethnic differences in access to the mortgage market and home

ownership have received relatively little attention in the finance literature, at least until recently.

New work in this area includes Ghent et al. (2014), Bayer et al. (2017), Bayer et al. (2018), Gerardi

et al. (2020), Stein and Yannelis (2020), Ambrose et al. (2021), Bhutta and Hizmo (2021), Giacoletti

et al. (2021), and, in the context of new FinTech business models, Bartlett et al. (2019) and Fuster et al.

(2020). Appel and Nickerson (2016) study the long-run effects of "redlining" policies that restricted

access to credit in poor and minority urban neighborhoods. Avenancio-Leon and Howard (2020)

document racial inequalities in property taxation. Future work could dig deeper into demographic

variation in the risk-return characteristics of owned housing, and, in the spirit of Agarwal et al.

(2019a), the role of race and ethnicity in housing search and matching dynamics. It could also

analyze how financial contract design can promote durable home ownership across all income

levels.

   Other dimensions of inequality are worth exploring more as well. For example, Goldsmith-

Pinkham and Shue (2020) show a substantial gender gap in housing returns. One reason can be

gender differences in negotiation as a driver of the less favorable execution prices for women in the

housing market, as also documented by Andersen et al. (2020).


                                                    16
4.2   Joint dynamics of prices and quantities

Demand-based asset pricing approaches.       The discussion in the previous subsection highlighted

the importance of investor heterogeneity. Using the tools of demand-based asset pricing developed

by Koijen and Yogo (2019), Koijen and Van Nieuwerburgh (2021) use rich data on the identity

of buyers and sellers to study whether different types of investors have different valuations for

asset characteristics. The coefficients of the hedonic pricing model come to depend on the investor

composition. The ultimate goal for the literature is to build a model that can jointly account for

prices, quantities (holdings and transactions), and liquidity measures (e.g., inventory, time on the

market) in the time series and in the cross-section.


Endogenous supply.     For most real assets, supply changes endogenously and often with long lags.

These "hog cycles" in development amplify price cycles in secondary markets. Land, which is an

option on a future building or infrastructure asset, is much more volatile than structures (Davis

and Heathcote, 2005). Some recent papers emphasize the role of supply in explaining housing price

dynamics. Head et al. (2014) models the response of housing construction to income shocks in

a search-and-matching model. Nathanson and Zwick (2018) study how the interaction between

development constraints and disagreement about future demand affects house prices. Ben-David

et al. (2019) infer the dynamics of house price expectations from the joint dynamics of prices and

demand-supply disparities. Combining richer models of supply with demand-based models is a

promising area for future work.


Role of speculators and arbitrageurs in art and housing.     For both art and housing, there is still

a lot to learn about the role played by "investors"--buyers driven by expectations of capital gains

rather than consumption motives--in generating the time dynamics of both prices and volume.

One type of investor aims to profit from market-wide price increases. Bayer et al. (2020) document

substantial entry by such (amateur) "speculators" during housing boom periods--completely

mistiming the market. DeFusco et al. (2020) and Gao et al. (2020) argue that variation in speculative



                                                 17
activity can play a role in amplifying housing market cycles. By contrast, Griffin et al. (2020)

find no consistent relation between different proxies for speculation and prices in the early 2000s

housing boom and bust. Bayer et al. (2021) shows how speculative activity is contagious and spills

over geographically. Investors may be subject to larger fluctuations in the availability and cost of

credit over time and a have different propensity to default on mortgages (Albanesi et al., 2019).

The impact of investors on house prices may thus change over the course of the credit cycle. An

interesting question to explore further is how taxes or other regulations targeting speculators affect

outcomes and welfare (Chi et al., 2021; Favilukis and Van Nieuwerburgh, 2021). More broadly, there

is relatively little work on the public finance aspects of real estate such as property taxation and

zoning, and how they affect prices, quantities, and population flows (e.g., Favilukis et al. (2019)).

   Other financially-driven art and housing buyers act as intermediaries or arbitrageurs, buying

undervalued assets--often from forced sellers--and bringing them back to the market quickly. In

the art auction model of Lovo and Spaenjers (2018), such "flipping" behavior arises endogenously

because of market illiquidity, and happens no matter what the state of the economy is. In the same

spirit, Bayer et al. (2020) contrast the stabilizing role of liquidity-providing "middlemen" for house

prices with the destabilizing role of speculators. Driven by the emergence of machine-learning-based

automated property valuation methods (Glaeser et al., 2018; Lindenthal and Johnson, 2020), one of

the most important developments in the housing market is the emergence of "iBuyers", studied

recently by Buchak et al. (2020). We foresee much more work on the role and (expected) impact of

such players on prices and quantities, and their cyclical properties, in the various segments of the

housing market.


Role of expectations and behavioral biases.      A quickly growing literature looks into how house-

holds' investment choices in the housing market are driven by their (subjective) experiences, their

(potentially biased) expectations of future price rises, and the interaction of the two (Piazzesi and

Schneider, 2009; Burnside et al., 2016; Glaeser and Nathanson, 2017; Bailey et al., 2018; Armona et al.,

2019; Kuchler and Zafar, 2019; Bottan and Perez-Truglia, 2020; Liu and Palmer, 2021). DeFusco



                                                  18
et al. (2020) and Pénasse and Renneboog (2020) emphasize the role of extrapolative expectations in

fueling speculative booms for the housing and the art market, respectively. The two-way feedback

loop between (implicit or explicit) expectations on the one hand and investment behavior and

outcomes on the other hand deserves further study.

      There is also scope for more work on how housing market beliefs drive credit demand (e.g.,

Bailey et al. (2019), De Stefani (2020)) and supply (e.g., Kaplan et al. (2020)), which may feed back

to price movements. The relative importance of beliefs and credit conditions in accounting for

boom and bust dynamics in the housing market remains an unsettled issue (Favilukis et al., 2017;

Greenwald and Guren, 2020).

      On the seller side, starting with Genesove and Mayer (2001), a literature has developed stressing

the importance of loss aversion in explaining the positive correlation between prices and volume

observed in the housing market. The loss aversion effect interacts with the downpayment effect,

typically attributed to Stein (1995). However, recent work by Bracke and Tenreyo (2020) and

Andersen et al. (2021) disputes this commonly-accepted explanation, arguing that loss aversion

does not play a very significant role over and above simple anchoring. Beggs and Graddy (2009)

show evidence for the existence of anchoring in the art market. A better theoretical understanding

of household decision-making when it comes to listing/consignment decisions--and the role of

behavioral biases therein--clearly would be helpful in order to explain the observed price and

volume dynamics.


4.3     Intermediaries

Intermediaries (e.g, real estate agents, art auction houses) play a crucial role in real asset markets.

A number of papers study the relation between house prices and (excess) entry into the real estate

agent profession (e.g., Hsieh and Moretti (2003), Begley et al. (2020)). However, the impact of

time-series and cross-sectional variation in broker quality and behavior on transaction outcomes is

arguably under-studied. A recent exception is Gilbukh and Goldsmith-Pinkham (2019), who find

that houses listed by inexperienced brokers have a lower probability of sale, and that this effect is


                                                   19
stronger during a housing bust. They propose a housing search model in which brokers enter and

exit endogenously--leading to cyclical variation in the distribution of intermediaries' experience.

For the art market, Bruno et al. (2018) argue that auction houses with artist-specific experience are

better at predicting price outcomes.

   Some other research focuses on the distorted incentives and conflicts of interest of real estate

agents. Levitt and Syverson (2008) show that brokers sell their clients' houses more quickly and at

lower prices than their own. However, recent work that applies textual analysis to broker listings

argues this result may due to omitted-variable bias (Liu et al., 2020). Still, it is clear that real estate

agents sometimes have informational advantages, for example allowing them to "cherry pick"

cheaper listing or to obtain larger discounts from weak sellers (Agarwal et al., 2019b). Barwick et al.

(2017) find that real estate agents steer buyers to high-commission properties. There is clearly scope

for more work here. Related to earlier-mentioned issues, future studies could also dig deeper into

the role of real estate agents in the matching (or not) of counterparties of different nationalities or

racial or ethnic groups, and the effects on transaction outcomes.

   An understudied aspect of intermediaries is their role as information producers or providers.

Some recent papers show how real estate advertisements provide otherwise hard to observe

information about properties' quality (Liu et al., 2020; Nowak and Smith, 2020; Shen and Ross, 2021).

Other work focuses on pre-sale appraisals of items' market values. For example, Aubry et al. (2020)

show that art auction house estimates are systematically biased, which could be due to behavioral

biases, but also to strategic reasons. Similar mechanisms may play a role in housing appraisals as

well (Salzman and Zwinkels, 2017). Future research should help improve our understanding of the

competitive considerations that underlie intermediaries' asset valuations, and their effects on the

equilibrium behavior of buyers and sellers. There is already some evidence that appraisals causally

affect transaction prices (Aubry et al., 2020; Lu, 2020).




                                                    20
4.4     Alternative ways to invest in real assets

Institutional investors access real estate and infrastructure investments both through public equity

and debt markets and through private equity and debt markets. The general trend seems to be for

an increasing allocation to alternative assets held outside public equity vehicles. Andonov et al. ask

an important question in this issue: do investors hold RPVA investments in the right vehicles? Do

commingled closed-end private equity funds provide a good structure for pension funds, sovereign

wealth funds, or endowments to invest in real assets given the long-term nature of their liabilities?

How does the after-fee performance of such investments compare to co-investments or direct asset

investments? Do pension funds have the expertise to pull off such direct investments successfully,

maybe by forming consortia, as was done in Canada (Lipshitz and Walter, 2020)? Do investors shy

away from public markets since it absolves them from having to mark positions to market, creating

an "illiquidity premium," as suggested by Gupta and Van Nieuwerburgh (2021)? More empirical

work is needed to carefully measure the risk-adjusted performance (before and after fees) of the

various modes of investing in real assets. More theoretical work is needed to develop the optimal

contractual structures for different types of institutional investors.

      Both for real estate and for collectibles, there has been quite some popular discussion around

"tokenization". There is limited academic research on this topic so far. For collectibles, Vorsatz (2020)

develops a model of tokenization, and argues that it can be welfare-improving. A complementary

perspective is offered by Whitaker and Kräussl (2020), who argue that a fractional equity system for

artworks can be a tool for diversified investment and democratized access to the art market, while

allowing artists to retain a share in the upside potential that their work creates. There is room for

new models of financing that study how to unlock some of the value and help share the risk in

RPVA assets.


4.5     Prices and preferences in collectibles markets

We can think of the private use value associated with the possession of an artwork as an "emotional

dividend" (Lovo and Spaenjers, 2018), which is worth what the owner would be willing to pay for


                                                   21
one period of enjoyment. Barring pressure from investment demand--including the occasional

need for a discrete and portable store of wealth (Oosterlinck, 2017)--prices of artworks and other

collectibles are thus determined at the intersection of the distribution of purchasing power and that

of tastes. Research has indeed shown a strong impact of wealth dynamics on the willingness-to-pay

for collectibles (Aït-Sahalia et al., 2004; Hiraki et al., 2009; Goetzmann et al., 2011; Dimson et al.,

2015). Oster and Goetzmann (2003) study the role played by urban concentrations of wealth in the

economics of local museums, emphasizing the social dimension of the non-monetary dividends

supplied by art. Moving from wealth to tastes, it is clear that common (and seemingly lexicographic)

preferences for certain highly-ranked experiences can have unusual economic effects--supporting

extreme and puzzling variation in prices for practically indistinguishable goods. The details of

collectors' preferences and their associated values are difficult to measure and model economically,

but may have first-order effects. Differential preferences can derive from variation in past aesthetic

experiences, social signaling, identity construction, and many other factors (Spaenjers et al., 2015).

   Research into the pricing of aesthetic features has arguably been hampered by blunt econometric

tools. Hedonic regressions typically project the characteristics of artworks to prosaic indicator

variables, with the most relevant being the artist. Advances in computer vision and machine

learning have opened up new possibilities for studying the subtleties of the pricing of style and

features detectable optically (Pownall and Graddy, 2016; Ma et al., 2019; Aubry et al., 2020). Future

work may build on new methods that visually compare objects to each other, for example to

computationally measure creativity (Elgammal and Saleh, 2015). There may also be scope for

research that constructs crowdsourced proxies for attractiveness, as has already been done to

evaluate metropolitan areas (Carlino and Saiz, 2019).

   Also new statistical methods applied to transaction and art historical data can enable a better

understanding of the formation of aesthetic tastes and the dynamics of fashion. Goetzmann et al.

(2016) develop an empirical classification of styles based on a manifold clustering algorithm applied

to auction prices. Fraiberger et al. (2018) use network analysis to model the paths of highly successful

contemporary artists, showing the importance of early access to prestigious central institutions,


                                                  22
suggesting a high level of demand coordination.

      Finally, there is definitely room for more experimental research examining the drivers of private

enjoyment and willingness-to-pay. As noted before, Adams et al., in this issue, study experimentally

how appreciation of artworks depends on the (perceived) gender of the artist. Other recent studies

have generated further insights into the aesthetic experience. Ma et al. (2019) study how colors can

affect emotions and valuations. Newman and Bloom (2012) explore when and for which reasons

original artworks and artifacts are considered more valuable than duplicates. Related research finds

that people value objects that enhance their sense of proximity to the artist or to collectors with

similar preferences (Newman and Smith, 2016; Smith et al., 2016).

      As more sophisticated methods for the study of aesthetics become available, future researchers

can build on insights from both neuroaesthetics (Chatterjee and Vartanian, 2014) and neuroeco-

nomics. Interestingly, neurological research suggests that the relation between experienced utility

and prices may not be a one-way street (Plassmann et al., 2008), arguably providing a biological

microfoundation for models in which the price of a collectible directly enters the utility function

(Mandel, 2009).


4.6     Big challenges for real estate and infrastructure markets

The Covid-19 crisis has raised important questions about the future of cities and the future of

work, with direct and indirect implications for housing markets, commercial real estate markets

(office, e-commerce), and infrastructure (e.g., safety and financial viability of public transit). Gupta

et al. (2021) study changes in residential rents and prices in urban vs. suburban locations resulting

from pandemic-induced household migration. Ling et al. (2020) study the impact of the pandemic

on asset-level commercial real estate across different categories, largely resulting from temporary

restrictions on business activity during the pandemic. Delventhal et al. (2020) and Davis et al. (2021)

study housing prices in spatial equilibrium models where households choose where to locate when

the technology for working from home improves. The pandemic has also underscored the need for

a better understanding of how public health shocks affect real estate markets (e.g., Wong (2008),


                                                   23
Custódio et al. (2020), D'Lima and Thibodeau (2021), Francke and Korevaar (2021)).

   Climate change and the energy transition it has set in motion directly affects the built en-

vironment and the infrastructure that supports it. Technological innovations such as driverless

cars (Zakharenko, 2016) and the sharing economy (Calder-Wang, 2020) intersect with the climate

imperative in interesting ways. Better cost-benefit analysis of investments in energy efficiency and a

quantification of the risk of economic obsolescence (stranded real assets) are needed. The increased

focus on sustainability by institutional and retail investors in equity and debt markets (green bonds)

and in property markets (green buildings) will continue to be an important research theme.

   Finally, there are large unmet infrastructure needs in the developed world, but even more so

in developing countries where most of the growth in the world population takes place (Walter,

2016). Infrastructure investments run up against fiscal constraints everywhere. Capturing some

of the newly created value of infrastructure additions (Gupta et al., 2020), for example through

property taxes, can be a useful tool in a broader arsenal of financing options. Much work is needed

to assess risk and return of infrastructure projects in emerging markets and to find ways to bridge

the financing gap (Gardner and Henry, 2021).




                                                 24
References
Adams, R., Kräussl, R., Navone, M. and Verwijmeren, P. (2021). Gendered Prices. Review of Financial Studies,
  this issue.

Agarwal, S., Choi, H.-S., He, J. and Sing, T. F. (2019a). Matching in Housing Markets: The Role of Ethnic
  Social Networks. Review of Financial Studies, 32 (10), 3958­4004.

--, He, J., Sing, T. F. and Song, C. (2019b). Do Real Estate Agents Have Information Advantages in Housing
  Markets? Journal of Financial Economics, 134 (3), 715­735.

--, Sing, T. F. and Wong, L. (2019c). Information Asymmetries and Learning in Commercial Real Estate Markets.
  Working paper.

Albanesi, S., De Giorgi, G. and Nosal, J. (2019). Credit Growth and the Financial Crisis: A New Narrative.
 Working paper.

Ambrose, B. W., Conklin, J. N. and Lopez, L. A. (2021). Does Borrower and Broker Race Affect the Cost of
 Mortgage Credit? Review of Financial Studies, 34 (2), 790­826.

Andersen, S., Badarinza, C., Liu, L., Marx, J. and Ramadorai, T. (2021). Reference Dependence in the Housing
  Market. Working paper.

--, Marx, J., Nielsen, K. M. and Vesterlund, L. (2020). Gender Differences in Negotiation: Evidence from Real
  Estate Transactions. NBER Working Paper 27318.

Andonov, A., Kräussl, R. and Rauh, J. (2021). Are Institutional Investors Using the Right Structure to Invest
  in Infrastructure? Review of Financial Studies.

Appel, I. and Nickerson, J. (2016). Pockets of Poverty: The Long-Term Effects of Redlining. Working paper.

Arefeva, A. (2020). How Auctions Amplify House-Price Fluctuations. Working paper.

Armona, L., Fuster, A. and Zafar, B. (2019). Home Price Expectations and Behaviour: Evidence from a
  Randomized Information Experiment. Review of Economic Studies, 86 (4), 1371­1410.

Aubry, M., Kräussl, R., Manso, G. and Spaenjers, C. (2020). Biased Auctioneers. Working paper.

Avenancio-Leon, C. and Howard, T. (2020). The Assessment Gap: Racial Inequalities in Property Taxation.
  Working paper.

Aït-Sahalia, Y., Parker, J. A. and Yogo, M. (2004). Luxury Goods and the Equity Premium. Journal of
  Finance, 59 (6), 2959­3004.

Bach, L., Calvet, L. E. and Sodini, P. (2020). Rich Pickings? Risk, Return, and Skill in Household Wealth.
  American Economic Review, 110 (9), 2703­2747.

Badarinza, C. and Ramadorai, T. (2018). Home Away from Home? Foreign Demand and London House
  Prices. Journal of Financial Economics, 130 (3), 532­555.

--, -- and Shimizu, C. (2020). Gravity, Counterparties, and Foreign Investment. Working paper.

Bailey, M., Cao, R., Kuchler, T. and Stroebel, J. (2018). The Economic Effects of Social Networks: Evidence
  from the Housing Market. Journal of Political Economy, 126 (6), 2224­2276.

--, Dávila, E., Kuchler, T. and Stroebel, J. (2019). House Price Beliefs And Mortgage Leverage Choice.
  Review of Economic Studies, 86 (6), 2403­2452.



                                                     25
Baldauf, M., Garlappi, L. and Yannelis, C. (2020). Does Climate Change Affect Real Estate Prices? Only If
  You Believe In It. Review of Financial Studies, 33 (3), 1256­1295.

Barber, B. M., Morse, A. and Yasuda, A. (2021). Impact Investing. Journal of Financial Economics, 139 (1),
  162­185.

Barcelona, W., Converse, N. and Wong, A. (2019). U.S. Housing as a Global Safe Asset: Evidence from China
  Shocks. Working paper.

Barclays (2012). Profit or Pleasure? Exploring the Motivations Behind Treasure Trends. Technical report.

Bartlett, R., Morse, A., Stanton, R. and Wallace, N. (2019). Consumer-Lending Discrimination in the FinTech
  Era. Working paper.

Barwick, P. J., Pathak, P. A. and Wong, M. (2017). Conflicts of Interest and Steering in Residential Brokerage.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9 (3), 191­222.

Bauer, R., Ruof, T. and Smeets, P. (2021). Get Real! Individuals Prefer More Sustainable Investments. Review
  of Financial Studies.

Bayer, P., Casey, M., Ferreira, F. and McMillan, R. (2017). Racial and Ethnic Price Differentials in the
  Housing Market. Journal of Urban Economics, 102, 91­105.

--, Ferreira, F. and Ross, S. L. (2018). What Drives Racial and Ethnic Differences in High-Cost Mortgages?
  The Role of High-Risk Lenders. Review of Financial Studies, 31 (1), 175­205.

--, Geissler, C., Mangum, K. and Roberts, J. W. (2020). Speculators and Middlemen: The Strategy and
  Performance of Investors in the Housing Market. Review of Financial Studies, 33 (11), 5212­5247.

--, Mangum, K. and Roberts, J. W. (2021). Speculative Fever: Investor Contagion in the Housing Bubble.
  American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Been, V., Ellen, I., Figlio, D., Nelson, A. A., Ross, S., Schwartz, A. E. and Stiefel, L. (2021). The Effects of
  Negative Equity on Children's Educational Outcomes. Working paper.

Beggs, A. and Graddy, K. (2009). Anchoring Effects: Evidence from Art Auctions. American Economic Review,
  99 (3), 1027­1039.

Begley, T. A., Haslag, P. H. and Weagley, D. (2020). Dream Chasers: The Draw and the Downside of Following
  House Price Signals. Working paper.

Bellon, A., Cookson, J. A., Gilje, E. P. and Heimer, R. Z. (2021). Personal Wealth and Self-Employment.
  Review of Financial Studies, this issue.

Ben-David, I., Towbin, P. and Weber, S. (2019). Expectations During the U.S. Housing Boom: Inferring Beliefs
  from Actions. Working paper.

Bernstein, A., Billings, S. B., Gustafson, M. T. and Lewis, R. (2021). Voting with their Sandals: Partisan
  Residential Sorting on Climate Change Risk. Working paper.

--, Gustafson, M. T. and Lewis, R. (2019). Disaster on the Horizon: The Price Effect of Sea Level Rise. Journal
  of Financial Economics, 134 (2), 253­272.

Bhutta, N. and Hizmo, A. (2021). Do Minorities Pay More for Mortgages? Review of Financial Studies, 34 (2),
  763­789.

Bocart, F., Gertsberg, M. and Pownall, R. A. J. (2018). Glass Ceilings in the Art Market. Working paper.



                                                      26
Bonnefon, J.-F., Landier, A., Sastry, P. and Thesmar, D. (2019). Do Investors Care About Corporate Externalities?
  Experimental Evidence. Working paper.

Bottan, N. L. and Perez-Truglia, R. (2020). Betting on the House: Subjective Expectations and Market Choices.
  NBER Working Paper 27412.

Bracke, P. and Tenreyo, S. (2020). History Dependence in the Housing Market. American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

Bruno, B., Garcia-Appendini, E. and Nocera, G. (2018). Experience and Brokerage in Asset Markets:
  Evidence from Art Auctions. Financial Management, 47 (4), 833­864.

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T. and Seru, A. (2020). iBuyers: Liquidity in Real Estate Markets? Working
  paper.

Burnside, C., Eichenbaum, M. and Rebelo, S. (2016). Understanding Booms and Busts in Housing Markets.
  Journal of Political Economy, 124 (4), 1088­1147.

Calder-Wang, S. (2020). The Distributional Impact of the Sharing Economy on the Housing Market. Working
  paper.

Cameron, L., Goetzmann, W. N. and Nozari, M. (2019). Art and Gender: Market Bias or Selection Bias?
  Journal of Cultural Economics, 43 (2), 279­307.

Carlino, G. A. and Saiz, A. (2019). Beautiful City: Leisure Amenities and Urban Growth. Journal of Regional
  Science, 59 (3), 369­408.

Chambers, D., Dimson, E. and Spaenjers, C. (2020). Art as an Asset: Evidence from Keynes the Collector.
  Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 10 (3), 490­520.

--, Spaenjers, C. and Steiner, E. (2021). The Rate of Return on Real Estate: Long-Run Micro-Level Evidence.
  Review of Financial Studies, this issue.

Chaney, T. (2014). The Network Structure of International Trade. American Economic Review, 104 (11), 3600­
  3634.

Chatterjee, A. and Vartanian, O. (2014). Neuroaesthetics. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 18 (7), 370­375.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N. and Katz, L. F. (2016). The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods on Children:
  New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment. American Economic Review, 106 (4), 855­902.

Chi, C.-C., LaPoint, C. and Lin, M.-J. (2021). Flip or Flop? Tobin Taxes in the Real Estate Market. Working paper.

Chinco, A. and Mayer, C. (2016). Misinformed Speculators and Mispricing in the Housing Market. Review of
  Financial Studies, 29 (2), 486­522.

Cooper, D. and Luengo-Prado, M. J. (2015). House Price Growth When Children Are Teenagers: A Path to
  Higher Earnings? Journal of Urban Economics, 86, 54­72.

Credit Suisse (2017). Global Wealth Report 2017. Technical report.

                       ´ , D. and Wiedemann, M. (2020). Opioid Crisis and Real Estate Prices. Working paper.
Custódio, C., Cvijanovic

Cvijanovic
         ´ , D., Milcheva, S. and van de Minne, A. (2020). Preferences of Institutional Investors in
  Commercial Real Estate. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, forthcoming.

-- and Spaenjers, C. (2020). "We'll Always Have Paris": Out-of-Country Buyers in the Housing Market.
  Management Science, forthcoming.


                                                       27
Davids, A. and Georg, C.-P. (2020). The Cape of Good Homes: Exchange Rate Depreciations, Foreign Demand and
  House Prices. Working paper.

Davis, M. and Van Nieuwerburgh, S. (2014). Housing, Finance and the Macroeconomy. In G. Duranton and
  W. Strange (eds.), Handbook of Regional Economics, North Holland: Elsevier Science B.V.

Davis, M. A., Ghent, A. C. and Gregory, J. (2021). The Work-at-Home Technology Boon and its Consequences.
  Working paper.

-- and Heathcote, J. (2005). Housing and the Business Cycle. International Economic Review, 46 (3), 751­784.

De Stefani, A. (2020). House Price history, Biased Expectations, and Credit Cycles: The Role of Housing
  Investors. Real Estate Economics, forthcoming.

DeFusco, A. A., Nathanson, C. G. and Zwick, E. (2020). Speculative Dynamics of Prices and Volume. Working
  paper.

Delventhal, M. J., Kwon, E. and Parkhomenko, A. (2020). How Do Cities Change When We Work from Home?
  Working paper.

Dimson, E., Rousseau, P. L. and Spaenjers, C. (2015). The Price of Wine. Journal of Financial Economics, 118 (2),
  431­449.

D'Lima, W. and Thibodeau, M. (2021). Health Crisis and Housing Market Effects - Evidence from the U.S. Opioid
  Epidemic. Working paper.

Eichholtz, P., Korevaar, M., Lindenthal, T. and Tallec, R. (2021). The Total Return and Risk to Residential
  Real Estate. Review of Financial Studies, this issue.

--, Steiner, E. and Yönder, E. (2019). Where, When, and How Do Sophisticated Investors Respond to Flood Risk?
  Working paper.

Eiling, E., Giambona, E., Lopez Aliouchkin, R. and Tuijp, P. (2020). Homeowners' Risk Premia: Evidence from
  Zip Code Housing Returns. Working paper.

Eisfeldt, A. and Demers, A. (2015). Total Returns to Single Family Rentals. NBER Working Paper 21804.

Elgammal, A. and Saleh, B. (2015). Quantifying Creativity in Art Networks. Technical Report.

Fagereng, A., Guiso, L., Malacrino, D. and Pistaferri, L. (2020). Heterogeneity and Persistence in Returns
  to Wealth. Econometrica, 88 (1), 115­170.

Favilukis, J., Ludvigson, S. C. and Van Nieuwerburgh, S. (2017). The Macroeconomic Effects of Housing
  Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk Sharing in General Equilibrium. Journal of Political Economy,
  125 (1), 140­223.

--, Mabille, P. and Van Nieuwerburgh, S. (2019). Affordable Housing and City Welfare. Working paper.

-- and Van Nieuwerburgh, S. (2021). Out-of-Town Home Buyers and City Welfare. Journal of Finance,
  forthcoming.

Fraiberger, S. P., Sinatra, R., Resch, M., Riedl, C. and Barabási, A.-L. (2018). Quantifying Reputation and
  Success in Art. Science, 362 (6416), 825­829.

Francke, M. and Korevaar, M. (2021). Housing Markets in a Pandemic: Evidence from Historical Outbreaks.
  Journal of Urban Economics, forthcoming.

Fuster, A., Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., Ramadorai, T. and Walther, A. (2020). Predictably Unequal? The
  Effects of Machine Learning on Credit Markets. Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

                                                       28
Gao, Z., Sockin, M. and Xiong, W. (2020). Economic Consequences of Housing Speculation. Review of
 Financial Studies, 33 (11), 5248­5287.

Gardner, C. and Henry, P. B. (2021). Global Infrastructure: Potential, Perils, and a Framework for Distinction.
 Working paper.

Gargano, A., Giacoletti, M. and Jarnecic, E. (2020). Attention and Search: Micro-Evidence on Housing Market
  Momentum. Working paper.

Garmaise, M. J. and Moskowitz, T. J. (2004). Confronting Information Asymmetries: Evidence from Real
  Estate Markets. Review of Financial Studies, 17 (2), 405­437.

Garnache, C. (2020). Does the Salience of Risk Affect Large, Risky Asset Prices? Working paper.

Gavazza, A. and Lizzeri, A. (2021). Frictions and Intermedation in Product Markets. Mimeo.

Genesove, D. and Mayer, C. (2001). Loss Aversion and Seller Behavior: Evidence from the Housing Market.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (4), 1233­1260.

Gerardi, K., Willen, P. and Zhang, D. H. (2020). Mortgage Prepayment, Race, and Monetary Policy. Working
  paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Ghent, A. C. (2020). What's Wrong with Pittsburgh? Delegated Investors and Liquidity Concentration.
 Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

--, Hernández-Murillo, R. and Owyang, M. T. (2014). Differences in Subprime Loan Pricing Across Races
  and Neighborhoods. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 48, 199­215.

--, Torous, W. N. and Valkanov, R. I. (2019). Commercial Real Estate as an Asset Class. Annual Review of
  Financial Economics, 11, 153­171.

Giacoletti, M. (2021). Idiosyncratic Risk in Housing Markets. Review of Financial Studies, this issue.

--, Heimer, R. Z. and Yu, E. G. (2021). Using High-Frequency Evaluations to Estimate Discrimination: Evidence
  from Mortgage Loan Officers. Working paper.

Giglio, S., Maggiori, M., Stroebel, J. and Weber, A. (2021). Climate Change and Long-Run Discount Rates:
  Evidence from Real Estate. Review of Financial Studies, this issue.

Gilbukh, S. and Goldsmith-Pinkham, P. S. (2019). Heterogeneous Real Estate Agents and the Housing Cycle.
  Working paper.

Glaeser, E. L., Kincaid, M. S. and Naik, N. (2018). Computer Vision and Real Estate: Do Looks Matter and Do
  Incentives Determine Looks. NBER Working Paper 25174.

-- and Nathanson, C. G. (2017). An Extrapolative Model of House Price Dynamics. Journal of Financial
  Economics, 126 (1), 147­170.

Goetzmann, W. and Peng, L. (2006). Estimating House Price Indexes in the Presence of Seller Reservation
  Prices. Review of Economics and Statistics, 88 (1), 100­112.

Goetzmann, W. N., Jones, P. W., Maggioni, M. and Walden, J. (2016). Beauty Is in the Bid of the Beholder:
 An Empirical Basis for Style. Research in Economics, 70 (3), 388­402.

--, Renneboog, L. and Spaenjers, C. (2011). Art and Money. American Economic Review, 101 (3), 222­226.

-- and Whitaker, A. C. (2021). Estimation of the Value of Art in U.S. Households. Mimeo.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, P. and Shue, K. (2020). The Gender Gap in Housing Returns. NBER Working Paper 26914.

                                                      29
Gomes, F., Haliassos, M. and Ramadorai, T. (2021). Household Finance. Journal of Economic Literature,
  forthcoming.

Gorback, C. S. and Keys, B. J. (2020). Global Capital and Local Assets: House Prices, Quantities, and Elasticities.
  NBER Working Paper 27370.

Greenwald, D. L. and Guren, A. (2020). Do Credit Conditions Move House Prices? Working paper.

Griffin, J. M., Kruger, S. and Maturana, G. (2020). What Drove the 2003­2006 House Price Boom and
  Subsequent Collapse? Disentangling Competing Explanations. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Guerrieri, V. and Uhlig, H. (2016). Housing and Credit Markets: Booms and Busts. In J. B. Taylor and
  H. Uhlig (eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 2, Elsevier, pp. 1427­1496.

Gupta, A., Peeters, J., Vrinda, M. and Van Nieuwerburgh, S. (2021). Flattening the Curve: Pandemic-induced
  Revaluation of Urban Real Estate. Working paper.

-- and Van Nieuwerburgh, S. (2021). Valuing Private Equity Investments Strip by Strip. Journal of Finance,
  forthcoming.

--, -- and Kontokosta, C. (2020). Take the Q Train: Value Capture of Public Infrastructure Projects. NBER
  Working Paper 26789.

Hacamo, I. (2021). The Babies of Mortgage Market Deregulation. Review of Financial Studies, 34 (2), 907­948.

Han, L. (2013). Understanding the Puzzling Risk-Return Relationship for Housing. Review of Financial Studies,
 26 (4), 877­928.

--, Lutz, C., Sand, B. and Stacey, D. (2021). The Effects of a Targeted Financial Constraint on the Housing
  Market. Review of Financial Studies, this issue.

-- and Strange, W. C. (2015). The Microstructure of Housing Markets. In Handbook of Regional and Urban
  Economics, vol. 5, Elsevier, pp. 813­886.

Head, A., Lloyd-Ellis, H. and Sun, H. (2014). Search, Liquidity, and the Dynamics of House Prices and
 Construction. American Economic Review, 104 (4), 1172­1210.

Hiraki, T., Ito, A., Spieth, D. A. and Takezawa, N. (2009). How Did Japanese Investments Influence
  International Art Prices? Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 44 (6), 1489­1514.

Hong, H., Karolyi, G. A. and Scheinkman, J. A. (2020). Climate Finance. Review of Financial Studies, 33 (3),
 1011­1023.

--, Scheinkman, J. and Xiong, W. (2006). Asset Float and Speculative Bubbles. Journal of Finance, 61 (3),
  1073­1117.

Hsieh, C.-T. and Moretti, E. (2003). Can Free Entry Be Inefficient? Fixed Commissions and Social Waste in
  the Real Estate Industry. Journal of Political Economy, 111 (5), 1076­1122.

Humphrey, J., Kogan, S., Sagi, J. and Starks, L. (2020). The Asymmetry in Responsible Investing Preferences.
 Working paper.

Hurst, E. and Pugsley, B. W. (2011). What Do Small Businesses Do? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp.
 73­142.

Jordà, , Knoll, K., Kuvshinov, D., Schularick, M. and Taylor, A. M. (2019). The Rate of Return on
  Everything, 1870­2015. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134 (3), 1225­1298.



                                                       30
Kaplan, G., Mitman, K. and Violante, G. L. (2020). The Housing Boom and Bust: Model Meets Evidence.
  Journal of Political Economy, 128 (9), 3285­3345.

Keys, B. J. and Mulder, P. (2020). Neglected No More: Housing Markets, Mortgage Lending, and Sea Level Rise.
  NBER Working Paper 27930.

Knoll, K., Schularick, M. and Steger, T. (2017). No Price Like Home: Global House Prices, 1870­2012.
 American Economic Review, 107 (2), 331­353.

Koijen, R. S. J. and Van Nieuwerburgh, S. (2021). The Commercial Real Estate Ecosystem. Mimeo.

-- and Yogo, M. (2019). A Demand System Approach to Asset Pricing. Journal of Political Economy, 127 (4),
  1475­1515.

Korteweg, A., Kräussl, R. and Verwijmeren, P. (2016). Does it Pay to Invest in Art? A Selection-Corrected
  Returns Perspective. Review of Financial Studies, 29 (4), 1007­1038.

-- and Sorensen, M. (2016). Estimating Loan-to-Value Distributions: Estimating Loan-to-Value Distributions.
  Real Estate Economics, 44 (1), 41­86.

Kotova, N. and Zhang, A. L. (2020). Liquidity in Residential Real Estate Markets. Working paper.

Kuchler, T. and Zafar, B. (2019). Personal Experiences and Expectations about Aggregate Outcomes. Journal
  of Finance, 74 (5), 2491­2542.

Kuhn, M., Schularick, M. and Steins, U. I. (2020). Income and Wealth Inequality in America, 1949­2016.
  Journal of Political Economy, 128, 3469­3519.

Kurlat, P. and Stroebel, J. (2015). Testing for Information Asymmetries in Real Estate Markets. Review of
  Financial Studies, 28 (8), 2429­2461.

Levitt, S. D. and Syverson, C. (2008). Market Distortions When Agents Are Better Informed: The Value of
  Information in Real Estate Transactions. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90 (4), 599­611.

Li, Z., Shen, L. S. and Zhang, C. (2020). Capital Flows, Asset Prices, and the Real Economy: A "China Shock" in
   the U.S. Real Estate Market. Working paper.

Lindenthal, T. and Johnson, E. B. (2020). Machine Learning, Architectural Styles and Property Values.
  Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, forthcoming.

Ling, D. C., Wang, C. and Zhou, T. (2020). A First Look at the Impact of COVID-19 on Commercial Real
  Estate Prices: Asset-Level Evidence. Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 10 (4), 669­704.

Lipshitz, C. and Walter, I. (2020). Public Pension Reform and the 49th Parallel: Lessons from Canada for
  the U.S. Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments, 29 (4), 121­162.

Liu, C. H., Nowak, A. D. and Smith, P. S. (2020). Asymmetric or Incomplete Information about Asset Values?
  Review of Financial Studies, 33 (7), 2898­2936.

Liu, H. and Palmer, C. (2021). Are Stated Expectations Actual Beliefs? New Evidence for the Beliefs Channel of
  Investment Demand. Working paper.

Lovenheim, M. F. and Mumford, K. J. (2013). Do Family Wealth Shocks Affect Fertility Choices? Evidence
  from the Housing Market. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95 (2), 464­475.

Lovo, S. and Spaenjers, C. (2018). A Model of Trading in the Art Market. American Economic Review, 108 (3),
  744­774.



                                                      31
Lu, G. (2020). How Machine Learning Reduces Racial Price Differentials in the U.S. Housing Market. Working
  paper.

Ma, M. X., Noussair, C. N. and Renneboog, L. (2019). Colors, Emotions, and the Auction Value of Paintings.
 Working paper.

Mandel, B. R. (2009). Art as an Investment and Conspicuous Consumption Good. American Economic Review,
 99 (4), 1653­1663.

Miller, S. and Soo, C. K. (2021). Do Neighborhoods Affect the Credit Market Decisions of Low-Income
 Borrowers? Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment. Review of Financial Studies, 34 (2),
 827­863.

Moskowitz, T. J. and Vissing-Jørgensen, A. (2002). The Returns to Entrepreneurial Investment: A Private
 Equity Premium Puzzle? American Economic Review, 92 (4), 745­778.

Murfin, J. and Spiegel, M. (2020). Is the Risk of Sea Level Rise Capitalized in Residential Real Estate? Review
 of Financial Studies, 33 (3), 1217­1255.

Nathanson, C. G. and Zwick, E. (2018). Arrested Development: Theory and Evidence of Supply-Side
 Speculation in the Housing Market. Journal of Finance, 73 (6), 2587­2633.

Newman, G. E. and Bloom, P. (2012). Art and Authenticity: The Importance of Originals in Judgments of
 Value. Journal of Experimental Psychology. General, 141 (3), 558­569.

-- and Smith, R. K. (2016). The Need to Belong Motivates Demand for Authentic Objects. Cognition, 156,
  129­134.

Ngai, L. R. and Tenreyro, S. (2014). Hot and Cold Seasons in the Housing Market. American Economic Review,
 104 (12), 3991­4026.

Nordhaus, W. D. (2013). The Climate Casino: Risk, Uncertainty, and Economics for a Warming World. New Haven
 London: Yale University Press.

Nowak, A. D. and Smith, P. S. (2020). Quality-Adjusted House Price Indexes. American Economic Review:
 Insights, 2 (3), 339­356.

Oosterlinck, K. (2017). Art as a Wartime Investment: Conspicuous Consumption and Discretion. Economic
  Journal, 127 (607), 2665­2701.

Oster, S. and Goetzmann, W. N. (2003). Does Governance Matter? The Case of Art Museums. In E. L.
  Glaeser (ed.), The Governance of Not-for-Profit Organizations, University of Chicago Press, pp. 71­100.

Peng, L. and Thibodeau, T. G. (2017). Idiosyncratic Risk of House Prices: Evidence from 26 Million Home
  Sales: Idiosyncratic Risk of House Prices. Real Estate Economics, 45 (2), 340­375.

Piazzesi, M. and Schneider, M. (2009). Momentum Traders in the Housing Market: Survey Evidence and a
  Search Model. American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 99 (2), 406­411.

--, -- and Stroebel, J. (2020). Segmented Housing Search. American Economic Review, 110 (3), 720­759.

Plassmann, H., O'Doherty, J., Shiv, B. and Rangel, A. (2008). Marketing Actions Can Modulate Neural
  Representations of Experienced Pleasantness. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105 (3),
  1050­1054.

Pownall, R. A. J. and Graddy, K. (2016). Pricing Color Intensity and Lightness in Contemporary Art
  Auctions. Research in Economics, 70 (3), 412­420.



                                                      32
Pénasse, J. and Renneboog, L. (2020). Speculative Trading and Bubbles: Evidence from the Art Market? Working
  paper.
--, -- and Scheinkman, J. A. (2021). When a Master Dies: Speculation and Asset Float. Review of Financial
  Studies, this issue.
RARE (2013). RARE Guide to Listed vs. Unlisted Infrastructure. Technical report.
Rognlie, M. (2016). Deciphering the Fall and Rise in the Net Capital Share: Accumulation or Scarcity?
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2015 (1), 1­69.
Sagi, J. S. (2021). Asset-Level Risk and Return in Real Estate Investments. Review of Financial Studies, this
  issue.
Saiz, A. and Wachter, S. (2011). Immigration and the Neighborhood. American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, 3 (2), 169­188.
Salzman, D. and Zwinkels, R. C. J. (2017). Behavioral Real Estate. Journal of Real Estate Literature, 25 (1),
  77­106.
Shen, L. and Ross, S. (2021). Information Value of Property Description: A Machine Learning Approach.
  Journal of Urban Economics, 121, 103299.
Smith, R. K., Newman, G. E. and Dhar, R. (2016). Closer to the Creator: Temporal Contagion Explains the
  Preference for Earlier Serial Numbers. Journal of Consumer Research, 42 (5), 653­668.
Sodini, P., Nieuwerburgh, S. V. and Vestman, R. (2017). Identifying the Benefits from Home Ownership: A
  Swedish Experiment. Working paper.
Spaenjers, C., Goetzmann, W. N. and Mamonova, E. (2015). The Economics of Aesthetics and Record Prices
  for Art Since 1701. Explorations in Economic History, 57, 79­94.
-- and Steiner, E. (2020). Do Private Equity Investors Create Value? Evidence from the Hotel Industry. Working
  paper.
Stein, J. C. (1995). Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Market: A Model with Down-Payment Effects.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110 (2), 379­406.
Stein, L. C. D. and Yannelis, C. (2020). Financial Inclusion, Human Capital, and Wealth Accumulation:
  Evidence from the Freedman's Savings Bank. Review of Financial Studies, 33 (11), 5333­5377.
Stroebel, J. (2016). Asymmetric Information about Collateral Values. Journal of Finance, 71 (3), 1071­1112.
Sá, F. (2015). Immigration and House Prices in the UK. Economic Journal, 125 (587), 1393­1424.
van Binsbergen, J., Brandt, M. and Koijen, R. (2012). On the Timing and Pricing of Dividends. American
  Economic Review, 102 (4), 1596­1618.
Van Nieuwerburgh, S. (2019). Why Are REITs Currently So Expensive? Real Estate Economics, 47 (1), 18­65.
Vorsatz, M. B. (2020). Collectibles Tokenization & Optimal Security Design. Working paper.
Walter, I. (ed.) (2016). The Infrastructure Finance Challenge. Open Book Publishers.
Whitaker, A. and Kräussl, R. (2020). Fractional Equity, Blockchain, and the Future of Creative Work.
 Management Science, 66 (10), 4594­4611.
Wong, G. (2008). Has SARS infected the property market? Evidence from Hong Kong. Journal of Urban
 Economics, 63 (1), 74­95.
World Economic Forum (2014). Infrastructure Investment Policy Blueprint. Technical report.
Zakharenko, R. (2016). Self-Driving Cars Will Change Cities. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 61, 26­37.

                                                     33
A       Appendix on Size of the Real and Private-Value Asset Class
This appendix describes the data sources and calculations behind Table 1, which computes the total
value of the stock of RPVA in the United States. The three main data sources are: the Financial
Accounts of the United States of the Federal Reserve Board (FAUS); the Fixed Assets Accounts of the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (FAA); and Vorsatz (2020).

A.1     Residential real estate
We use the 2020.Q3 value for FAUS series LM155035015.Q: Households; owner-occupied real estate
including vacant land and mobile homes at market value. This series excludes the assets belonging to
non-profit organizations from the household and non-profit sector.

A.2     Commercial real estate
We compute the 2020.Q3 value as the sum of:
    ·   FAUS series LM165035005.Q: Nonprofit organizations; real estate at market value
    ·   FAUS series LM105035005.Q: Nonfinancial corporate business; real estate at market value
    ·   FAUS series LM115035005.Q: Nonfinancial noncorporate business; real estate at market value
    ·   the market value of real estate held by equity REITs,
where we calculate the latter component as the sum of the aggregate market capitalization of equity
REITs from NAREIT as of November 2020 and financial liabilities of equity REITS (FAUS series
FL124190005), and subtract financial assets of equity REITs (FAUS series FL124090005). Real estate
assets held by equity REITs are estimated at $1.70 trillion in 2020.Q3.
    While we prefer the market valuation methodology used in the FAUS data, it is limited in its
breakdown of subcategories of CRE. To estimate the subcategory breakdown, we employ Table 2.1:
Current-Cost Net Stock of Private Fixed Assets, Equipment, Structures, and Intellectual Property Products by
Type in the FAA, which offers detailed estimates of the cost of different types of structures. Because
the FAA computes book values (which reflect depreciation) and the FAUS computes market values,
we use the FAA data only to compute shares, and then multiply these shares by the aggregate CRE
market value from the FAUS. The latest FAA data available are for 2019. We consider the following
subcategories:

    · Multi-family: residential structures, 5-or more-unit (line 71)
    · Office (line 38)
    · Retail: multimerchandise shopping (line 44), food and beverage establishments (line 45), and other
      commercial (line 47), which consists of auto dealerships, garages, service stations, drug stores,
      restaurants, mobile structures, and other structures used for commercial purposes
    · Industrial: warehouses (line 46) and manufacturing (line 48)
    · Hospitality: lodging (line 60) and amusement and recreation (line 61)
    · Health care (line 39), which consists of hospitals, special care, and medical buildings
    · Student housing: other residential (line 75), which consists primarily of dormitories and of
      fraternity and sorority houses

    Alternatively, one can value commercial real estate in a bottom-up manner using data on CRE
transactions. Koijen and Van Nieuwerburgh (2021) use data from Real Capital Analytics on all sales
above $10 million of CRE assets in the four core sectors (apartments, office, retail, and industrial)

                                                    34
between 2001 and 2020 to estimate a hedonic pricing model for each sector and geographic market.
They then revalue the stock of all assets that ever traded over this twenty-year period as of the end
of 2019. The column labeled "RCA data" in Table 1 reports the results.
    The main breakdown in Table 1 shows non-trivial values for non-core CRE sectors. The latter
have been growing in importance relative to the four core sectors over the past decade. Some
classify cell phone towers and data centers as CRE assets as well. In our calculations, those are
included as infrastructure.

A.3    Agricultural real estate
We use the estimate of the year-2020 value of farm real estate according to the U.S. farm sector
financial indicators published by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in February 2021.

A.4    Infrastructure
We focus on privately-held infrastructure assets in the United States. As before, we use FAA Table
2.1. We decompose infrastructure assets into the following components:

   ·   Power (line 50)
   ·   Electrical transmission equipment (line 17)
   ·   Communication (line 53)
   ·   Transportation (line 62)
   ·   Water, sewage, and waste treatment (line 66)
   ·   Petroleum and gas (line 55)
   ·   Mining (line 56)
   ·   Social infrastructure: religious (line 58) and educational and vocational (line 59)

A.5    Collectibles
Estimates for the worldwide value of the different collectible categories shown in Table 1 come from
Vorsatz (2020). We thank the author for generously sharing his data. To estimate the total value
of the float for these items, he combines a survey of the collectibles holdings of high net worth
individuals (Barclays, 2012) with year-2017 data on the distribution of wealth (Credit Suisse, 2017).
His Appendix C contains the details. To transform his global estimates to U.S. values, we multiply
by the estimated share of the U.S. in worldwide household wealth according to Credit Suisse (2017),
which is 33%. Finally, we group together "fine art pictures & paintings" and "fine art sculptures".
    Apart from the categories shown in the table, Vorsatz (2020) also estimates the aggregate value
of worldwide holdings of a number of other collectible types. Using the same methodology as
before would lead to the following estimates of the value of U.S. holdings: $480b for tapestries and
rugs, $567b for coins, $209b for stamps, and $345b for wine. These numbers strike us as implausibly
large given what we know about annual turnover in these markets. One explanation is that wealthy
households overestimate the market value of their holdings in these collectible types. Collections of
coins, stamps, etc. often consist of large numbers of items with relatively limited resale values.

A.6    Non-corporate business equity
We take the 2020.Q3 value for FAUS series LM112090205.Q: Nonfinancial noncorporate business;
proprietors' equity in noncorporate business (net worth), and subtract real estate equity computed as


                                                    35
the difference between series LM115035005.Q: Nonfinancial noncorporate business; real estate at market
value and series FL114123005.Q: Nonfinancial noncorporate business; loans; liability.




                                                 36
