                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE REPEATED SETBACKS OF HIV VACCINE DEVELOPMENT LAID THE
                  GROUNDWORK FOR SARS-COV-2 VACCINES

                                         Jeffrey E. Harris

                                       Working Paper 28587
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28587


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




The opinions expressed here are solely those of the author and do not represent the views of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Eisner Health, the National Bureau of Economic
Research, or any other individual or organization. The author has no sources of research support
to declare. The author has received no direct or indirect remuneration for this article. The author
discloses that a family member, M. Scott Harris MD, is chief medical officer of Altimmune, a
biopharmaceutical company with two COVID-19 vaccine prototypes currently in development.
The author has no financial or other interests in Altimmune's products, and no one employed by
or affiliated with Altimmune had any part in drafting or reviewing this article. Otherwise, the
author has no actual or potential conflicts of interest to declare.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jeffrey E. Harris. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Repeated Setbacks of HIV Vaccine Development Laid the Groundwork for SARS-CoV-2
Vaccines
Jeffrey E. Harris
NBER Working Paper No. 28587
March 2021
JEL No. H41,I18,O31

                                           ABSTRACT

The decades-long effort to produce a workable HIV vaccine has hardly been a waste of public
and private resources. To the contrary, the scientific know-how acquired along the way has
served as the critical foundation for the development of vaccines against the novel, pandemic
SARS-CoV-2 virus. We retell the real-world story of HIV vaccine research - with all its false
leads and missteps - in a way that sheds light on the current state of the art of antiviral vaccines.
We find that HIV-related R&D had more than a general spillover effect. In fact, the repeated
failures of HIV vaccine trials have served as a critical stimulus to the development of successful
vaccine technologies today. We rebut the counterargument that HIV vaccine development has
been no more than a blind alley, and that recently developed vaccines against COVID-19 are
really descendants of successful vaccines against Ebola, MERS, SARS-CoV-1 and human
papillomavirus. These successful vaccines likewise owe much to the vicissitudes of HIV vaccine
development.


Jeffrey E. Harris
Department of Economics, E52-422
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
jeffrey@mit.edu
        The Repeated Setbacks of HIV Vaccine Development Laid the
                       Groundwork for SARS-CoV-2 Vaccines

Jeffrey E. Harris*                                                     March 19, 2021

       Abstract. The decades-long effort to produce a workable HIV vaccine has hardly been a
waste of public and private resources. To the contrary, the scientific know-how acquired along
the way has served as the critical foundation for the development of vaccines against the novel,
pandemic SARS-CoV-2 virus. We retell the real-world story of HIV vaccine research ­ with all
its false leads and missteps ­ in a way that sheds light on the current state of the art of antiviral
vaccines. We find that HIV-related R&D had more than a general spillover effect. In fact, the
repeated failures of HIV vaccine trials have served as a critical stimulus to the development of
successful vaccine technologies today. We rebut the counterargument that HIV vaccine
development has been no more than a blind alley, and that recently developed vaccines against
COVID-19 are really descendants of successful vaccines against Ebola, MERS, SARS-CoV-1
and human papillomavirus. These successful vaccines likewise owe much to the vicissitudes of
HIV vaccine development.
Key Words: COVID-19, coronavirus, human immunodeficiency virus, clinical trials, R&D
JEL Codes: H41, I18, O31


* Professor of Economics, Emeritus, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA
02139; Physician, Eisner Health, Los Angeles CA 90015. jeffrey@mit.edu
 The opinions expressed here are solely those of the author and do not represent the views of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Eisner Health, the National Bureau of Economic
Research, or any other individual or organization.
 The author has received no direct or indirect remuneration for this article. The author discloses
that a family member, M. Scott Harris MD, is chief medical officer of Altimmune, a
biopharmaceutical company with two COVID-19 vaccine prototypes currently in development.
The author has no financial or other interests in Altimmune's products, and no one employed by
or affiliated with Altimmune had any part in drafting or reviewing this article. Otherwise, the
author has no actual or potential conflicts of interest to declare.
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                     Jeffrey E. Harris                             19-Mar-2021


1. Introduction
        Scientists and policymakers have been fretting for decades about our failure to develop
an effective, workable vaccine against human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The basic science
is extraordinarily complex, many researchers have rightly noted. Antiretroviral drugs were the
path of least resistance, others have cogently observed.
         The principal contention of this article is that the decades-long effort to produce a
workable HIV vaccine has hardly been a failure. To the contrary, the scientific know-how
acquired along the way has served as the critical foundation for the development of vaccines
against the novel, pandemic SARS-CoV-2 virus.
        The chronicle of repeated, unsuccessful efforts to develop an HIV vaccine is in some
ways a parable about the leakiness of scientific knowledge. It is also a take-home lesson in the
undervaluation of scientific and technological research. The supreme irony of the previous
generation's checkered attempts to overcome HIV is that in trying so hard to do so, it has
ultimately facilitated the next generation's conquest of another virus now ravaging the globe.
        It is already widely acknowledged that HIV-related research and, in particular, HIV
vaccine-related research, have had substantial spillover effects.1 Our thesis is more pointed. We
contend that the repeated failures of HIV vaccine trials have served as a critical stimulus to the
development of successful vaccine technologies today.
        How could one possibly test the principal contention of this article? Obviously, we
cannot rerun the tape on a counterfactual world deprived of a decades-long HIV vaccine
initiative to see what would have happened to our technical capabilities. What we can do,
however, is retell the real-world story of HIV vaccine research ­ with all its false leads and
missteps ­ in a way that sheds light on the current state of the art of antiviral vaccines.
        The main rejoinder to our hypothesis is that HIV vaccine development was no more than
a blind alley, an unsuccessful bystander to more fruitful lines of research. Recently developed
vaccines against COVID-19, it might be contended, are really descendants of successful vaccines

1
  As one group of reviewers put it, "In gaining this understanding, research progress in HIV-1 vaccine development
has catapulted forward the fields of non-human primate and human immunology, retroviral biology, structural
biology, genetics of the immune response, viral drug development, and vector development of gene delivery--all
accomplishments that are benefitting many non-HIV-1 areas of research." (Haynes et al. 2016) As another group of
scientists noted, the attempt to develop an HIV vaccine "has been the inspiration for much research in vaccine
technology, resulting in improved tools for induction of both T cell and antibody responses." (Andersson,
Schwerdtfeger, and Holst 2018)



                                                                                                                 2
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                        Jeffrey E. Harris                                19-Mar-2021


against Ebola, MERS, SARS-CoV-1, human papillomavirus, and influenza (Li et al. 2020). Our
response is that these successful vaccines likewise owe much to the vicissitudes of HIV vaccine
development. Beginning in the 1980s, the inadequacies of tried-and-true models for making
vaccines repeatedly pushed HIV vaccine research beyond conventional boundaries and into the
forefront of scientific understanding. These general advances were subsequently translated into
specific innovations in the development of workable, effective antiviral vaccines today.2
         A secondary counterargument is that it has simply been a matter of adequate financing.
Cumulative undiscounted R&D spending on HIV vaccines from 2000 to 2019 (the last year for
which data are available) amounted to US$ 15.3 billion, about 80 percent of which came from
the public sector, about 11 percent from philanthropic sources, and the remaining 9 percent from
private, commercial firms (Resource Tracking for HIV Prevention R&D Working Group
(RTWG) 2019, 2020). By contrast, the U.S. government's Operation Warp Speed has spent
about $10 billion in a matter of months (Ball 2021), and total investment in SARS-CoV-2
vaccine R&D and distribution has been already projected at $39.5 billion (Cornish 2020).
         The response to the latter counterargument is that it doesn't really prove or disprove our
hypothesis about the critical role of HIV vaccine development. If anything, it reinforces the
contention that we'd be a lot farther along in the search for an HIV vaccine if we had devoted
adequate resources to the task, especially to the formation of public-private partnerships (Harris
2009). It reinforces the view long held by economists that science doesn't simply march forward
by fortuitous accident. Science is endogenous (Romer 1990, Azoulay 2002).

2. Learning by Doing, Knowledge Externalities
         On February 4, 2020, the U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
announced that it was halting its clinical trial of yet another candidate vaccine against HIV
(NIAID 2020). The trial, called Uhambo, tested a vaccine based on canarypox, a live bird virus
that can infect human cells without causing disease. The canarypox virus had been genetically
altered to induce infected human cells to manufacture several key proteins of the HIV virus
(Bekker et al. 2018). These proteins, it was hoped, would then stimulate the vaccine recipient's
immune system to protect against future infection by HIV.


2
  "Things like this give a real shock to a field, and the field makes a major advance. It's just great, because, thanks to
HIV, we were much better prepared ­ at least scientifically ­ for this virus, if not the level of boots on the ground,
where we were not prepared at all. But scientifically, we're ready for this." (Yewdell 2020)


                                                                                                                        3
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                Jeffrey E. Harris                         19-Mar-2021


        The Uhambo trial had been conducted in 14 sites across South Africa, enrolling over
5,400 HIV-negative participants 18­35 years old. More than half-way through the study,
researchers had unsealed the data to find that the intervention group, composed of persons who
got the candidate vaccine, and the control group, composed of persons who got an inert placebo
vaccine, had about the same number of new cases of HIV. "While we are obviously disappointed
in the results," commented Winnie Byanyima, Executive Director of UNAIDS, "important
science has been learned that can be carried forward to future trials." (UNAIDS 2020)
        Byanyima's comment was right on target. Even the simplest, small-scale production
process involves what economists call learning by doing (Arrow 1962). Let's say you're a
restaurant chef learning to make clafoutis, a French dessert with fruit and a custard-like creamy
filling. If you bake it too little, the dessert is runny and tastes like eggs. If you bake it too much,
your patrons won't appreciate the chalky custard. You've got to make clafoutis several times to
really get the hang of it. To take a more complex example, once an organ transplant team has
worked together on hundreds of cases, the transplant surgery goes faster, there are fewer
complications, and the organ recipient's long-term survival is improved.
        The same goes for large-scale, complex scientific and technological research enterprises,
including the task of developing and testing a vaccine against HIV. It's not simply that the
research team becomes more efficient at producing the candidate vaccine or carrying out a trial
on human subjects. What matters even more is that researchers gain insights from their mistakes.
The suspension of Uhambo was just the latest in a decades-long series of failures to find a
vaccine against HIV and, in the process, to learn by trying, failing, rethinking, and trying again.
        A great many of the candidate HIV vaccines that have been tested over the last three
decades were originally developed by private firms and protected by patents. The private firms
holding these patents have been competing for a very valuable prize. If a candidate vaccine turns
out to be effective, its patent holder wins big. But when the candidate vaccine fails, all the
competitors in the vaccine field ­ not just the patent holder ­ learn from the mishap. The patent
holder can reap the rewards of success, but cannot fully capture the gains from its mistakes. We
thus have a positive externality, specifically a knowledge spillover (Griliches 1992, Aghion and
Jaravel 2015). An HIV vaccine trial ending in failure may still have an extraordinarily large
social benefit even if its private benefit turns out to be vanishingly small, or even negative.




                                                                                                          4
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                      Jeffrey E. Harris                             19-Mar-2021


3. The Conventional Approaches Didn't Work.

3.1. Inactivated and Live Attenuated Vaccines
         Before the HIV epidemic of the 1980s, vaccines were made primarily through two
conventional methods. First, inactivated vaccines were produced by heat or chemical treatment
of a virus or other infectious organism. The Salk polio vaccine, for example, was produced by
treating the poliovirus with formaldehyde (Juskewitch, Tapia, and Windebank 2010), a key
component of embalming fluid. Second, live attenuated vaccines were produced by repeatedly
passing the infectious organism through animals, cell lines, or unfavorable conditions in order to
induce mutations that would render it harmless but still infectious. The original measles vaccine,
for example, was made by passing the virus through cell cultures of human organs and chick
embryos, as well as embryonated hen's eggs (Stokes, Hilleman, and Weibel 1961). It wasn't
clearly known why these two approaches worked, but they were enormously successful in
combating not only polio and measles, but also smallpox, rabies, mumps and rubella (German
measles) (Zhang et al. 2019, Hicks, Fooks, and Johnson 2012). Currently, hepatitis A vaccine is
available in both inactivate virus and live attenuated virus forms (WHO 2020).
         Unfortunately, these previously successful, conventional approaches to vaccine
development bumped headlong into two critical features of the natural course of HIV infection.

3.2. Cellular Immunity ­ Not Just Humoral Immunity ­ Was Critical.
         From the start of the HIV epidemic, there was abundant evidence that combating the
virus would require not only humoral immunity, but also cellular immunity. Humans and other
animals have evolved a dual, partly complementary and partly redundant system of defenses
against noxious infectious agents (Plotkin 2010). Under humoral immunity, the defending animal
produces antibodies that claw onto and neutralize the offending antigen. Under cellular
immunity, certain white blood cells called killer lymphocytes attack and destroy other white
blood cells that have lassoed the offender.3
         As early as 1985, it was known that HIV stimulated the development of neutralizing
antibodies in most infected people, but that those antibodies alone weren't enough to confer


3
  In the humoral system, helper (CD4+) lymphocytes recognize mostly large, exogenous molecules and present them
to B lymphocytes, which in turn make antibodies to neutralize these antigens. In the cellular system, dendritic cells
(and other antigen-presenting cells) recognize mostly small, endogenous molecules and present them to killer
(CD8+) lymphocytes, which in turn destroy them. For example, both humoral and cellular immunity are involved in
the body's response to the chickenpox virus. A shingles outbreak occurs when cellular immunity is later weakened.


                                                                                                                   5
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                       Jeffrey E. Harris                               19-Mar-2021


protection against disease (Robert-Guroff, Brown, and Gallo 1985, Weiss et al. 1985). By the
1990s, it was also known that HIV could transfer directly from an infected cell to another cell,
thus avoiding humoral antibodies that roamed in extracellular fluids (Girard 1990). When an
individual was first infected, it was subsequently found, the killer lymphocytes ­ not the
antibodies ­ were responsible for tamping down the spread of the virus (Borrow et al. 1994,
Koup et al. 1994, Price et al. 1997, Heeney and Plotkin 2006). In fact, progression of HIV
infection to AIDS was associated with escape from killer cell control (Goulder et al. 1997). Later
on, studies of elite controllers ­ chronically infected people who never seemed to progress to
AIDS even without treatment ­ confirmed they were shielded by their cellular immune system
(Genovese, Nebuloni, and Alfano 2013).4

3.2. HIV Mutated Rapidly.
         HIV is a single-stranded RNA virus enclosed in an envelope. The RNA is positive-sense,
which means it can immediately use the machinery in the infected cell's cytoplasm to make viral
protein.5 The only viral proteins that HIV immediately makes are an enzyme called reverse
transcriptase, which converts the viral RNA to complementary viral DNA, and an integrase,
which then integrates the viral DNA into the host cell DNA, where it then can remain latent for
years. The initial process of reverse transcription, however, is extremely error-prone and subject
to mutation. And, as the scientific community soon found out, there's the rub.
         The hypermutability of HIV played havoc with some of the basic ideas underlying
vaccine development. Neutralizing antibodies against one isolated sample of the virus, it was
found, did not necessarily cross-neutralize other isolated samples (Girard 1990, Wei et al. 2003).
In what later became known as the transmitted founder effect, a single virus was almost always
found to be involved in the initial transmission of an HIV infection from one person to another
(Keele et al. 2008). But within months, the transmitted founder was replaced by mutated viruses



4
  "Given the accumulation of evidence that cell-mediated immune responses play a substantial role in containment
of primary HIV infection and suppression of viral replication, it is likely that a component of an effective vaccine is
the ability to elicit HIV-specific T cells." (Dubey et al. 2007)
5
  RNA is ribonucleic acid, while DNA is deoxyribonucleic acid. Both are nucleic acids. A double-stranded DNA
molecule has positive-sense and anti-sense strands. Positive-sense viral RNA is similar to a host cell's own
messenger RNA (mRNA) in that both are complementary to the anti-sense strand of DNA and thus can be
immediately translated into protein once inside the cell. The RNA from HIV and coronaviruses is positive-sense.
Influenza viruses have negative-sense RNA and thus need an extra packaged enzyme to make positive-sense RNA.


                                                                                                                      6
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                     Jeffrey E. Harris                            19-Mar-2021


that did not react to antibodies developed by the infected person and thus might escape humoral
immune control (Derdeyn et al. 2004).
        These two critical features of HIV infection ­ the central role of cellular immunity and
the hypermutability of the virus ­ posed serious problems for conventional vaccine technology.6
For one thing, inactivated virus vaccines appeared to stimulate the humoral system to make
antibodies, but since they could not infect host cells, they did not stimulate the cellular immune
system. To be sure, live attenuated virus vaccines did appear to stimulate the cellular system
(Zhang et al. 2019). However, at least early on, it wasn't known what mutation was responsible
for rendering the virus harmless. If the virus had been attenuated as a result of an unknown
mutation, there was a genuine possibility that it could revert to its more virulent form as a result
of a back mutation, or perhaps a separate compensatory mutation (Whatmore et al. 1995).
Added to this concern was the possibility that supposedly attenuated viruses might still cause
disease in patients whose immune system had been weakened by HIV. And then there was the
possibility that the attenuated virus could recombine with a virulent, wild form of the virus. The
live attenuated virus model was, at least for the meantime, off the table, too.

4. A Successful Vaccine May Not Mimic the Natural Immune Response.
        Under the conventional, pre-HIV model of vaccination, the main strategy was to mimic
the natural process of acquiring immune protection against the infectious agent. If contracting an
infection naturally protected someone against getting it again, then the idea was to develop a
vaccine that would make the blood of the vaccine recipient look like the convalescent serum of a
recovered individual. HIV tossed this classic idea out the window. The problem was that we
didn't ­ and still don't ­ have a crystal-clear notion of what it means to naturally recover, and
thus become naturally immune, to HIV (Desrosiers 2004).
        We're not talking about the elite controllers who let HIV enter through the front door and
then cohabit with their new guest indefinitely. To the contrary, we're talking about a model of
immunity in which HIV can't even get past the front door ­ sometimes called sterilizing
immunity (Dutta et al. 2016). At least for heterosexual transmission, that would mean an immune
response that keeps the virus from traversing the mucous membranes involved in sexual contact


6
  "The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is the best-studied virus for which an established technology is
unlikely to yield an effective vaccine. Like influenza virus and HCV [hepatitis C virus], HIV mutates at an
extraordinarily rapid rate, allowing it to evade a neutralizing antibody response." (Letvin 2007)


                                                                                                              7
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine               Jeffrey E. Harris                        19-Mar-2021


at the very moment of infection. Achieving this level of immunity turned out to be even more
challenging, as there was evidence that HIV itself may be able to disable those front-door
defenses (Morrow et al. 2007, Letvin 2007).
       As HIV vaccine researchers began to work on the most effective combination of
stimulants to both humoral and cellular immunity, a novel reevaluation of the basic paradigm
was in order. Protection and natural recovery from infection may be different (Plotkin 2010, Liu
2010). That could mean, for example, that a sufficiently large stimulus to humoral immunity
could confer protection even though the levels of antibodies seen in naturally infected
individuals didn't appear to be sufficient. The same could apply to a sufficiently large stimulus to
cellular immunity, much larger than among people naturally infected by HIV.

4.1. gp120, Viral Receptors, and the AIDSVAX Vaccines
       Through detailed analysis of HIV's molecular structure, researchers determined that the
outer skin (or envelope) of the virus contains a key molecule named gp120, where "gp" is short
for glycoprotein, which is basically a sugar-coated protein. This key molecule protrudes outward
from the viral envelope and fits like a key into a viral receptor on the surface of a target cell in
the victim's body. Upon attachment of the key to the receptor, the viral envelope fuses with the
target cell membrane, thus effectively opening the lock and permitting viral invasion of the cell.
As it turned out, gp120 fit onto the viral receptor of a white blood cell called CD4+ lymphocyte
that is critical in maintaining the body's cellular immunity. What's worse, the gp120 key also fit
on viral receptors of other types of cells, including the nervous system.
       The discovery of gp120 as the key molecule that attaches the host's receptor led the way
to a new model for potentially achieving immunity. Instead of using a whole virus to stimulate
an immune response ­ as in the case of inactivated and live attenuated viruses ­ the approach
would be to make a vaccine out of pure gp120. The goal was to artificially stimulate a strong
humoral antibody response to the pure glycoprotein molecule, even if that sort of response did
not occur during natural infection.
       Two vaccine candidates adhering to this new model advanced to the point where they
were evaluated in large clinical trials on volunteer, HIV-negative human subjects. Both were
produced by VaxGen, a relatively small U.S. biotechnology company spun off from the larger
firm Genentech in 1995. One of the candidate vaccines was AIDSVAX B/B, based upon the
purified form of gp120 encountered in HIV subtype B, which circulated in countries where man-


                                                                                                       8
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine             Jeffrey E. Harris                       19-Mar-2021


to-man sex and the sharing of injection equipment were the main routes of transmission. The
other candidate was AIDSVAX B/E, based on purified forms of gp120 seen in subtype B and in
a hybrid-viral subtype circulating in Southeast Asia, where heterosexual transmission was more
prevalent. A US$ 122 million joint venture with South Korean investors to manufacture more
than 200 million doses of AIDSVAX vaccines annually was in the works (Harris 2009).
       Unfortunately, AIDSVAX B/B failed to curb HIV in a study of over 5,400 volunteers in
the U.S and the Netherlands (Flynn et al. 2005), while AIDSVAX B/E performed no better in a
study of over 2,500 injection drug users in Bangkok, Thailand (Pitisuttithum et al. 2006). The
failures of these two candidate vaccines became the focus of a substantial research effort. Both
vaccines did indeed stimulate a humoral response against the gp120 stimulus, but that alone did
not confer immunity (Gilbert et al. 2005). There was some evidence of a correlation between the
protective effect of the gp120 vaccines and antibody-dependent cell-mediated immunity, but
again, the findings were inconclusive (Forthal et al. 2007).
       Even at this point in the narrative, the connections to SARS-CoV-2 vaccine development
should be evident. The research on gp120 as the key molecule on the surface of HIV attaching to
receptors on CD4+ lymphocytes and other tissues was the forerunner of subsequent research on
the spike protein as the key molecule on SARS-CoV-2 attaching to ACE2 receptors in the lungs
and other organs. But we're getting ahead of our story.

5. Live Viral Vectors Become the New Model.

5.1. The STEP Trial of the Ad5 Viral Vector
       In the face of the failure of the AIDSVAX candidate vaccines to stimulate protective
humoral immunity against the key molecule gp120, and with growing evidence of the role
played by cellular immunity in the defense against HIV infection, vaccine researchers turned to
radically different models for conveying the immune stimulus (Benmira, Bhattacharya, and
Schmid 2010).
       During the 1980s, a research team had managed to genetically engineer a live smallpox
virus to produce a key protein from the surface of another virus ­ the hepatitis B virus.
Chimpanzees infected with this modified smallpox virus turned out to be immune against
hepatitis B (Moss et al. 1984). Of course, no one contemplated infecting a human being with
smallpox in order to immunize him against hepatitis B. But if we could instead find a benign



                                                                                                   9
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine               Jeffrey E. Harris                       19-Mar-2021


virus to act as a live vector, then perhaps we could similarly engineer it to produce immunogenic
proteins from HIV.
       Efforts focused on a common-cold virus called adenovirus 5 (or Ad5) as a potential live
vector (Downey et al. 1983, Rodrigues et al. 1997, Rodrigues et al. 1998, Patterson, Papagatsias,
and Benlahrech 2009). Evidence had accumulated, in particular, that a genetically engineered
version of Ad5, once it naturally infected the cells of the vaccine recipient, could activate its
newly acquired genes to boost anti-HIV cellular immunity (Sekaly 2008). Even if the Ad5
vaccine could not completely block HIV infection, perhaps it would stave off the progression of
the infection to AIDS.
       In the STEP vaccine trial, the pharmaceutical manufacturer Merck made a major,
multimillion-dollar investment to test this concept (Harris 2009). Almost 3,000 participants were
recruited from 34 sites where subtype B was prevalent, including Australia, Brazil, Canada, the
Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica, Peru, Puerto Rico and the United States. Participants were
given one injection with each of three Ad5 viruses modified to contain the HIV genes gag, pol
and nef, respectively.
       Unfortunately, Merck's Ad5-based vaccine did not fully live up to expectations. While
the vaccine stimulated cellular immunity (McElrath et al. 2008), it showed no reduction in HIV
incidence compared to a placebo vaccine (Buchbinder et al. 2008). What's more, a participant's
prior immunity to the Ad5 virus turned out to at least double the risk that he would come down
with HIV during the trial (Buchbinder et al. 2008). As a result, the Phambili trial of the same
vaccine in South Africa was cancelled (NIAID 2007, Gray, Buchbinder, and Duerr 2010,
Moodie et al. 2015), while PAVE-100, another Ad5-based trial proposed for Africa and the
Caribbean was put on hold (Day and Kublin 2013).

5.2. The RV144 Trial
       There were two competing explanations for the failure of Merck's STEP vaccine. One
was that the whole concept of using a virus vector was flawed. The other was that adenovirus 5
simply wasn't the right vector. Perhaps vaccine recipients preferentially developed polyreactive
antibodies against many Ad5 proteins, including its native proteins, and not just against the
artificial HIV proteins inserted into the vector's genetic code (Sekaly 2008). While Ad5 had been
engineered to infect the host cells of the vaccine recipient without itself multiplying (Wold and
Toth 2013), even this replication-defective adenovirus 5 stimulated a strong immune reaction in


                                                                                                    10
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                    Jeffrey E. Harris                            19-Mar-2021


humans. What's more, a significant proportion of participants in the Merck STEP study already
had antibodies to Ad5.
        To help sort out these two possibilities, the RV144 Trial, conducted by the U.S. Military
HIV Research Program (MHRP), tested a two-component vaccine on over 16,400 supposedly
HIV-negative volunteers in Thailand. The first component ­ a primer­ was based instead on the
canarypox vector, a proprietary product acquired by Sanofi Pasteur named ALVAC. The second
component ­ a two-dose booster­ was AIDSVAX B/E. Even if this new vaccine protocol were to
have commercial value, it would ultimately come too late for VaxGen's stockholders, as the
company negotiated the rights to AIDSVAX to a nonprofit foundation in 2008.
        In a December 2009 intent-to-treat analysis of the RV144 data ­ which included all
participants ­ MHRP scientists reported a statistically insignificant "trend" toward HIV
prevention with an estimated efficacy of 26.4%. The findings looked more promising when the
researchers tossed out 7 participants who were discovered to be already HIV-positive at the time
they were enrolled in the trial, or when they analyzed only those participants in the intervention
group who followed through with all vaccine doses (Rerks-Ngarm et al. 2009). Still, the problem
was that an efficacy of about 26 percent simply wasn't enough to make the vaccine realistically
useful for HIV prevention.
        One possible reason that RV144 gave only weak protection against HIV was that the two
booster doses with AIDSVAX B/E were inadequate. To explore that possibility, a public-private
collaborative team called the Pox-Protein Public-Private Partnership (or P5) initiated Uhambo in
2016, using the combination of the canarypox ALVAC vaccine from Sanofi Pasteur along with
multiple booster doses at one year and 18 months of a different purified form of gp120 from
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) adapted to HIV subtype C, which is more prevalent in South Africa.
        We already know that Uhambo was called off in February 2020. But those findings have
in turn led scientists to test other variations of the vector-based prime-boost strategy to achieve
adequate immunity against HIV.7 The Imbokodo trial in women (HVTN 705) and the Mosaico
trial in men (HVTN 706), both sponsored by Janssen, used an adenovirus 26 vector encoding
proteins from a mosaic of different HIV subtypes, along with a purified gp140, another key



7
  In a 2013 review entitled "Lessons Learned from HIV Vaccine Clinical Efficacy Trials," one pair of commentators
wrote, "Moreover, valuable information has emerged from RV144 and the other completed efficacy trials and is
serving to guide vaccine discovery efforts." (Day and Kublin 2013)


                                                                                                              11
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine              Jeffrey E. Harris                        19-Mar-2021


protein on HIV's envelope, as a booster (U.S. National Library of Medicine 2020b, a). Both
Mosaico and Imbokodo are ongoing.

5.3. Virus-Like Particles
       If a significant proportion of vaccine recipients already had antibodies against naturally
occurring viral vectors such as Ad5 and Ad26, was there any way to create an artificial viral
vector to which recipients would be immunologically naïve? That's where the idea of virus-like
particles (VLPs) came into play (Doan et al. 2005, Young et al. 2006). In this novel vector
system, a purified viral glycoprotein was not directly administered to the recipient, as was the
case with purified gp120 in the AIDSVAX trials and purified gp120 and gp140 in the booster
doses of the RV144, Imbokodo, and Mosaico trials. Instead, an amalgam of viral glycoproteins
was assembled into a particle that resembled a real virus but did not have any nucleic acid and
thus could not reproduce (Zhao, Ao, and Yao 2016). While work has continued on a VLP-based
vaccine against HIV, other vaccines based on the VLP platform are already in use against human
papillomavirus (HPV), hepatitis B, and malaria (Fuenmayor, Godia, and Cervera 2017).

5.4. DC Therapeutic Vaccines
       As we've already learned, researchers became increasingly convinced that cellular
immunity was critical to mounting an effective defense against HIV. They further understood the
long-term maintenance of cellular immune defenses would be essential to keeping an HIV-
infected person healthy without having to take lifelong antiretroviral medication. Boosting
cellular immunity was thus the key not only to HIV prevention, but also to its treatment.
       There was a growing scientific consensus that those vaccines most closely mimicking a
natural viral infection had a greater propensity to boost cellular immunity. Live attenuated virus
vaccines were in that category, but as we've noted, the risk of a back mutation to virulent HIV,
or of recombination with the virulent form, was just too great. They had learned from the Merck
STEP trial that live viral vectors could stimulate cellular immunity, but multiple clinical trials
with that vaccine model had so far not succeeded.
       In the cellular immune system, a dendritic cell (DC) ­ or another antigen-presenting cell
(APC) such as a macrophage ­ engulfs an antigen molecular and then presents the antigen to a
killer CD8+ lymphocyte, which gobbles it up. (See note 3 above.) The acquired knowledge of
the detailed workings of the cellular immune system led to the idea of creating a vaccine
consisting of an individual's own DCs loaded with HIV antigens, HIV antigen-expressing viral


                                                                                                     12
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                     Jeffrey E. Harris                            19-Mar-2021


vectors, HIV antigen-containing VLPs, or HIV antigen-encoding RNA (Kundu et al. 1998, Lu et
al. 2004). By 2016, seventeen clinical trials had been undertaken to see whether the DC-based
approach could be employed as a therapeutic strategy in HIV-infected patients (Zhao, Ao, and
Yao 2016). Unfortunately, the DC vaccine approach has thus far not proved to be consistently
effective (Gandhi et al. 2016), but efforts to refine this strategy continue (da Silva et al. 2018).

6. Nucleic Acid Vaccines
        If vaccine designers were going to all the trouble of extracting the sequences of RNA
from key HIV genes, then converting these RNA sequences into DNA sequences, and then
inserting these DNA sequences into the genome of a replication-defective DNA-based vector
virus, then why not just skip the vector altogether and work directly with the HIV-derived RNA
from start? Why not copy the key HIV gene sequences into messenger RNA (or mRNA), the
form of RNA that cells naturally used as an amplifier to crank out multiple copies of proteins?
Or if not mRNA, then why not work at least with the corresponding sequences of DNA?
        The use of freestanding nucleic acids, it was understood, might be vastly easier than
inactivating or attenuating a whole virus, or inserting a gene into another vector virus. Those
vaccine technologies had to be customized for each virus and, in some cases, each strain of each
virus.8 But the technology for developing nucleic acid-based vaccines could, at least in principle,
be more readily standardized, and thus take advantage of significant economies of scale and
scope (Maruggi et al. 2019).
        By 1990, investigators working with mice, found that naked DNA or RNA, when injected
directly into muscle, could result in the expression of the encoded protein (Wolff et al. 1990). By
1993, in another mouse-based study, naked DNA coding for a protein from one influenza virus
had been found to stimulate the immune response to a related but distinct influenza virus (Ulmer
et al. 1993). While naked nucleic acids initially appeared to be too unstable to be used alone in a
workable vaccine, other investigators were able to package a water-based solution containing
RNA inside globules lined with fat molecules, a drug delivery device called a liposome
(Martinon et al. 1993).




8
  When the 2009 H1N1 pandemic hit, vaccine developers took six months just to switch the strain of influenza virus
to be covered ­ too late for the second wave that hit the U.S. in the fall of that year (Amanat and Krammer 2020).


                                                                                                               13
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine              Jeffrey E. Harris                        19-Mar-2021


        These initial advances in the use of nucleic acid vaccines offered a scientific basis for
moving forward with further research. Still, the critical added stimulus to the search for a nuclei
acid vaccine was the repeated failure to get the live virus vector model to work for HIV. What's
more, there remained significant uncertainty about the respective roles of humoral and cellular
immunity in mounting an effective defense against HIV, and preliminary evidence suggested that
nucleic acid vaccines for HIV more closely mimicked the form of infection that would
adequately stimulate both immune systems (Mascola et al. 2005, Allen et al. 2000, Amara et al.
2001, Liu 2010).

6.1. HTVN 505 and the Path to mRNA
        Then came the HVTN 505 trial, which tested a vaccine combining two components: a
primer dose of a DNA-based vaccine expressing six HIV genes, followed by a booster dose of a
replication-defective Ad5 vector containing the same genes (Hammer et al. 2013). The primer
dose of the DNA-based vaccine was made from plasmid DNA, a naked, circular loop of double-
stranded DNA that exits naturally in bacterial cells. Unfortunately, after two years of follow up,
27 of the 1,253 individuals randomized to receive the two-component vaccine came down with
HIV, compared to 21 of the 1,251 individuals randomly assigned to receive a placebo (Hammer
et al. 2013).
        Once again, failure led to further research to explain the failure. One suggested
explanation was that the prime-boost DNA-Ad5 combination used in HVTN 505 likewise
stimulated weak, polyreactive antibodies against the Ad5 vector (Williams et al. 2015). The other
possibility was that a DNA-based vaccine was simply not going to work, in part because the
plasmid DNA had too hard a time passing into the target cell nucleus (Maruggi et al. 2019). This
stimulated further in interest in mRNA-based vaccines, which only had to get into the host cell
cytoplasm to do their job.
        Still, mRNA vaccines still faced significant obstacles. One of the trickiest problems was
that mRNA itself stimulated an immune response. That's not what vaccine researchers wanted.
The whole point was to stimulate the immune response to the protein that the mRNA encoded,
not the mRNA itself. That problem was ultimately solved in 2005 by chemically tinkering with
the natural bases that make up RNA's molecular backbone (Kariko et al. 2005, Kariko et al.
2008). But even with that problem out of the way, experimental HIV vaccines based on mRNA




                                                                                                    14
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine             Jeffrey E. Harris                      19-Mar-2021


provoked other inflammatory responses that tended to counteract their effectiveness (Pollard et
al. 2013).
       To address these problems, researchers worked on more sophisticated systems for
delivering mRNA to the vaccine recipient. One important advance was the development self-
amplifying mRNA (or SAM). The idea was to take the section of mRNA that codes for a
particular immunogenic protein and splice it onto another section of mRNA that contains the
code for amplification of the RNA and expression of the protein (Pardi et al. 2018, Moyo et al.
2019). In one study, researchers created an SAM, splicing the mRNA encoding HIV's envelope
protein into the mRNA from the alphavirus, then wrapped the hybrid mRNA in a lipid particle
(Bogers et al. 2015).
       Nor were HIV vaccine researchers deterred from pushing ahead with human trials of
RNA vaccine prototypes. In one phase 1 trial, investigators injected an mRNA vaccine encoding
16 key fragments of HIV RNA into the lymph nodes of human volunteers who were already
chronically infected with HIV. At the highest dose, the vaccine appeared to stimulate the cellular
immune response, thus raising the hope that it could ultimately be used as therapy for those
already infected (Leal et al. 2018).
       By 2019, just months before SARS-Cov-2 was about to enter the world stage, mRNA had
reached the forefront of vaccine research, with experimental tests of vaccines against influenza,
Zika, and Ebola virus as well (Maruggi et al. 2019). With many of the problems of packaging
mRNA out of the way, and with the possibility of streamlined fabrication of mRNA vaccines on
demand, it has become clear in retrospect that if mRNA vaccines actually worked, they would be
the first out of the starting gate in the race for a SARS-CoV-2 vaccine.

7. SARS-Cov-2 Vaccines

7.1. They Knew It Was Coming.
       The SARS-CoV-1 outbreak in 2002-2003 and the continuing reintroduction of MERS-
CoV on the Arabian Peninsula a decade later (Lee 2015) sent a clear message to the public health
and scientific communities well before the December 2019 outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan,
China. At any minute, a novel, lethal respiratory coronavirus could emerge with the potential for
pandemic human-to-human spread (Cockrell et al. 2018, Maruggi et al. 2019). Piggybacking on
the major advances in virology, immunology and molecular biology achieved during the



                                                                                                  15
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine             Jeffrey E. Harris                       19-Mar-2021


scientific confrontation with HIV, researchers already knew that human coronaviruses were
positive-sense RNA viruses with a key spike glycoprotein that protruded from viral envelope.
They already knew that the spike glycoprotein could bind to viral receptors on host target cells.
The spike glycoprotein of SARS-Cov-1, they knew as well, could bind a receptor called ACE2 in
human lungs (Cockrell et al. 2017, Cockrell et al. 2018). They knew it was coming and, at least
from the scientific point of view of vaccine development, they were ready.

7.2. Pivotal Knowledge Leak
       Within a month after the initial outbreak in Wuhan, China, the complete genetic code of
SARS-CoV-2 was published (Wu et al. 2020a, b, Zhou et al. 2020, Zhu et al. 2020, Lu et al.
2020), an unimaginable, lightning-paced feat in comparison to the decade it took for the genome
of HIV to be unraveled (Bachmann et al. 1994). This disclosure ­ no doubt the pivotal
knowledge leak of the entire COVID-19 pandemic ­ led quickly to confirmation that the spike
glycoprotein SARS-Cov-2 would likewise bind to the ACE2 receptor in human lungs (Lan et al.
2020, Wrapp et al. 2020). By February 3, 2020, the day that the Ohambu HIV vaccine trial was
cancelled, almost precisely the day when SARS-CoV-2 had jumped from Hubei to Italy
(Worobey et al. 2020), scientists in the know had already arrived at an important conclusion. Just
as the gp120 envelope glycoprotein had played a key role in the search for HIV vaccines that
began more than two decades earlier, the spike protein could serve as an immune stimulus for
potential vaccines against SARS-Cov-2 (Lan et al. 2020, Wrapp et al. 2020).
       The importance of this knowledge leak cannot be overemphasized. With multiple
vaccine-development groups on the ready to respond to a new pandemic threat, it is doubtful that
any single firm could have capitalized on its private knowledge of the SARS-CoV-2 genome for
long. Still, if there had been even a few weeks delay until investigators outside China acquired
viral samples and sequenced the viral RNA, we would not be where we are today.

7.3. HIV Vaccines as Progenitors
       As of March 5, 2021, the World Health Organization's COVID-19 Candidate Vaccine
Landscape and Tracker reported 78 candidate vaccines undergoing human clinical trials or
already in use, and 181 additional candidates in preclinical development (World Health
Organization 2021). Among 78 candidates in the clinical phase, 68 (or 86 percent) involved
technologies that could be traced back to prototypes tested in HIV vaccine trials, while only 11
(14 percent) were based on inactivated virus and a live attenuated virus.


                                                                                                   16
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                    Jeffrey E. Harris                             19-Mar-2021


        Table 1 shows the specifics. The largest category ­ nearly one-third of vaccine candidates
undergoing clinical ­ was based on the purified viral protein model. We have already seen how
the glycoprotein gp120 on the surface of HIV was found to be the key molecule unlocking the
receptors on human host CD4+ lymphocytes. The purification of gp120 led to the development
of AIDSVAX B/B and AIDSVAX B/E. While both of these vaccine candidates failed in clinical
trials (Flynn et al. 2005, Pitisuttithum et al. 2006), purified gp120 and related viral glycoproteins
served as the booster shots in the RV144, Uhamabo, Mosaico and Imbokodo trials (Rerks-Ngarm
et al. 2009, Bekker et al. 2018, Abakuks 1973, U.S. National Library of Medicine 2020b, a,
Cohen 2020). With the exception of Mosaico and Imbokodo, which are ongoing, these trials
likewise failed to produce an effective, workable HIV vaccine.




 Table 1. HIV Vaccine Progenitors of SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine Candidates in Clinical Trials*

 Vaccine Model                 SARS-CoV-2 Candidates             HIV Vaccine Progenitor 
                                   Number           Percent
 Purified Viral Subunit                  25          32.1%       AIDSVAX (Flynn et al. 2005)
 Nucleic Acid                            20          25.6%       HTN 505 (Hammer et al. 2013)
 Viral Vector §                          16          20.5%       Merck STEP (Buchbinder et al. 2008)
 Inactivated Virus                       10          12.8%       ­
 Virus-Like Particle                       3           3.8%      (Young et al. 2006)
 Viral Vector + DC ¶                       3           3.8%      (Kundu et al. 1998, Lu et al. 2004)
 Attenuated Virus                          1           1.3%      ­

 * Among 78 SARS-CV-2 vaccine candidates in clinical trials identified by WHO as of March 5, 2021 (World
 Health Organization 2021). These include vaccines currently approved or reported to have completed phase 3 trials
 (Kyriakidis et al. 2021): Pfizer-BioNTech (nucleic acid); Moderna (nucleic acid); Oxford-AstraZeneca (viral
 vector); Johnson & Johnson (viral vector); Gamaleya-Sputnik V (viral vector); CanSino Biological (viral vector);
 Novavax (purified viral subunit); Sinovac (inactivated virus); Sinopharm (inactivated virus); Bharat (inactivated
 virus); and Medicago-Glaxo Smith Kline (virus-like particle).
  Not all progenitors identified. For example, other progenitors of the Purified Viral Subunit model included the
 booster doses in the RV144, Unambo, Mosaico and Imbokodo trials.
  Includes vaccines based on plasma DNA and messenger RNA.
 § Includes vaccines based on replicating and non-replicating viral vectors.
 ¶ DC = dendritic cell. WHO refers instead to antigen-presenting cells (APCs).




                                                                                                               17
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine               Jeffrey E. Harris                       19-Mar-2021


       Yet the entire line of research laid the scientific foundation for subsequent identification
of the spike protein as the key molecule on SARS-CoV-2 unlocking ACE2 receptors in the
human lungs and other organs. It further laid the foundation for the use of purified versions of
the spike protein in vaccine candidates currently under development against SARS-CoV-2. One
of these candidates is NVX-CoV2373, under development by Novavax, produced high titers of
neutralizing antibodies in a phase 1/2 trial (Keech et al. 2020) and has been under phase 3
investigation since September 2020.
       The model employed for the priming dose in the STEP, RV144, Unambo, Mosaico and
Imbokodo trials of HIV vaccine candidates was a viral vector. The STEP relied on the Ad5 virus.
When that trial failed, the RV144 and Uhambo trials switched to a canarypox viral vector. When
those trials failed, the Mosaico and Imbokodo trials switched to the Ad26 virus. Now, one-fifth
of the vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 in Table 1 are based upon the viral vector model. Among
these vaccines is the Ad26.COV2.S candidate, developed by Johnson & Johnson and Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center and recently approved for emergency use in the United States and
based upon the Ad26 vector (Sadoff et al. 2021, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases 2021).
       Other SARS-CoV-2 vaccines based upon the viral vector model include AZD1222,
developed by AstraZeneca and Oxford University, based upon the Ad5 vector (van Doremalen et
al. 2020), and Gem-COVID-Vac/Sputnik V, developed by Gamalaya Research Institute, based
upon a priming dose with Ad26 vector and a booster dose with the Ad5 vector (Sputnik V 2020,
Kyriakidis et al. 2021). It is not just the case that the HIV vector vaccine trials predated these
SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. The knowledge gained from these failed progenitor trials ­ particularly a
greater understanding of the role of preexisting antibodies against the viral vectors themselves ­
contributed directly to the design of their more successful progeny.
       As shown in Table 1, about one in four SARS-CoV-2 vaccine candidates in clinical trials
is based upon the nucleic acid platform. These include not only the mRNA-based vaccines from
Pfizer-BioNTech (Polack et al. 2020)and Moderna (Anderson et al. 2020, Widge et al. 2021),
already approved for emergency use in the United States and other jurisdictions, but also plasmid
DNA-based and other mRNA-based vaccines in development. While a phase 1 trial of a plasmid
DNA-based HIV vaccine was launched as early as 2002 (Graham et al. 2006), only one nucleic
acid-based vaccine against HIV has advanced as far enough to undergo evaluation in a phase 3



                                                                                                     18
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine              Jeffrey E. Harris                      19-Mar-2021


clinical trial. In the HTVN 505 trial, as we've already noted, a priming dose with a plasmid
DNA-based vaccine was combined with an Ad5 vector-based booster (Hammer et al. 2013).
That's not a whole lot of progenitors.
       But this is not about keeping a box score of the number of DNA-based and RNA-based
vaccines against HIV. The critical issue is that the repeated failure of vector-based vaccine
candidates against HIV provided the momentum to press forward with nucleic acid-based
models. And the further failure of the plasmid DNA-based vaccine in HTVN 505 enhanced the
incentive to investigate mRNA-based vaccines as alternatives. After all, DNA was known to be
more stable than RNA, but RNA only had to enter the host cell cytoplasm to do its job, while
DNA had to go one step further and get into the cell nucleus. So, if a DNA-based vaccine didn't
work, then researchers would have to figure out how to deliver a more stable RNA-based
vaccine.
       Table 1 shows us that fewer SARS-CoV-2 candidates have exploited the virus-like
particle and the dendritic cell models. Still, the same underlying paradigm applies. The failure of
the viral vector model to yield an effective vaccine against HIV expanded the search for other
models that mimicked viral infection and thus stimulated an adequate cellular immune response.

8. Counterarguments

8.1. What About Inactivated Virus Vaccines?
       The first counterargument comes directly out of Table 1. A total of 14 percent of SARS-
CoV-2 vaccine candidates in clinical trials have been based on conventional models that
predated the search for an HIV vaccine. These include inactivated viral vaccines developed by
Sinovac (Zhang et al. 2021), Sinopharm (Xia et al. 2021), and Bharat (Ella et al. 2020), which
are now in use in several countries worldwide.
       The inactivated vaccine model may appear to be so primitive that its successful
application does not even require knowledge of the SARS-CoV-2 genome. Just marinate the
virus in formaldehyde ­ or, more recently, in the alkylating agent beta propiolactone (BPL) ­ and
it's ready for prime time. But that is far from the reality of modern vaccine development.
       It has been long been known that an inactivated virus cannot on its own infect host cells
and thus adequately stimulate cellular immunity. That could lead to a weaker, shorter-lived
immune response and thus require higher doses and repeated boosters. To get around this



                                                                                                 19
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                  Jeffrey E. Harris                          19-Mar-2021


limitation, inactivated virus vaccines had to be administered with a mixture of aluminum salts
called alum, which acts as an adjuvant (Christensen 2016). In fact, all three of the inactivated
virus vaccines currently in use against SARS-CoV-2 are administered along with alum or
another aluminum salt (Kyriakidis et al. 2021).
        The use of vaccine adjuvants is hardly new. What is new is the regulatory framework for
demonstrating that a vaccine candidate is effective. It is no longer enough for a developer to
submit data that a virus was inactivated with BPL and then combined with alum. Developers
now have to show that the BPL disables the viral RNA without also knocking out the surface
glycoproteins that stimulate the host's immune response (Fan et al. 2017). They now have to
demonstrate during phase 1/2 trials that their proposed candidate adequately stimulates cellular
immunity as well as humoral immunity, especially in view of the evidence that natural infection
with some coronaviruses evokes only limited-duration protection (Choe et al. 2017). Had it not
been for advances in virology and immunology achieved through HIV research in the 1980s and
1990s, one wonders whether inactivated viral vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 would have cleared
these significantly higher, modern-day regulatory hurdles.
        As we've already learned, the search for an HIV vaccine focused researchers' attention
on the importance of the cellular immune response to infection, and not just the humoral immune
response. Scientists had learned that the first step in the infection of a CD4+ cell, also called a T-
helper (or Th) cell, was the attachment of key glycoprotein gp120 (Fauci 1988). They further
determined that there were actually two types of Th cells.9 Resistance to HIV infection, it was
found, was associated with a strong response of type-1 T-helper cells (Th1), which mediated the
cellular immune response. By contrast, progression of HIV infection to AIDS was associated
with a switch to type-2 T-helper cells (Th2), which mediated the humoral immune response
(Romagnani et al. 1994).
        Knowledge about the nature of virus-host molecular interaction and the cellular immune
response ­ acquired from the confrontation with HIV ­ ultimately helped to resuscitate
conventional vaccine technologies. In phase 1/2 trials, each one of three inactivated virus




9
 Immunologists now regard Th1 and Th2 as distinct phenotypes of both CD4+ and CD8+ cells, but the complete
scheme had not been worked out when the Th1 à Th2 switch hypothesis was first elaborated.


                                                                                                             20
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                      Jeffrey E. Harris                              19-Mar-2021


candidates (Sinovac, Sinopharm, Bharat) was able to demonstrate a dominance of Th1 over Th2
activation.10

8.2. SARS-CoV-1, MERS-CoV, and Other Viruses Deserve the Credit Instead.
         The second counterargument is that outbreaks of other deadly coronaviruses ­ SARS-
CoV-1 in 2002-2003 and MERS-CoV ­ are what really prepared us scientifically for the arrival
of SARS-CoV-2. By the time that the latter virus arrived in late 2019, as we've acknowledged,
virologists already knew that coronaviruses were single-stranded, positive-sense RNA viruses,
that the outer shell was adorned with spike proteins, that the spike protein of SARS-CoV-1
locked onto the ACE2 receptor of the host cell. They even understood the conformational change
in the spike's S molecule required to fuse with host cell membrane (Masters 2006). Vaccines
against SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV, based upon the technologies described in Table 1, were
already in development, and a few candidates had entered clinical trials (Enjuanes et al. 2016, Li
et al. 2020). There is little doubt that the acquired knowledge about SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-
CoV set the stage for the extraordinarily rapid emergence of workable, efficacious SARS-CoV-2
vaccines in 2020.
         Quite apart from SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV, didn't research on other unrelated
viruses also contribute to our scientific know-how? Take Ebola virus. The Ebola vaccine is based
upon a viral vector derived from the vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). A critical step in vaccine
development was the creation of a genetically engineered VSV that expressed the Zaire Ebola
virus (ZEBOV) glycoprotein (Garbutt et al. 2004, Jones et al. 2005, Feldmann et al. 2007). The
resultant vaccine (rVSV-ZEBOV) was approved in Dec. 2019 (Monath et al. 2019).
Subsequently, the European Medicines Agency approved a separate viral vector vaccine for the
Zaire strain of Ebola (commercially called Zabdeno) based upon a combination of two vectors,
Ad26 and Modified Vaccinia Ankara (European Medicines Agency 2020).
         Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a major cause of cervical cancer and other diseases. The
HPV vaccines in current use are virus-like particles (Kirnbauer et al. 1992, Kirnbauer et al. 1993,
Harro et al. 2001, Koutsky et al. 2002). And we've already acknowledged that a vaccine based
on the virus-like particle technology is currently in use against hepatitis B (Fuenmayor, Godia,
and Cervera 2017). What's more, those vaccines were successes, not failures.

10
  It has also been suggested HIV trials in South Africa have created the necessary infrastructure for subsequently
conducting SARS-CoV-2 trials (Miller 2021). We will not pursue this line of inquiry here.


                                                                                                                     21
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine             Jeffrey E. Harris                       19-Mar-2021


       The principal response to this multifaceted counterargument is that the foregoing
observations about other vaccines are accurate but shortsighted. For any one of these vaccines ­
call it vaccine X ­ we could have adapted this article with a modified title: The Repeated
Setbacks of HIV Vaccine Development Laid the Groundwork for Vaccine X.
       It is not enough merely to cite the development of some other viral vaccine X as a
counterexample. One would have to argue that vaccine X was developed along a track
independent from and unaided by the search for an HIV vaccine. That would not fit the facts.
       To the contrary, the successful search for a human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine shared
common techniques of virology and molecular biology with the failed search for an HIV
vaccine. Attempts to exploit the virus-like particle model go back to the early years of the HIV
epidemic (Gheysen et al. 1989, Delchambre et al. 1989, Wagner et al. 1998, Buonaguro et al.
2002). The successful Ebola vaccines and the unsuccessful HIV vaccine likewise drew from a
common knowledge base. The development of the VSV viral vector used in the Ebola vaccine
did not come out of nowhere. In fact, the first experimental Ebola virus vaccine to protect
nonhuman primates involved an adenovirus 5 vector (Sullivan et al. 2000), the same vector that
served as the prototype for the Merck STEP vaccine.
       To reiterate, the development of viral vector vaccines for HIV and for Ebola shared
common techniques of virology and molecular biology. To contend that we have an ample menu
of candidate vector virus vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 today because we managed to develop
rVSV-ZEBOV just in time and that prior work on vector virus vaccines for HIV was an
irrelevant bystander doesn't fit the facts.

9. Private Losses, Public Gains
       If we dare to accept the principal contention of this article, then we are confronted with a
truly massive R&D spillover. A relatively modest investment of about US$ 16 billion spread
over two decades on an enterprise that, on its face, has been unsuccessful actually laid the
foundation for a subsequently successful enterprise that may end up saving the world from the
brutal endgame of the plagues (Cohn 2008, Alfani and Bonetti 2019). This singular case study,
with a sample size of one, would appear to be so important that we ought to think hard about
what, if anything, it teaches us about the economics of innovation.




                                                                                                   22
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine              Jeffrey E. Harris                         19-Mar-2021


9.1. How Do Firms Learn from Failures?
        Let's enumerate some of the private entities investing in HIV vaccine development that
appeared, at least facially, to have sustained losses: VaxGen, the relatively small U.S.
biotechnology company that originally owned the rights to the AIDSVAX vaccine; the South
Korean investors who entered into a US$ 122 million joint venture with VaxGen to manufacture
more than 200 million doses of AIDSVAX vaccines annually; Merck, the pharmaceutical firm
that made a multimillion-dollar investment in the STEP Ad5 viral vector vaccine; Sanofi Pasteur,
the pharmaceutical firm whose proprietary canarypox vector ALVAC was tested in the RV144
trial; and GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), whose purified gp120 adapted to HIV subtype C was used in
the Uhambo trial. The apparent failures of these private entities to capitalize on their intellectual
property rights to specific vaccine platforms were counterbalanced by enormous social gains in
immunology, virology, molecular biology, and vaccine design generally.
        There is certainly no paucity of economic research examining how one firm learns from
another firm's innovation (Jaffe 1986, Bernstein 1988, Ornaghi 2006). Neither is there a lack of
data on the ripple effects of an apparently narrow innovation in one product market on the state
of the art in other product markets. The discovery of froth flotation, for example, initially
implemented in the refining of sulfide ores, ended up benefiting firms in mineral processing
generally, waste water treatment, and paper recycling (Lynchagin et al. 2016). Nor is there any
denying that firms don't always gain from R&D spillovers (Bloom, Schankerman, and Van
Reenen 2013). Nor has it been lost on economists that the social returns to R&D are in the
aggregate a multiple of the private returns (Lucking, Bloom, and Van Reenen 2019). Still, the
case where a sustained string of private R&D failures has been associated with substantial social
gains has received little attention.
        There is an interesting literature on how organizations react to their own failures (Desai
2016). During the launch of the Atlantis orbiter in October 2002, a piece of foam insulation
broke off, damaging a ring holding a rocket booster but not interfering with the mission. During
the launch of Columbia in January 2003, a piece of foam insulation similarly broke off,
damaging the left wing, and ultimately resulting in the disastrous disintegration of the orbiter
upon reentry and the demise of seven crew members. The response of the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration to the Columbia failure, it has been noted, stood in stark contrast to its
response to the Atlantis accident, which was perceived as a success (Madsen and Desai 2010).



                                                                                                   23
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine              Jeffrey E. Harris                       19-Mar-2021


       Here, however, our focus is on the responses of firms and other organizations to the
failures of others. In December 2006, Pfizer abruptly halted its phase 3 trial of torcetrapib, a
next-generation drug intended to increase blood concentrations of HDL (the "good") cholesterol,
on which the firm had already invested US$ 800 million, when interim data showed the
intervention group had 82 deaths while the control group had only 51 (Tanne 2006). The failure
appears to have motivated competitor Merck to design a scaled-back trial in patients at highest
cardiovascular risk to assess whether its own candidate drug anacetrapib posed the same risks as
Pfizer's torcetrapib (Cannon et al. 2010). The failure of torcetrapib ultimately delayed Merck's
larger phase 3 trial of its own anacetrapib by about 4 years (News Analysis 2011). Competitor
Roche, by contrast, apparently motivated in part by molecular differences between its own
candidate dalcetrapib and Pfizer's torcetrapib, went forward with its phase 3 trial (News Analysis
2011, Schwartz et al. 2009).
       Case studies of this sort have led investigators to hypothesize that the phase 3 clinical
trial is the critical catalyst for knowledge leaks of negative results in bio-pharmaceutical R&D
(Magazzani, Pammolli, and Riccaboni 2012, Chiou et al. 2016). In our study, this hypothesis
points the finger at AIDSVAX, Merck STEP, RV144, Uhambu, and other failed phase 3 HIV
vaccine trials as key pathways for the diffusion of know-how that prepared us for SARS-CoV-2
vaccines. Still, there is evidence that phase 2 trials have been just as instrumental in opening up
knowledge leaks (Krieger 2021).
       More than a few economists have suggested that patents on existing innovations may
inhibit subsequent scientific research and product development (Galasso and Schankerman
2015). Whether this phenomenon ­ well documented in the case of the human genome project
(Williams 2013) ­ applies just as well to the development of HIV and other antiviral vaccines is
less clear. Intellectual property rights to adenovirus 5 (Ad5) based viral-vector vaccines did not
stop Sanofi Pasteur from developing a canarypox viral-vector based vaccine. Nor did patents on
purified gp120 stop GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) from developing another form of the purified
glycoprotein adapted to an HIV subtype more prevalent in South Africa.
       Still other researchers have distinguished between the R&D spillover effects of complete
failures and near failures (Kim and Miner 2007). A study of the disk drive industry suggested
that a firm's complete exit from a market has a considerably greater inhibitory effect on
knowledge diffusion that less-than-total failure with survival (Hoetker and Agarwal 2007). This



                                                                                                   24
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine               Jeffrey E. Harris                        19-Mar-2021


distinction, however, may not have been critically important in the diffusion of knowledge
generated by HIV vaccine research. While VaxGen, the developer of the AIDSVAX version of
purified gp120, exited the market, the firm negotiated its intellectual property rights to a
nonprofit foundation in 2008. AIDSVAX and related glycoproteins were subsequently employed
as boosters in the RV144, Uhamabo, Mosaico and Imbokodo clinical trials. This observation
suggests that the nonprofit sector may have been a critical vehicle in transferring otherwise
doomed technical know-how from a failed firm to successors.
        Why isn't it simply the case that the public sector kept the search for an HIV vaccine
alive, even in the face of a string of failures of private vaccine candidates? After all, the public
section has made far and away the largest contribution to HIV vaccine R&D over the last two
decades (Resource Tracking for HIV Prevention R&D Working Group (RTWG) 2019, 2020).
The Pox-Protein Public-Private Partnership (or P5) initiated the Uhambo trial in 2016. Public
regulation of pharmaceuticals created the framework that requires conducting the phase 2 and 3
clinical trials that were undoubtedly instrumental in promoting knowledge leaks. That said, we
still need to acknowledge that a substantial majority of vaccines currently in use ­ and of vaccine
candidates that have failed ­ have been developed by private firms taking advantage of their
intellectual property rights. These are the firms that ultimately have to learn from each other's
failures.
        Whatever the underlying mechanisms that transformed the succession of failed HIV
vaccines into the growing list of successful SARS-CoV-2 vaccines already in use today, we need
to take a broad view of the returns to HIV-related research and development. A narrow view that
focused myopically on the string of setbacks of HIV vaccine development would vastly
understate its contribution to our social welfare.




                                                                                                       25
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                       Jeffrey E. Harris                               19-Mar-2021


References
Abakuks, Andris. 1973. "An Optimal Isolation Policy for an Epidemic." Journal of Applied Probability 10 (2):247-
         262.
Aghion, Philippe, and Xavier Jaravel. 2015. "Knowledge Spillovers, Innovation and Growth." Economic Journal
         125 (March):533­573. doi: 10.1111/ecoj.12199.
Alfani, G., and M. Bonetti. 2019. "A survival analysis of the last great European plagues: The case of Nonantola
         (Northern Italy) in 1630." Popul Stud (Camb) 73 (1):101-118. doi: 10.1080/00324728.2018.1457794.
Allen, T. M., T. U. Vogel, D. H. Fuller, B. R. Mothe, S. Steffen, J. E. Boyson, T. Shipley, J. Fuller, T. Hanke, A.
         Sette, J. D. Altman, B. Moss, A. J. McMichael, and D. I. Watkins. 2000. "Induction of AIDS virus-specific
         CTL activity in fresh, unstimulated peripheral blood lymphocytes from rhesus macaques vaccinated with a
         DNA prime/modified vaccinia virus Ankara boost regimen." J Immunol 164 (9):4968-78. doi:
         10.4049/jimmunol.164.9.4968.
Amanat, F., and F. Krammer. 2020. "SARS-CoV-2 Vaccines: Status Report." Immunity 52 (4):583-589. doi:
         10.1016/j.immuni.2020.03.007.
Amara, R. R., F. Villinger, J. D. Altman, S. L. Lydy, S. P. O'Neil, S. I. Staprans, D. C. Montefiori, Y. Xu, J. G.
         Herndon, L. S. Wyatt, M. A. Candido, N. L. Kozyr, P. L. Earl, J. M. Smith, H. L. Ma, B. D. Grimm, M. L.
         Hulsey, J. Miller, H. M. McClure, J. M. McNicholl, B. Moss, and H. L. Robinson. 2001. "Control of a
         mucosal challenge and prevention of AIDS by a multiprotein DNA/MVA vaccine." Science 292
         (5514):69-74. doi: 10.1126/science.1058915.
Anderson, E. J., N. G. Rouphael, A. T. Widge, L. A. Jackson, P. C. Roberts, M. Makhene, J. D. Chappell, M. R.
         Denison, L. J. Stevens, A. J. Pruijssers, A. B. McDermott, B. Flach, B. C. Lin, N. A. Doria-Rose, S. O'Dell,
         S. D. Schmidt, K. S. Corbett, P. A. Swanson, 2nd, M. Padilla, K. M. Neuzil, H. Bennett, B. Leav, M.
         Makowski, J. Albert, K. Cross, V. V. Edara, K. Floyd, M. S. Suthar, D. R. Martinez, R. Baric, W.
         Buchanan, C. J. Luke, V. K. Phadke, C. A. Rostad, J. E. Ledgerwood, B. S. Graham, J. H. Beigel, and R.
         N. A. Study Group m. 2020. "Safety and Immunogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 mRNA-1273 Vaccine in Older
         Adults." N Engl J Med 383 (25):2427-2438. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2028436.
Andersson, A. C., M. Schwerdtfeger, and P. J. Holst. 2018. "Virus-Like-Vaccines against HIV." Vaccines (Basel) 6
         (1). doi: 10.3390/vaccines6010010.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1962. "The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing " Review of Economic Studies 29
         (3):155-173. doi: 10.2307/2295952
Azoulay, Pierre. 2002. "Do Pharmaceutical Sales Respond to Scientific Evidence?" Journal of Economics &
         Management Stretagy 11 (4):551-716. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1430-9134.2002.00551.x.
Bachmann, M. H., E. L. Delwart, E. G. Shpaer, P. Lingenfelter, R. Singal, and J. I. Mullins. 1994. "Rapid genetic
         characterization of HIV type 1 strains from four World Health Organization-sponsored vaccine evaluation
         sites using a heteroduplex mobility assay. WHO Network for HIV Isolation and Characterization." AIDS
         Res Hum Retroviruses 10 (11):1345-53. doi: 10.1089/aid.1994.10.1345.




                                                                                                                      26
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                      Jeffrey E. Harris                               19-Mar-2021


Ball, Philip. 2021. "The lightning-fast quest for COVID vaccines -- and what it means for other diseases." Nature
        589:16-18.
Bekker, L. G., Z. Moodie, N. Grunenberg, F. Laher, G. D. Tomaras, K. W. Cohen, M. Allen, M. Malahleha, K.
        Mngadi, B. Daniels, C. Innes, C. Bentley, N. Frahm, D. E. Morris, L. Morris, N. N. Mkhize, D. C.
        Montefiori, M. Sarzotti-Kelsoe, S. Grant, C. Yu, V. L. Mehra, M. N. Pensiero, S. Phogat, C. A.
        DiazGranados, S. W. Barnett, N. Kanesa-Thasan, M. Koutsoukos, N. L. Michael, M. L. Robb, J. G. Kublin,
        P. B. Gilbert, L. Corey, G. E. Gray, M. J. McElrath, and Hvtn Protocol Team. 2018. "Subtype C ALVAC-
        HIV and bivalent subtype C gp120/MF59 HIV-1 vaccine in low-risk, HIV-uninfected, South African
        adults: a phase 1/2 trial." Lancet HIV 5 (7):e366-e378. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3018(18)30071-7.
Benmira, S., V. Bhattacharya, and M. L. Schmid. 2010. "An effective HIV vaccine: A combination of humoral and
        cellular immunity?" Curr HIV Res 8 (6):441-9. doi: 10.2174/157016210793499286.
Bernstein, Jeffrey I. 1988. "Costs of Production, Intra- and Interindustry R&D Spillovers: Canadian Evidence."
        Canadian Journal of Economics 21 (2):324-347. doi: https://www.jstor.org/stable/135304.
Bloom, Nicholas, Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen. 2013. "Identifying Technology Spillovers and Product
        Market Rivalry." Econometrica 81 (4):1347-1393. doi: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23524180.
Bogers, W. M., H. Oostermeijer, P. Mooij, G. Koopman, E. J. Verschoor, D. Davis, J. B. Ulmer, L. A. Brito, Y. Cu,
        K. Banerjee, G. R. Otten, B. Burke, A. Dey, J. L. Heeney, X. Shen, G. D. Tomaras, C. Labranche, D. C.
        Montefiori, H. X. Liao, B. Haynes, A. J. Geall, and S. W. Barnett. 2015. "Potent immune responses in
        rhesus macaques induced by nonviral delivery of a self-amplifying RNA vaccine expressing HIV type 1
        envelope with a cationic nanoemulsion." J Infect Dis 211 (6):947-55. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu522.
Borrow, P., H. Lewicki, B. H. Hahn, G. M. Shaw, and M. B. Oldstone. 1994. "Virus-specific CD8+ cytotoxic T-
        lymphocyte activity associated with control of viremia in primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1
        infection." J Virol 68 (9):6103-10.
Buchbinder, S. P., D. V. Mehrotra, A. Duerr, D. W. Fitzgerald, R. Mogg, D. Li, P. B. Gilbert, J. R. Lama, M.
        Marmor, C. Del Rio, M. J. McElrath, D. R. Casimiro, K. M. Gottesdiener, J. A. Chodakewitz, L. Corey, M.
        N. Robertson, and Team Step Study Protocol. 2008. "Efficacy assessment of a cell-mediated immunity
        HIV-1 vaccine (the Step Study): a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, test-of-concept trial."
        Lancet 372 (9653):1881-1893. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61591-3.
Buonaguro, L., L. Racioppi, M. L. Tornesello, C. Arra, M. L. Visciano, B. Biryahwaho, S. D. Sempala, G. Giraldo,
        and F. M. Buonaguro. 2002. "Induction of neutralizing antibodies and cytotoxic T lymphocytes in Balb/c
        mice immunized with virus-like particles presenting a gp120 molecule from a HIV-1 isolate of clade A."
        Antiviral Res 54 (3):189-201. doi: 10.1016/s0166-3542(02)00004-9.
Cannon, C. P., S. Shah, H. M. Dansky, M. Davidson, E. A. Brinton, A. M. Gotto, M. Stepanavage, S. X. Liu, P.
        Gibbons, T. B. Ashraf, J. Zafarino, Y. Mitchel, P. Barter, Efficacy Determining the, and Investigators
        Tolerability. 2010. "Safety of anacetrapib in patients with or at high risk for coronary heart disease." N
        Engl J Med 363 (25):2406-15. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1009744.




                                                                                                                     27
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                      Jeffrey E. Harris                              19-Mar-2021


Chiou, Jing-Yuan, Laura Magazzani, Fabio Pammolli, and Massimo Riccaboni. 2016. "Learning from successes and
         failures in pharmaceuticalR&D." Journal of Evolutionary Economics 26:271-290. doi: 10.1007/s00191-
         015-0439-z.
Choe, P. G., Rapm Perera, W. B. Park, K. H. Song, J. H. Bang, E. S. Kim, H. B. Kim, L. W. R. Ko, S. W. Park, N. J.
         Kim, E. H. Y. Lau, L. L. M. Poon, M. Peiris, and M. D. Oh. 2017. "MERS-CoV Antibody Responses 1
         Year after Symptom Onset, South Korea, 2015." Emerg Infect Dis 23 (7):1079-1084. doi:
         10.3201/eid2307.170310.
Christensen, D. 2016. "Vaccine adjuvants: Why and how." Hum Vaccin Immunother 12 (10):2709-2711. doi:
         10.1080/21645515.2016.1219003.
Cockrell, A. S., A. Beall, B. Yount, and R. Baric. 2017. "Efficient Reverse Genetic Systems for Rapid Genetic
         Manipulation of Emergent and Preemergent Infectious Coronaviruses." Methods Mol Biol 1602:59-81. doi:
         10.1007/978-1-4939-6964-7_5.
Cockrell, A. S., S. R. Leist, M. G. Douglas, and R. S. Baric. 2018. "Modeling pathogenesis of emergent and pre-
         emergent human coronaviruses in mice." Mamm Genome 29 (7-8):367-383. doi: 10.1007/s00335-018-
         9760-9.
Cohen, Jon. 2020. "Another HIV vaccine strategy fails in large-scale study." Science (February 3). doi:
         doi:10.1126/science.abb1480.
Cohn, S. K., Jr. 2008. "Epidemiology of the Black Death and successive waves of plague." Med Hist Suppl (27):74-
         100.
Cornish, Lisa. 2020. Funding COVID-19 vaccines: A timeline. https://www.devex.com/news/funding-covid-19-
         vaccines-a-timeline-97950: Devex, August 21.
da Silva, L. T., B. T. Santillo, A. de Almeida, Ajds Duarte, and T. M. Oshiro. 2018. "Using Dendritic Cell-Based
         Immunotherapy to Treat HIV: How Can This Strategy be Improved?" Front Immunol 9:2993. doi:
         10.3389/fimmu.2018.02993.
Day, T. A., and J. G. Kublin. 2013. "Lessons learned from HIV vaccine clinical efficacy trials." Curr HIV Res 11
         (6):441-9. doi: 10.2174/1570162x113116660051.
Delchambre, M., D. Gheysen, D. Thines, C. Thiriart, E. Jacobs, E. Verdin, M. Horth, A. Burny, and F. Bex. 1989.
         "The GAG precursor of simian immunodeficiency virus assembles into virus-like particles." EMBO J 8
         (9):2653-60.
Derdeyn, C. A., J. M. Decker, F. Bibollet-Ruche, J. L. Mokili, M. Muldoon, S. A. Denham, M. L. Heil, F. Kasolo,
         R. Musonda, B. H. Hahn, G. M. Shaw, B. T. Korber, S. Allen, and E. Hunter. 2004. "Envelope-constrained
         neutralization-sensitive HIV-1 after heterosexual transmission." Science 303 (5666):2019-22. doi:
         10.1126/science.1093137.
Desai, Vinit. 2016. "Learning to learn from failures: the impact of operating experience on railroad accident
         responses." Industrial and Corporate Change 25 (2). doi: 10.1093/icc/dtq019.
Desrosiers, R. C. 2004. "Prospects for an AIDS vaccine." Nat Med 10 (3):221-3. doi: 10.1038/nm0304-221.




                                                                                                                   28
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                      Jeffrey E. Harris                              19-Mar-2021


Doan, L. X., M. Li, C. Chen, and Q. Yao. 2005. "Virus-like particles as HIV-1 vaccines." Rev Med Virol 15 (2):75-
        88. doi: 10.1002/rmv.449.
Downey, J. F., D. T. Rowe, S. Bacchetti, F. L. Graham, and S. T. Bayley. 1983. "Mapping of a 14,000-dalton
        antigen to early region 4 of the human adenovirus 5 genome." J Virol 45 (2):514-23.
Dubey, S., J. Clair, T. M. Fu, L. Guan, R. Long, R. Mogg, K. Anderson, K. B. Collins, C. Gaunt, V. R. Fernandez,
        L. Zhu, L. Kierstead, S. Thaler, S. B. Gupta, W. Straus, D. Mehrotra, T. W. Tobery, D. R. Casimiro, and J.
        W. Shiver. 2007. "Detection of HIV vaccine-induced cell-mediated immunity in HIV-seronegative clinical
        trial participants using an optimized and validated enzyme-linked immunospot assay." J Acquir Immune
        Defic Syndr 45 (1):20-7. doi: 10.1097/QAI.0b013e3180377b5b.
Dutta, A., C. T. Huang, C. Y. Lin, T. C. Chen, Y. C. Lin, C. S. Chang, and Y. C. He. 2016. "Sterilizing immunity to
        influenza virus infection requires local antigen-specific T cell response in the lungs." Sci Rep 6:32973. doi:
        10.1038/srep32973.
Ella, Raches, Siddharth Reddy, Harsh Jogdand, Vamshi Sarangi, Brunda Ganneru, Sai Prasad, Dipankar Das,
        Dugyala Raju, Usha Praturi, Gajanan Sapkal, Pragya Yadav, Prabhakar Reddy, Savita Verma,
        Chandramani Singh, Sagar Vivek Redkar, Chandra Sekhar Gillurkar, Jitendra Singh Kushwaha, Satyajit
        Mohapatra, Amit Bhate, Sanjay Rai, Samiran Panda, Priya Abraham, Nivedita Gupta, Krishna Ella, and
        Balram Bhargava. 2020. Safety and immunogenicity clinical trial of an inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine,
        BBV152 (a phase 2, double-blind, randomised controlled trial) and the persistence of immune responses
        from a phase 1 follow-up report. https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.12.21.20248643v1:
        December 22.
Enjuanes, L., S. Zuniga, C. Castano-Rodriguez, J. Gutierrez-Alvarez, J. Canton, and I. Sola. 2016. "Molecular Basis
        of Coronavirus Virulence and Vaccine Development." Adv Virus Res 96:245-286. doi:
        10.1016/bs.aivir.2016.08.003.
European Medicines Agency. 2020. Zabdeno. https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/medicines/human/EPAR/zabdeno:
        July 23.
Fan, C., X. Ye, Z. Ku, L. Kong, Q. Liu, C. Xu, Y. Cong, and Z. Huang. 2017. "Beta-Propiolactone Inactivation of
        Coxsackievirus A16 Induces Structural Alteration and Surface Modification of Viral Capsids." J Virol 91
        (8). doi: 10.1128/JVI.00038-17.
Fauci, A. S. 1988. "The human immunodeficiency virus: infectivity and mechanisms of pathogenesis." Science 239
        (4840):617-22. doi: 10.1126/science.3277274.
Feldmann, H., S. M. Jones, K. M. Daddario-DiCaprio, J. B. Geisbert, U. Stroher, A. Grolla, M. Bray, E. A. Fritz, L.
        Fernando, F. Feldmann, L. E. Hensley, and T. W. Geisbert. 2007. "Effective post-exposure treatment of
        Ebola infection." PLoS Pathog 3 (1):e2. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0030002.
Flynn, N. M., D. N. Forthal, C. D. Harro, F. N. Judson, K. H. Mayer, M. F. Para, and H. I. V. Vaccine Study Group
        rgp. 2005. "Placebo-controlled phase 3 trial of a recombinant glycoprotein 120 vaccine to prevent HIV-1
        infection." J Infect Dis 191 (5):654-65. doi: 10.1086/428404.




                                                                                                                   29
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                       Jeffrey E. Harris                               19-Mar-2021


Forthal, D. N., P. B. Gilbert, G. Landucci, and T. Phan. 2007. "Recombinant gp120 vaccine-induced antibodies
        inhibit clinical strains of HIV-1 in the presence of Fc receptor-bearing effector cells and correlate inversely
        with HIV infection rate." J Immunol 178 (10):6596-603. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.10.6596.
Fuenmayor, J., F. Godia, and L. Cervera. 2017. "Production of virus-like particles for vaccines." N Biotechnol 39
        (Pt B):174-180. doi: 10.1016/j.nbt.2017.07.010.
Galasso, Alberto, and Mark Schankerman. 2015. "Patents and cumulative innovation." Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 130 (1):317-370. doi: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26372601.
Gandhi, R. T., D. S. Kwon, E. A. Macklin, J. R. Shopis, A. P. McLean, N. McBrine, T. Flynn, L. Peter, A. Sbrolla,
        D. E. Kaufmann, F. Porichis, B. D. Walker, N. Bhardwaj, D. H. Barouch, and D. G. Kavanagh. 2016.
        "Immunization of HIV-1-Infected Persons With Autologous Dendritic Cells Transfected With mRNA
        Encoding HIV-1 Gag and Nef: Results of a Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial." J Acquir
        Immune Defic Syndr 71 (3):246-53. doi: 10.1097/QAI.0000000000000852.
Garbutt, M., R. Liebscher, V. Wahl-Jensen, S. Jones, P. Moller, R. Wagner, V. Volchkov, H. D. Klenk, H.
        Feldmann, and U. Stroher. 2004. "Properties of replication-competent vesicular stomatitis virus vectors
        expressing glycoproteins of filoviruses and arenaviruses." J Virol 78 (10):5458-65. doi:
        10.1128/jvi.78.10.5458-5465.2004.
Genovese, L., M. Nebuloni, and M. Alfano. 2013. "Cell-Mediated Immunity in Elite Controllers Naturally
        Controlling HIV Viral Load." Front Immunol 4:86. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00086.
Gheysen, D., E. Jacobs, F. de Foresta, C. Thiriart, M. Francotte, D. Thines, and M. De Wilde. 1989. "Assembly and
        release of HIV-1 precursor Pr55gag virus-like particles from recombinant baculovirus-infected insect
        cells." Cell 59 (1):103-12. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(89)90873-8.
Gilbert, P. B., M. L. Peterson, D. Follmann, M. G. Hudgens, D. P. Francis, M. Gurwith, W. L. Heyward, D. V.
        Jobes, V. Popovic, S. G. Self, F. Sinangil, D. Burke, and P. W. Berman. 2005. "Correlation between
        immunologic responses to a recombinant glycoprotein 120 vaccine and incidence of HIV-1 infection in a
        phase 3 HIV-1 preventive vaccine trial." J Infect Dis 191 (5):666-77. doi: 10.1086/428405.
Girard, M. 1990. "Prospects for an AIDS vaccine." Cancer Detect Prev 14 (3):411-3.
Goulder, P. J., R. E. Phillips, R. A. Colbert, S. McAdam, G. Ogg, M. A. Nowak, P. Giangrande, G. Luzzi, B.
        Morgan, A. Edwards, A. J. McMichael, and S. Rowland-Jones. 1997. "Late escape from an
        immunodominant cytotoxic T-lymphocyte response associated with progression to AIDS." Nat Med 3
        (2):212-7. doi: 10.1038/nm0297-212.
Graham, B. S., R. A. Koup, M. Roederer, R. T. Bailer, M. E. Enama, Z. Moodie, J. E. Martin, M. M. McCluskey, B.
        K. Chakrabarti, L. Lamoreaux, C. A. Andrews, P. L. Gomez, J. R. Mascola, G. J. Nabel, and Team Vaccine
        Research Center 004 Study. 2006. "Phase 1 safety and immunogenicity evaluation of a multiclade HIV-1
        DNA candidate vaccine." J Infect Dis 194 (12):1650-60. doi: 10.1086/509259.
Gray, G., S. Buchbinder, and A. Duerr. 2010. "Overview of STEP and Phambili trial results: two phase IIb test-of-
        concept studies investigating the efficacy of MRK adenovirus type 5 gag/pol/nef subtype B HIV vaccine."
        Curr Opin HIV AIDS 5 (5):357-61. doi: 10.1097/COH.0b013e32833d2d2b.




                                                                                                                    30
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                      Jeffrey E. Harris                              19-Mar-2021


Griliches, Zvi. 1992. "The Search for R&D Spillovers." Scandinavian Journal of Economics 94:S29-S47. doi:
         10.2307/3440244
Hammer, S. M., M. E. Sobieszczyk, H. Janes, S. T. Karuna, M. J. Mulligan, D. Grove, B. A. Koblin, S. P.
         Buchbinder, M. C. Keefer, G. D. Tomaras, N. Frahm, J. Hural, C. Anude, B. S. Graham, M. E. Enama, E.
         Adams, E. DeJesus, R. M. Novak, I. Frank, C. Bentley, S. Ramirez, R. Fu, R. A. Koup, J. R. Mascola, G. J.
         Nabel, D. C. Montefiori, J. Kublin, M. J. McElrath, L. Corey, P. B. Gilbert, and Hvtn Study Team. 2013.
         "Efficacy trial of a DNA/rAd5 HIV-1 preventive vaccine." N Engl J Med 369 (22):2083-92. doi:
         10.1056/NEJMoa1310566.
Harris, J. E. 2009. "Why we don't have an HIV vaccine, and how we can develop one." Health Aff (Millwood) 28
         (6):1642-54. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.28.6.1642.
Harro, C. D., Y. Y. Pang, R. B. Roden, A. Hildesheim, Z. Wang, M. J. Reynolds, T. C. Mast, R. Robinson, B. R.
         Murphy, R. A. Karron, J. Dillner, J. T. Schiller, and D. R. Lowy. 2001. "Safety and immunogenicity trial in
         adult volunteers of a human papillomavirus 16 L1 virus-like particle vaccine." J Natl Cancer Inst 93
         (4):284-92. doi: 10.1093/jnci/93.4.284.
Haynes, B. F., G. M. Shaw, B. Korber, G. Kelsoe, J. Sodroski, B. H. Hahn, P. Borrow, and A. J. McMichael. 2016.
         "HIV-Host Interactions: Implications for Vaccine Design." Cell Host Microbe 19 (3):292-303. doi:
         10.1016/j.chom.2016.02.002.
Heeney, J. L., and S. A. Plotkin. 2006. "Immunological correlates of protection from HIV infection and disease."
         Nat Immunol 7 (12):1281-4. doi: 10.1038/ni1206-1281.
Hicks, D. J., A. R. Fooks, and N. Johnson. 2012. "Developments in rabies vaccines." Clin Exp Immunol 169
         (3):199-204. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2012.04592.x.
Hoetker, Glenn, and Rajshree Agarwal. 2007. "Death Hurts, But It Isn't Fatal: The Postexit Diffusion of Knowledge
         Created by Innovative Companies." Academy of Management Journal 50 (2):446­467. doi:
         https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2007.24634858.
Jaffe, Adam B. 1986. "Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R & D: Evidence from Firms' Patents, Profits,
         and Market Value." American Economic Review 76 (5):984- 1001. doi:
         https://www.jstor.org/stable/1816464.
Jones, S. M., H. Feldmann, U. Stroher, J. B. Geisbert, L. Fernando, A. Grolla, H. D. Klenk, N. J. Sullivan, V. E.
         Volchkov, E. A. Fritz, K. M. Daddario, L. E. Hensley, P. B. Jahrling, and T. W. Geisbert. 2005. "Live
         attenuated recombinant vaccine protects nonhuman primates against Ebola and Marburg viruses." Nat Med
         11 (7):786-90. doi: 10.1038/nm1258.
Juskewitch, J. E., C. J. Tapia, and A. J. Windebank. 2010. "Lessons from the Salk polio vaccine: methods for and
         risks of rapid translation." Clin Transl Sci 3 (4):182-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-8062.2010.00205.x.
Kariko, K., M. Buckstein, H. Ni, and D. Weissman. 2005. "Suppression of RNA recognition by Toll-like receptors:
         the impact of nucleoside modification and the evolutionary origin of RNA." Immunity 23 (2):165-75. doi:
         10.1016/j.immuni.2005.06.008.




                                                                                                                    31
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                      Jeffrey E. Harris                              19-Mar-2021


Kariko, K., H. Muramatsu, F. A. Welsh, J. Ludwig, H. Kato, S. Akira, and D. Weissman. 2008. "Incorporation of
        pseudouridine into mRNA yields superior nonimmunogenic vector with increased translational capacity
        and biological stability." Mol Ther 16 (11):1833-40. doi: 10.1038/mt.2008.200.
Keech, C., G. Albert, I. Cho, A. Robertson, P. Reed, S. Neal, J. S. Plested, M. Zhu, S. Cloney-Clark, H. Zhou, G.
        Smith, N. Patel, M. B. Frieman, R. E. Haupt, J. Logue, M. McGrath, S. Weston, P. A. Piedra, C. Desai, K.
        Callahan, M. Lewis, P. Price-Abbott, N. Formica, V. Shinde, L. Fries, J. D. Lickliter, P. Griffin, B.
        Wilkinson, and G. M. Glenn. 2020. "Phase 1-2 Trial of a SARS-CoV-2 Recombinant Spike Protein
        Nanoparticle Vaccine." N Engl J Med 383 (24):2320-2332. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2026920.
Keele, B. F., E. E. Giorgi, J. F. Salazar-Gonzalez, J. M. Decker, K. T. Pham, M. G. Salazar, C. Sun, T. Grayson, S.
        Wang, H. Li, X. Wei, C. Jiang, J. L. Kirchherr, F. Gao, J. A. Anderson, L. H. Ping, R. Swanstrom, G. D.
        Tomaras, W. A. Blattner, P. A. Goepfert, J. M. Kilby, M. S. Saag, E. L. Delwart, M. P. Busch, M. S.
        Cohen, D. C. Montefiori, B. F. Haynes, B. Gaschen, G. S. Athreya, H. Y. Lee, N. Wood, C. Seoighe, A. S.
        Perelson, T. Bhattacharya, B. T. Korber, B. H. Hahn, and G. M. Shaw. 2008. "Identification and
        characterization of transmitted and early founder virus envelopes in primary HIV-1 infection." Proc Natl
        Acad Sci U S A 105 (21):7552-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0802203105.
Kim, Ji-Yub (Jay), and Anne S. Miner. 2007. "Vicarious Learning from the Failures and Near-Failures of Others:
        Evidence from the U.S. Commercial Banking Industry." Academy of Management Journal 30 (3):687­
        714. doi: https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2007.25529755.
Kirnbauer, R., F. Booy, N. Cheng, D. R. Lowy, and J. T. Schiller. 1992. "Papillomavirus L1 major capsid protein
        self-assembles into virus-like particles that are highly immunogenic." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 89
        (24):12180-4. doi: 10.1073/pnas.89.24.12180.
Kirnbauer, R., J. Taub, H. Greenstone, R. Roden, M. Durst, L. Gissmann, D. R. Lowy, and J. T. Schiller. 1993.
        "Efficient self-assembly of human papillomavirus type 16 L1 and L1-L2 into virus-like particles." J Virol
        67 (12):6929-36.
Koup, R. A., J. T. Safrit, Y. Cao, C. A. Andrews, G. McLeod, W. Borkowsky, C. Farthing, and D. D. Ho. 1994.
        "Temporal association of cellular immune responses with the initial control of viremia in primary human
        immunodeficiency virus type 1 syndrome." J Virol 68 (7):4650-5.
Koutsky, L. A., K. A. Ault, C. M. Wheeler, D. R. Brown, E. Barr, F. B. Alvarez, L. M. Chiacchierini, K. U. Jansen,
        and Investigators Proof of Principle Study. 2002. "A controlled trial of a human papillomavirus type 16
        vaccine." N Engl J Med 347 (21):1645-51. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa020586.
Krieger, Joshua L. 2021. "Trials and Terminations: Learning from Competitors' R&D Failures." Management
        Science ePub February 15. doi: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2020.3775.
Kundu, S. K., E. Engleman, C. Benike, M. H. Shapero, M. Dupuis, W. C. van Schooten, M. Eibl, and T. C. Merigan.
        1998. "A pilot clinical trial of HIV antigen-pulsed allogeneic and autologous dendritic cell therapy in HIV-
        infected patients." AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 14 (7):551-60. doi: 10.1089/aid.1998.14.551.




                                                                                                                    32
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                     Jeffrey E. Harris                             19-Mar-2021


Kyriakidis, N. C., A. Lopez-Cortes, E. V. Gonzalez, A. B. Grimaldos, and E. O. Prado. 2021. "SARS-CoV-2
        vaccines strategies: a comprehensive review of phase 3 candidates." NPJ Vaccines 6 (1):28. doi:
        10.1038/s41541-021-00292-w.
Lan, J., J. Ge, J. Yu, S. Shan, H. Zhou, S. Fan, Q. Zhang, X. Shi, Q. Wang, L. Zhang, and X. Wang. 2020. "Structure
        of the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding domain bound to the ACE2 receptor." Nature 581 (7807):215-
        220. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2180-5.
Leal, L., A. C. Guardo, S. Moron-Lopez, M. Salgado, B. Mothe, C. Heirman, P. Pannus, G. Vanham, H. J. van den
        Ham, R. Gruters, A. Andeweg, S. Van Meirvenne, J. Pich, J. A. Arnaiz, J. M. Gatell, C. Brander, K.
        Thielemans, J. Martinez-Picado, M. Plana, F. Garcia, and Hivarna consortium i. 2018. "Phase I clinical trial
        of an intranodally administered mRNA-based therapeutic vaccine against HIV-1 infection." AIDS 32
        (17):2533-2545. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0000000000002026.
Lee, S. I. 2015. "Costly Lessons From the 2015 Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Outbreak in
        Korea." J Prev Med Public Health 48 (6):274-6. doi: 10.3961/jpmph.15.064.
Letvin, N. L. 2007. "Correlates of immune protection and the development of a human immunodeficiency virus
        vaccine." Immunity 27 (3):366-9. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2007.09.001.
Li, Y. D., W. Y. Chi, J. H. Su, L. Ferrall, C. F. Hung, and T. C. Wu. 2020. "Coronavirus vaccine development: from
        SARS and MERS to COVID-19." J Biomed Sci 27 (1):104. doi: 10.1186/s12929-020-00695-2.
Liu, M. A. 2010. "Immunologic basis of vaccine vectors." Immunity 33 (4):504-15. doi:
        10.1016/j.immuni.2010.10.004.
Lu, R., X. Zhao, J. Li, P. Niu, B. Yang, H. Wu, W. Wang, H. Song, B. Huang, N. Zhu, Y. Bi, X. Ma, F. Zhan, L.
        Wang, T. Hu, H. Zhou, Z. Hu, W. Zhou, L. Zhao, J. Chen, Y. Meng, J. Wang, Y. Lin, J. Yuan, Z. Xie, J.
        Ma, W. J. Liu, D. Wang, W. Xu, E. C. Holmes, G. F. Gao, G. Wu, W. Chen, W. Shi, and W. Tan. 2020.
        "Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications for virus origins and
        receptor binding." Lancet 395 (10224):565-574. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30251-8.
Lu, W., L. C. Arraes, W. T. Ferreira, and J. M. Andrieu. 2004. "Therapeutic dendritic-cell vaccine for chronic HIV-
        1 infection." Nat Med 10 (12):1359-65. doi: 10.1038/nm1147.
Lucking, Brian, Nicholas Bloom, and John Van Reenen. 2019. "Have R&D Spillovers Declined in the 21st
        Century?" Fiscal Studies 40 (4):561-590. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-5890.12195.
Lynchagin, Sergey, Joris Pinske, Margaret E. Slade, and John Van Reenen. 2016. "Spillovers in space: Does
        geography matter?" Journal of Industrial Economics 64 (2):295-335.
Madsen, Peter M., and Vinit Desai. 2010. "Failing to Learn? The Effects of Failure and Success on Organizational
        Learning in the Global Orbital Launch Vehicle Industry." Academy of Management Journal 53 (3):451-
        476. doi: https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2010.51467631.
Magazzani, Laura, Fabio Pammolli, and Massimo Riccaboni. 2012. "Learning from Failures or Failing to Learn?
        Lessons from Pharmaceutical R&D." Eurpoean Management Review 9 (1):45-58. doi:
        https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1740-4762.2012.01027.x.




                                                                                                                 33
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                      Jeffrey E. Harris                             19-Mar-2021


Martinon, F., S. Krishnan, G. Lenzen, R. Magne, E. Gomard, J. G. Guillet, J. P. Levy, and P. Meulien. 1993.
         "Induction of virus-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in vivo by liposome-entrapped mRNA." Eur J
         Immunol 23 (7):1719-22. doi: 10.1002/eji.1830230749.
Maruggi, G., C. Zhang, J. Li, J. B. Ulmer, and D. Yu. 2019. "mRNA as a Transformative Technology for Vaccine
         Development to Control Infectious Diseases." Mol Ther 27 (4):757-772. doi:
         10.1016/j.ymthe.2019.01.020.
Mascola, J. R., A. Sambor, K. Beaudry, S. Santra, B. Welcher, M. K. Louder, T. C. Vancott, Y. Huang, B. K.
         Chakrabarti, W. P. Kong, Z. Y. Yang, L. Xu, D. C. Montefiori, G. J. Nabel, and N. L. Letvin. 2005.
         "Neutralizing antibodies elicited by immunization of monkeys with DNA plasmids and recombinant
         adenoviral vectors expressing human immunodeficiency virus type 1 proteins." J Virol 79 (2):771-9. doi:
         10.1128/JVI.79.2.771-779.2005.
Masters, P. S. 2006. "The molecular biology of coronaviruses." Adv Virus Res 66:193-292. doi: 10.1016/S0065-
         3527(06)66005-3.
McElrath, M. J., S. C. De Rosa, Z. Moodie, S. Dubey, L. Kierstead, H. Janes, O. D. Defawe, D. K. Carter, J. Hural,
         R. Akondy, S. P. Buchbinder, M. N. Robertson, D. V. Mehrotra, S. G. Self, L. Corey, J. W. Shiver, D. R.
         Casimiro, and Team Step Study Protocol. 2008. "HIV-1 vaccine-induced immunity in the test-of-concept
         Step Study: a case-cohort analysis." Lancet 372 (9653):1894-1905. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61592-5.
Miller, Benjamin. 2021. Can the World Learn From South Africa's Vaccine Trials?
         https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/13/world/africa/south-africa-vaccine-virus.html: New York Times,
         March 13.
Monath, T. P., P. E. Fast, K. Modjarrad, D. K. Clarke, B. K. Martin, J. Fusco, R. Nichols, D. G. Heppner, J. K.
         Simon, S. Dubey, S. P. Troth, J. Wolf, V. Singh, B. A. Coller, J. S. Robertson, and Group Brighton
         Collaboration Viral Vector Vaccines Safety Working. 2019. "rVSVDeltaG-ZEBOV-GP (also designated
         V920) recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus pseudotyped with Ebola Zaire Glycoprotein: Standardized
         template with key considerations for a risk/benefit assessment." Vaccine X 1:100009. doi:
         10.1016/j.jvacx.2019.100009.
Moodie, Z., B. Metch, L. G. Bekker, G. Churchyard, M. Nchabeleng, K. Mlisana, F. Laher, S. Roux, K. Mngadi, C.
         Innes, M. Mathebula, M. Allen, C. Bentley, P. B. Gilbert, M. Robertson, J. Kublin, L. Corey, and G. E.
         Gray. 2015. "Continued Follow-Up of Phambili Phase 2b Randomized HIV-1 Vaccine Trial Participants
         Supports Increased HIV-1 Acquisition among Vaccinated Men." PLoS One 10 (9):e0137666. doi:
         10.1371/journal.pone.0137666.
Morrow, G., L. Vachot, P. Vagenas, and M. Robbiani. 2007. "Current concepts of HIV transmission." Curr
         HIV/AIDS Rep 4 (1):29-35. doi: 10.1007/s11904-007-0005-x.
Moss, B., G. L. Smith, J. L. Gerin, and R. H. Purcell. 1984. "Live recombinant vaccinia virus protects chimpanzees
         against hepatitis B." Nature 311 (5981):67-9. doi: 10.1038/311067a0.




                                                                                                                  34
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                      Jeffrey E. Harris                              19-Mar-2021


Moyo, N., A. B. Vogel, S. Buus, S. Erbar, E. G. Wee, U. Sahin, and T. Hanke. 2019. "Efficient Induction of T Cells
         against Conserved HIV-1 Regions by Mosaic Vaccines Delivered as Self-Amplifying mRNA." Mol Ther
         Methods Clin Dev 12:32-46. doi: 10.1016/j.omtm.2018.10.010.
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. 2021. Janssen Investigational COVID-19 Vaccine: Interim
         Analysis of Phase 3 Clinical Data Released (News Release). https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-
         releases/janssen-investigational-covid-19-vaccine-interim-analysis-phase-3-clinical-data-released: January
         29.
News Analysis. 2011. "Learning lessons from Pfizer's $800 million failure." Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 10
         (March 1):163-164.
NIAID. 2007. Clinical Alert: Immunizations Are Discontinued in Two HIV Vaccine Trials
         https://www.nlm.nih.gov/databases/alerts/hiv_step_study.html: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
         Diseases, Last accessed May 26, 2020.
NIAID. 2020. News Release: Experimental HIV Vaccine Regimen Ineffective in Preventing HIV.
         https://www.niaid.nih.gov/news-events/experimental-hiv-vaccine-regimen-ineffective-preventing-hiv:
         National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Disease, February 3, 2020.
Ornaghi, Carmine. 2006. "Spillovers in product and process innovation:Evidence from manufacturing firms."
         International Journal of Industrial Organization 24:349­380. doi: 10.1016/j.ijindorg.2005.07.002.
Pardi, N., M. J. Hogan, F. W. Porter, and D. Weissman. 2018. "mRNA vaccines - a new era in vaccinology." Nat
         Rev Drug Discov 17 (4):261-279. doi: 10.1038/nrd.2017.243.
Patterson, S., T. Papagatsias, and A. Benlahrech. 2009. "Use of adenovirus in vaccines for HIV." Handb Exp
         Pharmacol (188):275-93. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-71029-5_13.
Pitisuttithum, P., P. Gilbert, M. Gurwith, W. Heyward, M. Martin, F. van Griensven, D. Hu, J. W. Tappero, K.
         Choopanya, and Group Bangkok Vaccine Evaluation. 2006. "Randomized, double-blind, placebo-
         controlled efficacy trial of a bivalent recombinant glycoprotein 120 HIV-1 vaccine among injection drug
         users in Bangkok, Thailand." J Infect Dis 194 (12):1661-71. doi: 10.1086/508748.
Plotkin, S. A. 2010. "Correlates of protection induced by vaccination." Clin Vaccine Immunol 17 (7):1055-65. doi:
         10.1128/CVI.00131-10.
Polack, F. P., S. J. Thomas, N. Kitchin, J. Absalon, A. Gurtman, S. Lockhart, J. L. Perez, G. Perez Marc, E. D.
         Moreira, C. Zerbini, R. Bailey, K. A. Swanson, S. Roychoudhury, K. Koury, P. Li, W. V. Kalina, D.
         Cooper, R. W. Frenck, Jr., L. L. Hammitt, O. Tureci, H. Nell, A. Schaefer, S. Unal, D. B. Tresnan, S.
         Mather, P. R. Dormitzer, U. Sahin, K. U. Jansen, W. C. Gruber, and C. Clinical Trial Group. 2020. "Safety
         and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19 Vaccine." N Engl J Med 383 (27):2603-2615. doi:
         10.1056/NEJMoa2034577.
Pollard, C., J. Rejman, W. De Haes, B. Verrier, E. Van Gulck, T. Naessens, S. De Smedt, P. Bogaert, J. Grooten, G.
         Vanham, and S. De Koker. 2013. "Type I IFN counteracts the induction of antigen-specific immune
         responses by lipid-based delivery of mRNA vaccines." Mol Ther 21 (1):251-9. doi: 10.1038/mt.2012.202.




                                                                                                                   35
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                      Jeffrey E. Harris                              19-Mar-2021


Price, D. A., P. J. Goulder, P. Klenerman, A. K. Sewell, P. J. Easterbrook, M. Troop, C. R. Bangham, and R. E.
         Phillips. 1997. "Positive selection of HIV-1 cytotoxic T lymphocyte escape variants during primary
         infection." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94 (5):1890-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.5.1890.
Rerks-Ngarm, S., P. Pitisuttithum, S. Nitayaphan, J. Kaewkungwal, J. Chiu, R. Paris, N. Premsri, C. Namwat, M. de
         Souza, E. Adams, M. Benenson, S. Gurunathan, J. Tartaglia, J. G. McNeil, D. P. Francis, D. Stablein, D. L.
         Birx, S. Chunsuttiwat, C. Khamboonruang, P. Thongcharoen, M. L. Robb, N. L. Michael, P. Kunasol, J. H.
         Kim, and Moph-Taveg Investigators. 2009. "Vaccination with ALVAC and AIDSVAX to prevent HIV-1
         infection in Thailand." N Engl J Med 361 (23):2209-20. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0908492.
Resource Tracking for HIV Prevention R&D Working Group (RTWG). 2019. HIV Prevention Research &
         Development Investments 2018: Investing to end the epidemic. https://www.avac.org/resource/hiv-
         prevention-research-development-investments-2018-investing-end-epidemic: Issued July 2019, Last
         accessed March 3, 2021.
Resource Tracking for HIV Prevention R&D Working Group (RTWG). 2020. HIV Prevention Research &
         Development Investments. https://www.hivresourcetracking.org/: Last accessed March 3, 2021.
Robert-Guroff, M., M. Brown, and R. C. Gallo. 1985. "HTLV-III-neutralizing antibodies in patients with AIDS and
         AIDS-related complex." Nature 316 (6023):72-4. doi: 10.1038/316072a0.
Rodrigues, E. G., F. Zavala, D. Eichinger, J. M. Wilson, and M. Tsuji. 1997. "Single immunizing dose of
         recombinant adenovirus efficiently induces CD8+ T cell-mediated protective immunity against malaria." J
         Immunol 158 (3):1268-74.
Rodrigues, E. G., F. Zavala, R. S. Nussenzweig, J. M. Wilson, and M. Tsuji. 1998. "Efficient induction of protective
         anti-malaria immunity by recombinant adenovirus." Vaccine 16 (19):1812-7. doi: 10.1016/s0264-
         410x(98)00181-9.
Romagnani, S., G. Del Prete, R. Manetti, A. Ravina, F. Annunziato, M. De Carli, M. Mazzetti, M. P. Piccinni, M.
         M. D'Elios, P. Parronchi, and et al. 1994. "Role of TH1/TH2 cytokines in HIV infection." Immunol Rev
         140:73-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065x.1994.tb00865.x.
Romer, Paul M. 1990. "Endogenous Technological Change." Journal of Political Economy 98 (5):S71-S102. doi:
         https://www.jstor.org/stable/2937632.
Sadoff, J., M. Le Gars, G. Shukarev, D. Heerwegh, C. Truyers, A. M. de Groot, J. Stoop, S. Tete, W. Van Damme, I.
         Leroux-Roels, P. J. Berghmans, M. Kimmel, P. Van Damme, J. de Hoon, W. Smith, K. E. Stephenson, S.
         C. De Rosa, K. W. Cohen, M. J. McElrath, E. Cormier, G. Scheper, D. H. Barouch, J. Hendriks, F. Struyf,
         M. Douoguih, J. Van Hoof, and H. Schuitemaker. 2021. "Interim Results of a Phase 1-2a Trial of
         Ad26.COV2.S Covid-19 Vaccine." N Engl J Med. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2034201.
Schwartz, G. G., A. G. Olsson, C. M. Ballantyne, P. J. Barter, I. M. Holme, D. Kallend, L. A. Leiter, E. Leitersdorf,
         J. J. McMurray, P. K. Shah, J. C. Tardif, B. R. Chaitman, R. Duttlinger-Maddux, J. Mathieson, Outcomes
         Committees dal, and Investigators. 2009. "Rationale and design of the dal-OUTCOMES trial: efficacy and
         safety of dalcetrapib in patients with recent acute coronary syndrome." Am Heart J 158 (6):896-901 e3.
         doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2009.09.017.




                                                                                                                   36
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                        Jeffrey E. Harris                           19-Mar-2021


Sekaly, R. P. 2008. "The failed HIV Merck vaccine study: a step back or a launching point for future vaccine
         development?" J Exp Med 205 (1):7-12. doi: 10.1084/jem.20072681.
Sputnik V. 2020. Second interim analysis of clinical trial data showed a 91.4% efficacy for the Sputnik V vaccine on
         day 28 after the first dose; vaccine efficacy is over 95% 42 days after the first dose.
         https://sputnikvaccine.com/newsroom/pressreleases/second-interim-analysis-of-clinical-trial-data-showed-
         a-91-4-efficacy-for-the-sputnik-v-vaccine-on-d/: December 14.
Stokes, J., Jr.,, M. R. Hilleman, and R. E. Weibel. 1961. "Efficacy of Live, Attenuated Measles-Virus Vaccine
         Given With Human Immune Globulin." New Engl J Med 265 (11):507-513.
Sullivan, N. J., A. Sanchez, P. E. Rollin, Z. Y. Yang, and G. J. Nabel. 2000. "Development of a preventive vaccine
         for Ebola virus infection in primates." Nature 408 (6812):605-9. doi: 10.1038/35046108.
Tanne, J. H. 2006. "Pfizer stops clinical trials of heart drug." BMJ 333 (7581):1237. doi:
         10.1136/bmj.39059.438044.DB.
U.S. National Library of Medicine. 2020a. A Study of Heterologous Vaccine Regimen of Adenovirus Serotype 26
         Mosaic4 Human Immunodeficiency Virus(Ad26.Mos4.HIV), Adjuvanted Clade C gp140 and Mosaic gp140
         to Prevent HIV-1 Infection Among Cis-gender Men and Transgender Individuals Who Have Sex With Cis-
         gender Men and/or Transgender Individuals (MOSAICO).
         https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03964415: ClinicalTrials.gov, Last updated May 12, 2020.
U.S. National Library of Medicine. 2020b. A Study to Assess the Efficacy of a Heterologous Prime/Boost Vaccine
         Regimen of Ad26.Mos4.HIV and Aluminum Phosphate-Adjuvanted Clade C gp140 in Preventing Human
         Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) -1 Infection in Women in Sub-Saharan Africa.
         https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03060629: GlinicalTrials.gov, last updated May 13, 2020.
Ulmer, J. B., J. J. Donnelly, S. E. Parker, G. H. Rhodes, P. L. Felgner, V. J. Dwarki, S. H. Gromkowski, R. R. Deck,
         C. M. DeWitt, A. Friedman, and et al. 1993. "Heterologous protection against influenza by injection of
         DNA encoding a viral protein." Science 259 (5102):1745-9. doi: 10.1126/science.8456302.
UNAIDS. 2020. Press Statement: HVTN 702 clinical trial of an HIV vaccine stopped.
         https://www.unaids.org/sites/default/files/20200204_PS_vaccine_en.pdf: February 4, 2020.
van Doremalen, Neeltje, Teresa Lambe, Alexandra Spencer, and et al. 2020. ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccination
         prevents SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia in rhesus macaques.
         https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.05.13.093195v1.full.pdf: bioRxiv preprint, May 13, 2020.
Wagner, R., V. J. Teeuwsen, L. Deml, F. Notka, A. G. Haaksma, S. S. Jhagjhoorsingh, H. Niphuis, H. Wolf, and J.
         L. Heeney. 1998. "Cytotoxic T cells and neutralizing antibodies induced in rhesus monkeys by virus-like
         particle HIV vaccines in the absence of protection from SHIV infection." Virology 245 (1):65-74. doi:
         10.1006/viro.1998.9104.
Wei, X., J. M. Decker, S. Wang, H. Hui, J. C. Kappes, X. Wu, J. F. Salazar-Gonzalez, M. G. Salazar, J. M. Kilby,
         M. S. Saag, N. L. Komarova, M. A. Nowak, B. H. Hahn, P. D. Kwong, and G. M. Shaw. 2003. "Antibody
         neutralization and escape by HIV-1." Nature 422 (6929):307-12. doi: 10.1038/nature01470.




                                                                                                                   37
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                      Jeffrey E. Harris                               19-Mar-2021


Weiss, R. A., P. R. Clapham, R. Cheingsong-Popov, A. G. Dalgleish, C. A. Carne, I. V. Weller, and R. S. Tedder.
        1985. "Neutralization of human T-lymphotropic virus type III by sera of AIDS and AIDS-risk patients."
        Nature 316 (6023):69-72. doi: 10.1038/316069a0.
Whatmore, A. M., N. Cook, G. A. Hall, S. Sharpe, E. W. Rud, and M. P. Cranage. 1995. "Repair and evolution of
        nef in vivo modulates simian immunodeficiency virus virulence." J Virol 69 (8):5117-23.
WHO. 2020. International Travel and Health: Hepatitis A Vaccine. https://www.who.int/ith/vaccines/hepatitisA/en/:
        World Health Organization, Last accessed May 28, 2020.
Widge, A. T., N. G. Rouphael, L. A. Jackson, E. J. Anderson, P. C. Roberts, M. Makhene, J. D. Chappell, M. R.
        Denison, L. J. Stevens, A. J. Pruijssers, A. B. McDermott, B. Flach, B. C. Lin, N. A. Doria-Rose, S. O'Dell,
        S. D. Schmidt, K. M. Neuzil, H. Bennett, B. Leav, M. Makowski, J. Albert, K. Cross, V. V. Edara, K.
        Floyd, M. S. Suthar, W. Buchanan, C. J. Luke, J. E. Ledgerwood, J. R. Mascola, B. S. Graham, J. H.
        Beigel, and R. N. A. Study Group m. 2021. "Durability of Responses after SARS-CoV-2 mRNA-1273
        Vaccination." N Engl J Med 384 (1):80-82. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2032195.
Williams, Heidi L. 2013. "Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence from the Human Genome."
        Journal of Political Economy 121 (1):1-27. doi: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/669706.
Williams, W. B., H. X. Liao, M. A. Moody, T. B. Kepler, S. M. Alam, F. Gao, K. Wiehe, A. M. Trama, K. Jones, R.
        Zhang, H. Song, D. J. Marshall, J. F. Whitesides, K. Sawatzki, A. Hua, P. Liu, M. Z. Tay, K. E. Seaton, X.
        Shen, A. Foulger, K. E. Lloyd, R. Parks, J. Pollara, G. Ferrari, J. S. Yu, N. Vandergrift, D. C. Montefiori,
        M. E. Sobieszczyk, S. Hammer, S. Karuna, P. Gilbert, D. Grove, N. Grunenberg, M. J. McElrath, J. R.
        Mascola, R. A. Koup, L. Corey, G. J. Nabel, C. Morgan, G. Churchyard, J. Maenza, M. Keefer, B. S.
        Graham, L. R. Baden, G. D. Tomaras, and B. F. Haynes. 2015. "HIV-1 VACCINES. Diversion of HIV-1
        vaccine-induced immunity by gp41-microbiota cross-reactive antibodies." Science 349 (6249):aab1253.
        doi: 10.1126/science.aab1253.
Wold, W. S., and K. Toth. 2013. "Adenovirus vectors for gene therapy, vaccination and cancer gene therapy." Curr
        Gene Ther 13 (6):421-33. doi: 10.2174/1566523213666131125095046.
Wolff, J. A., R. W. Malone, P. Williams, W. Chong, G. Acsadi, A. Jani, and P. L. Felgner. 1990. "Direct gene
        transfer into mouse muscle in vivo." Science 247 (4949 Pt 1):1465-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1690918.
World Health Organization. 2021. Candidate Vaccine Landscape and Tracker.
        https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/draft-landscape-of-covid-19-candidate-vaccines: Last accessed
        March 5.
Worobey, Michael, Jonathan Pekar, Brendan B. Larsen, and et al.. 2020. The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in Europe
        and the US. https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.05.21.109322v1: BioRxiv, May 23, 2020.
Wrapp, D., N. Wang, K. S. Corbett, J. A. Goldsmith, C. L. Hsieh, O. Abiona, B. S. Graham, and J. S. McLellan.
        2020. "Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation." Science 367
        (6483):1260-1263. doi: 10.1126/science.abb2507.
Wu, F., S. Zhao, B. Yu, Y. M. Chen, W. Wang, Z. G. Song, Y. Hu, Z. W. Tao, J. H. Tian, Y. Y. Pei, M. L. Yuan, Y.
        L. Zhang, F. H. Dai, Y. Liu, Q. M. Wang, J. J. Zheng, L. Xu, E. C. Holmes, and Y. Z. Zhang. 2020a.




                                                                                                                   38
Groundwork for a SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine                      Jeffrey E. Harris                              19-Mar-2021


        "Author Correction: A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China." Nature 580
        (7803):E7. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2202-3.
Wu, F., S. Zhao, B. Yu, Y. M. Chen, W. Wang, Z. G. Song, Y. Hu, Z. W. Tao, J. H. Tian, Y. Y. Pei, M. L. Yuan, Y.
        L. Zhang, F. H. Dai, Y. Liu, Q. M. Wang, J. J. Zheng, L. Xu, E. C. Holmes, and Y. Z. Zhang. 2020b. "A
        new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China." Nature 579 (7798):265-269. doi:
        10.1038/s41586-020-2008-3.
Xia, S., Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Yang, G. F. Gao, W. Tan, G. Wu, M. Xu, Z. Lou, W. Huang, W. Xu, B.
        Huang, H. Wang, W. Wang, W. Zhang, N. Li, Z. Xie, L. Ding, W. You, Y. Zhao, X. Yang, Y. Liu, Q.
        Wang, L. Huang, Y. Yang, G. Xu, B. Luo, W. Wang, P. Liu, W. Guo, and X. Yang. 2021. "Safety and
        immunogenicity of an inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine, BBIBP-CorV: a randomised, double-blind,
        placebo-controlled, phase 1/2 trial." Lancet Infect Dis 21 (1):39-51. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30831-8.
Yewdell, John Wilson. 2020. TWiV 620: Antibodies and T cells in COVID-19 patients.
        https://www.microbe.tv/twiv/twiv-620/: This Week in Virology, May 27, 2020, at 1:28.
Young, K. R., S. P. McBurney, L. U. Karkhanis, and T. M. Ross. 2006. "Virus-like particles: designing an effective
        AIDS vaccine." Methods 40 (1):98-117. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2006.05.024.
Zhang, C., G. Maruggi, H. Shan, and J. Li. 2019. "Advances in mRNA Vaccines for Infectious Diseases." Front
        Immunol 10:594. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00594.
Zhang, Y., G. Zeng, H. Pan, C. Li, Y. Hu, K. Chu, W. Han, Z. Chen, R. Tang, W. Yin, X. Chen, Y. Hu, X. Liu, C.
        Jiang, J. Li, M. Yang, Y. Song, X. Wang, Q. Gao, and F. Zhu. 2021. "Safety, tolerability, and
        immunogenicity of an inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine in healthy adults aged 18-59 years: a randomised,
        double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 1/2 clinical trial." Lancet Infect Dis 21 (2):181-192. doi:
        10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30843-4.
Zhao, C., Z. Ao, and X. Yao. 2016. "Current Advances in Virus-Like Particles as a Vaccination Approach against
        HIV Infection." Vaccines (Basel) 4 (1). doi: 10.3390/vaccines4010002.
Zhou, P., X. L. Yang, X. G. Wang, B. Hu, L. Zhang, W. Zhang, H. R. Si, Y. Zhu, B. Li, C. L. Huang, H. D. Chen, J.
        Chen, Y. Luo, H. Guo, R. D. Jiang, M. Q. Liu, Y. Chen, X. R. Shen, X. Wang, X. S. Zheng, K. Zhao, Q. J.
        Chen, F. Deng, L. L. Liu, B. Yan, F. X. Zhan, Y. Y. Wang, G. F. Xiao, and Z. L. Shi. 2020. "A pneumonia
        outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin." Nature 579 (7798):270-273. doi:
        10.1038/s41586-020-2012-7.
Zhu, N., D. Zhang, W. Wang, X. Li, B. Yang, J. Song, X. Zhao, B. Huang, W. Shi, R. Lu, P. Niu, F. Zhan, X. Ma,
        D. Wang, W. Xu, G. Wu, G. F. Gao, W. Tan, Investigating China Novel Coronavirus, and Team Research.
        2020. "A Novel Coronavirus from Patients with Pneumonia in China, 2019." N Engl J Med 382 (8):727-
        733. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2001017.




                                                                                                                 39
