                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  REDUCING PARENT-SCHOOL INFORMATION GAPS
                     AND IMPROVING EDUCATION OUTCOMES:
                 EVIDENCE FROM HIGH-FREQUENCY TEXT MESSAGES

                                       Samuel Berlinski
                                         Matias Busso
                                       Taryn Dinkelman
                                      Claudia Martínez A.

                                      Working Paper 28581
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28581


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




Julian Martinez-Correa provided excellent research assistance and multiple comments that
improved the manuscript. Anna Koh Lee, Santiago Perez Vincent, Dario Romero, and Dario
Salcedo provided excellent research assistance in early stages of the paper. We thank Bernardita
Muñoz, Daniela Alvarado and Paula Espinoza for superb support in fieldwork. Thomas Dishion
and Anne Mauricio gave fabulous guidance on how to communicate with parents and the Family
Check-Up approach. The authors gratefully acknowledge funding through J-PAL's Post-Primary
Education Initiative, the Inter-American Development Bank, the Spencer Foundation, and a
Chilean FONIDE grant (No. 711272). The study is registered as AEARCTR-0001059. The
opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Inter-American Development Bank, its Board of Directors, or the countries they
represent. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Samuel Berlinski, Matias Busso, Taryn Dinkelman, and Claudia Martínez A.. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reducing Parent-School Information Gaps and Improving Education Outcomes: Evidence
from High-Frequency Text Messages
Samuel Berlinski, Matias Busso, Taryn Dinkelman, and Claudia Martínez A.
NBER Working Paper No. 28581
March 2021
JEL No. D8,I25,N36

                                         ABSTRACT

Grade retention and early dropout are two of the biggest challenges facing education systems in
middle-income countries today, representing waste in school resources. We investigate whether
reducing parent-school information gaps can improve outcomes that are early-warning signals for
grade retention and dropout. We conducted an experiment in low-income schools in Chile to test
the effects and behavioral changes triggered by a program that sends attendance, grade, and
classroom behavior information to parents via weekly and monthly text messages. Our 18-month
intervention raised average math GPA by 0.09 of a standard deviation and increased the share of
students satisfying attendance requirements for grade promotion by 4.5 percentage points.
Treatment effects were larger for students at higher risk of later grade retention and dropout. We
find some evidence of positive classroom spillovers. Leveraging existing school inputs to
implement a light-touch, cost-effective information intervention can improve education outcomes
in lower-income settings.

Samuel Berlinski                                Taryn Dinkelman
Research Department                             Department of Economics
Inter-American Development Bank                 3058 Jenkins Nanovic Halls
1300 New York Avenue, NW                        University of Notre Dame
Washington, DC 20577                            South Bend, IN 46617
samuelb@iadb.org                                and NBER
                                                tdinkelm@nd.edu
Matias Busso
Research Department                             Claudia Martínez A.
Inter-American Development Bank                 Instituto de Economia
1300 New York Ave. NW                           Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile
Washington, DC                                  Av. Vicuna Mackenna 4860
mbusso@iadb.org                                 Macul, Santiago
                                                Chile
                                                clmartineza@uc.cl




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28581
1    Introduction
Grade retention and early dropout are two of the biggest challenges facing education sys-
tems in middle-income countries today. In Latin America, only 46% of students graduate
from secondary school on time, and only 53% of young people aged 20 to 24 have completed
their high school education [UNFPA and ECLAC, 2011]. These outcomes contribute to per-
sistent education gaps between low- and high-income families. Researchers have identified
absenteeism, failing grades, and classroom misbehavior as important early warning signals
for grade retention and the likelihood that students will eventually drop out of school [Man-
acorda, 2012; Wedenoja, 2017]. While schools around the world routinely record these types
of student outcomes, families often do not have timely access to this information. In this
paper, we examine whether improving the frequency of communication between parents and
schools can help improve students' academic outcomes, particularly among those who are
at-risk of being retained at a given grade or of later dropout.
    We conducted a randomized experiment in a sample of Chilean families to evaluate
the effects of using weekly and monthly cellphone text messages to provide parents with
information on students' attendance, grades, and classroom behavior. The intervention
focuses on students in the last five grades of primary school. It targets information for
parents during the years when attendance and grades start to matter, but before the risks of
grade repetition or dropout significantly increase. Our main experimental sample includes
about 1,000 children enrolled in seven low-income schools in a metropolitan area in Chile.
The text message intervention (Papas al Dia) was deliberately designed to test a fairly low-
touch and low-cost intervention; easily and inexpensively implemented at scale. We did not
teach parents how to interpret or use the information, and we did not provide any guidance
to students, teachers or principals.
    Our research design has several distinguishing features: First, the information treatment
lasted one and a half years (spanning two school years) and over 44,000 text messages were
delivered at different frequencies (weekly and monthly) during this time. As a result, we are
able to examine whether the effects of messages changed over time or with the frequency
of the messaging. Second, we randomly manipulated the share of treated students in each
classroom to quantify spillover effects within classrooms. Third, after parents had some
exposure to the program, we relied on a survey experiment to assess whether parents in
treatment and control groups valued the frequent communication with schools differently,
and whether willingness to pay was affected by a student's baseline educational performance.
Fourth, we administered several rounds of surveys to measure whether the intervention led
to changes in behaviors within the household.


                                             1
    We start by documenting fairly sizable gaps that exist between parents' knowledge and
school reports of students' attendance and grades. Using a baseline survey and school records,
we find that about one in four parents was unable to report correct information about a child's
grades and attendance. Similar information gaps have been found in settings as diverse as the
US [Bergman, 2021], Malawi [Dizon-Ross, 2019] and Colombia [Barrera-Osorio et al., 2020].
Moreover, we document that the parents of at-risk, low-achieving students are more likely
to misreport grades and attendance. Narrowing this gap ­between parents' understanding
of their child's performance and the actual performance as documented by the school­ is the
initial target of our text messaging treatment.
    The text messaging had positive impacts on grades and attendance. A comparison of the
treated and control students shows that the intervention led to an increase in math GPA of
0.09 of a standard deviation; the probability of earning a passing grade in math increased
by 2.7 percentage points (relative to a mean of 90%). The intervention also reduced school
absenteeism by 1 percentage point, and increased the share of students who satisfied the
attendance requirements for grade promotion by 4.5 percentage points. These treatment
effects are 60 percent larger when imperfect text message reception is taken into account ­
that is, when one accounts for the effects solely among students whose parents did, indeed,
receive the texts.1 These treatment effects are somewhat heterogeneous on initial academic
performance. We find that low-performing at-risk students benefited the most from receiving
the intervention. The effects on grades, attendance, and behavior are doubled for those
students with a standard deviation more of our at-risk index.
    We find evidence of positive classroom-level spillovers among treated students for grades
and attendance. In addition to randomizing the assignment to receive the text message
treatment at the individual student level, we randomized the share of students treated at
the classroom level. To test for such potential spillovers, classes were randomized into groups
with a high (75%) or low (25%) share of students whose parents participated in the texting
program. This allowed us to test our hypothesis that classroom-level spillovers could play an
important role in impacts, for a wide variety of reasons. For example, parents might share
information with one another, potentially affecting social norms about how much parents
should be involved in helping or monitoring their children in school. Peer effects among
    1
     These math grade intention-to-treat effects are somewhat smaller than grade effects of other types of
interventions in the literature. For example: Bettinger [2012] finds an increase of 0.15 of a standard deviation
in math test scores resulted from a $15 incentive used in grades 3 through 6 in Ohio. Kremer et al. [2009]
finds an increase of 0.13 of a standard deviation in test scores as the result of offering expensive scholarships
for two school years of high school to girls in grade 6 in Kenya. Bergman [2021] finds an increase of 0.19
of a standard deviation in test scores from a program involving communicating with parents of students in
low-income schools in the US; the program evaluated by Bergman [2021] is similar to ours, but it used much
more expensive ways of communicating parents.



                                                       2
students could be important, too. For instance, the utility of skipping school may depend
on how many of a given student's friends also skip school. Although our design does not
allow us to test for spillovers to the control group, the spillover results on treated students
suggest that the positive direct effect on individual grades and attendance that we measure
are likely underestimates of the impacts of a scaled-up version of this program in which all
students would be treated.
    Exploring the timing and frequency of text messages through the week and through the
school year allows us to draw out some important policy implications for the design of these
types of information interventions. We show that the positive effect on attendance fades
out over the week: effects are larger immediately after parents receiving the text messages
and decline as the days go by. This suggests that for outcomes where the student make
daily choices ­to attend or not to attend school­ high frequency text messages are more
beneficial than sporadic ones. We also show that the intervention is effective throughout the
school year. Parents do not seem to get used to the information treatment. Taken together,
these results suggest that the information treatments studied in this paper should be high
frequency and sustained over time in order to increase their effectiveness.
    To gain further insight into the channels that induced the intervention to change students'
and parents' behaviors, we combined rich administrative data collected from each school
with information collected through surveys conducted with parents and students before and
after the program. We show that the text message treatment shrunk information gaps
between parents and schools. Parents of at-risk students "correct" their understanding
of their child's performance to the greatest degree (although results are not statistically
significant at normal levels). Additionally, we show that parents used this new information
when interacting with their children at home. The intervention changed parent behaviors at
home. Treated students perceived that they received significantly more family support as a
result of the intervention and students perceived that their parents were more involved in
schools matters.
    Consistent with these changes in parental behavior we find that some parents (especially
those of students at-risk) are willing to pay for the information. We rely on a survey exper-
iment to assess the willingness to pay for the information. For all parents, demand slopes
downward; more parents are willing to pay at lower prices. Parents in the treatment group
­who had already experienced receiving the text messages for several months­ whose chil-
dren were measured at-risk grade retention and dropout to begin with, are significantly more
likely to say they are willing to pay for the continued service relative to control parents. We
interpret this as evidence that these parents learned about their value of the program, and,
as a result, they were more willing to pay for the service. This result echoes the findings of


                                              3
Bursztyn and Coffman [2012], who show that Brazilian parents report being willing to pay
for receiving regular updates on their child's absenteeism.
     The text message intervention is characterized by low variable cost and a once in a
life-time setup cost. Using the treatment effects estimates we find that a 0.01 of standard
deviation increase in math grades has a variable cost of about US$1.18 per student per
year at market prices (rising to US$2/year when we include the fixed set up costs). This
program is cost-effective when compared to other interventions designed to improve learning
outcomes.
     There is a large and recent literature studying the effect of sending parents information
about their children's activities and performance in school. This literature includes Bursztyn
and Coffman [2012], Kraft and Dougherty [2013], Avvisati et al. [2014], Castleman and Page
[2015], Kraft and Rogers [2015], De Walque and Valente [2018], Rogers and Feller [2018],
Bergman and Chan [2019], Dizon-Ross [2019], Angrist et al. [2020], Barrera-Osorio et al.
[2020], Bergman [2021], Bergman et al. [2020], and Gallego et al. [2020] among others.2
Much, although not all of this work, is based in the US. We make three contributions to this
literature.
     First, we show that taking simple steps to provide parents with timely, accurate infor-
mation about their children's school performance can improve educational outcomes. Our
results connect with a growing economics literature that identifies a lack of correct and timely
information as one of the critical constraints on good decision-making.3 Having the right
information at the right time is especially important in the context of students' education;
adult caregivers act as agents for their children until the children are developmentally capable
of making good choices about their own human capital or health investments. Our program
offers one example of a simple intervention that can help parents to be more effective in this
role, with potentially long-term positive impacts on educational attainment for children from
low-income backgrounds, particularly those at-risk of poor education outcomes. Our results
also suggest that once parents of the most at-risk students understand the value of such an
information service, they may be willing to pay for at least part of the costs of measures
that improve parent-school communication.
     Second, our work contributes to the understanding of how to better design public poli-
   2
     Appendix B provides a summary of the results in these papers.
   3
     See, for example, Nguyen [2008], Jensen [2010], Oreopoulos and Dunn [2013], Dinkelman and Mart´  inez A
[2014], for evidence on how educational outcomes improve after parents or students are informed about the
returns to, or costs of, educational investments. Bettinger et al. [2012] and Fryer Jr [2016] are examples in
which information alone was insufficient for improving educational attainment. Dizon-Ross [2019] studies
a one-off information intervention with parents in Malawi, showing that the intervention improves what
parents know about their children, and causes family educational investments to adjust to match newly
revealed abilities of each child.



                                                     4
cies that may help improve students' academic outcomes, given existing school resources
and practices. Though efforts to improve school access, especially in developing countries,
have been successful in recent decades, improving school quality has proved more elusive.
Digitizing data already collected by schools, and providing these data to parents at high fre-
quency over a sustained period of time offers an effective and relatively inexpensive way to
improve grades and attendance outcomes, measures that are likely to reduce the probability
that students drop out of school. Closing information gaps between parents and schools are
feasible actions that can better leverage existing school inputs to improve student outcomes.
    Third, relative to other types of parenting programs, our intervention is low cost, sustain-
able, and amenable to scale up in developing-country settings. By comparison, a number of
recent parenting programs that have been found to be successful require more contact time
between parents and schools [e.g. Avvisati et al., 2014; Banerji et al., 2017]; thus, these other
interventions tend to be costly, and more difficult to scale. Our work most closely relates
to that of Bergman and Chan [2019] who evaluated a low-cost program of improved parent-
school communication in 22 middle and high schools in West Virginia. Both our intervention
and that of Bergman and Chan [2019] provide information through high-frequency text mes-
sages. Our intervention additionally studies student's misbehavior outcomes and spillovers
among the treated students, and directly addresses the willingness to pay of parents for
continuing the service with specific monetary values. Thus, our intervention holds potential
for scaling up in settings with limited resources.4
    Our paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the experimental setting, and
documents the extent of parent-school information gaps at baseline. Section 3 describes
the recruitment of participants in the intervention, the intervention itself, and treatment
randomization. Section 4 describes the data we collected and used in our analysis, variable
definitions, and instrument response rates. Section 5 discusses our estimation strategy, and
analyzes the internal validity of our experiment. Sections 6 discusses the treatment effects
on academic outcomes, heterogeneity, and spillovers. Section 7 explores the mechanisms
behind those effects. Section 8 discusses whether the program was cost-effective. Section 9
concludes.
   4
     Bergman and Chan [2019] automated the process of gathering the data by scraping student information
systems, this is possibly unfeasible in low- and middle-income countries where information is almost always
collected on paper.




                                                    5
2       Setting
School dropout is concentrated among the lower-income quintiles in Chile. For instance, in
2010, only 65% of students in the lowest-income quintile complete high school, compared
with over 96% of students in the highest-income quintile. Attendance, grades, and classroom
behavior in elementary school are key factors affecting the risk of grade retention, which, in
turn, increases the probability that students will drop out of school when they grow older
[e.g. Manacorda, 2012; Wedenoja, 2017].
    There are twelve years of mandatory school in Chile: eight of primary school and four of
secondary school. To pass each grade students must attend at least 85% of school days in a
school year, and must obtain a passing grade of 4.0 in all subjects (on a scale from one to
seven).5 As a result, there is a strong correlation between attendance, subject grades, and
grade retention.6
    The transition from the final grade of primary school to the beginning of secondary
school appears to be a point at which students are at high risk of grade retention or, in the
worst case scenario, of dropping out of the school system. Even though grade retention is
an outcome of concern during lower grades, it becomes even more of a concern as students
progress through their school years. During grades 1-3 about 3% of students repeat their
grade. Starting in grade 4 this percentage increases with each grade, finally reaching 5% by
the end of primary school. In the first year of secondary school, the grade retention rate
surges, reaching 13%. This pattern is observed in our sample but it is also common in most
Latin American countries [Bassi et al., 2015].
    Our intervention focuses on students in the last five grades of primary school, where the
median child age is 10. It targets information for parents during the years when attendance
and grades start to matter, but before the risks of grade repetition or dropout significantly
increase.
    Many parents do not have good information about their children school performance.
Gaps in the information that schools and parents have about children have been identified
in settings as diverse as the US [Bergman, 2021], Malawi [Dizon-Ross, 2019] and Colombia
    5
      Students who fail one subject can still advance to the next grade if they maintain an average grade of
4.5 for the remaining subjects; students who fail two subjects can also advance if they maintain an average
grade above 5.0 in the remaining subjects. In addition, the 85% attendance requirement can be lifted by the
school board under special circumstances.
    6
      Using administrative data we examined these same correlations in our sample prior to the start of
the intervention. The correlation of average grade was 0.4 with attendance and -0.4 with grade retention.
The correlation between school attendance and grade retention was -0.3. Even conditional on age and
gender controls, and taking into account grade-level and school fixed effects, the correlations between lower
attendance, lower grades, and a higher risk of failing the grade are large and statistically significant at the
5% level.



                                                      6
[Barrera-Osorio et al., 2020]. In general, examples in the literature suggest that most par-
ents tend to overestimate their child's performance in school, and that parents who have
less education themselves have worse information about their child's performance in school
[Barrera-Osorio et al., 2020; Rogers and Feller, 2018; Bergman and Chan, 2019].

                       Prop. of parents who misreported child's grades/attendance
                                                                                    1.0
                                                                                    0.8
                                                                                    0.6
                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                    0.0
                                                                                           Figure 1: Baseline share of misinformed parents




                                                                                          -2        -1            0              1            2             3
                                                                                                                      At-risk index

                                                                                                  Grades misinformation               Attendance misinformation


Note: Y-axis presents the (lowess-smoothed) share of parents misinformed regarding their child's grades and attendance as
measured by the at-risk index. Based on parent surveys at baseline. See notes for columns [2] and [3] of Table 6 for details on
the construction of misinformation measures and Section 4 for the index construction.




    In our setting, we also observe similar types of parent-school information gaps regarding
the student's actual grades and attendance. Parents are usually provided with information
about their child's progress every quarter through a report card that details a student's
grades and number of absences. Teachers and principals also communicate with parents on
an "as needed" basis for certain cases of misbehavior, regular absenteeism, and repeated low
grades. Figure 1, based on data from our baseline survey described in Section 4, plots the
share of parents whose report of the child's grade/attendance is at odds with the child's actual
school performance before the intervention begun. We define a grade to be misreported if
it deviates more than 0.5 points above or below the actual grade and Figure 1 graphs the
share of grade misreports in blue. We define attendance to be misreported if the parents'
report of the child's absence differs by two or more instances from actual absences recorded
in the previous two weeks. Figure 1 graphs the share of attendance misreports in red.7 These
     7
       Parents who did not respond to either question were also classified as misinformed. See notes on columns
[2] and [3] of Table 6 for details.


                                                                                                                          7
misreports are graphed against a summary measure ­ the at-risk index ­ of whether a child is
considered at-risk of retention or dropping out (because of higher absenteeism, lower grades,
or worse behavior in class) before the intervention.8
    In our sample, 40% percent of parents of students with a baseline math grade below 4.5
did not know their children's test scores. Similarly, 70% percent of parents of students with
an attendance rate of lower than 85 percent, did not know how many days their children had
missed school in the previous two weeks. This is despite 75% of parents declaring that they
almost always check their children's report. From the figure, we see that around 30-40% of
parents who have children with a zero value of the at-risk index misreport grades/attendance.
And the share of parents misreporting grades and attendance only increases as the child is
considered more at-risk of grade retention/dropping out. These are the types of information
gaps our intervention is designed to address. Moreover, the patterns in Figure 1 suggest
that our intervention is likely to be particularly relevant for those children who are the most
at-risk of grade retention/dropping out.


3       Experimental Design
In this section we outline the basic elements of our experiment: the recruitment of schools
and parents, the randomization of students and classrooms, and the intervention.
    Recruitment of participants. We worked with the Secretary of Education of two low-
income municipalities of Santiago (Chile) to recruit schools to join our study.9 In these
schools, we held a series of meetings, inviting parents of all students in grade 4 or above to
join the experiment.10 Over 50% percent of parents consented to participate. Consent rates
by grade-level were roughly similar. Younger students, those not new to the school, and
those with better baseline attendance and grades were somewhat more likely to consent.11
    Randomization. We assigned students to treatment in two steps. First, we stratified
by school grade-level, and randomly allocated classrooms (sections) to include a high- or
low-share of students whose parents would receive text messages. In high-share classrooms,
    8
       We discuss how we construct this at-risk index in Section 4.
    9
       Five schools were fully public while one was a publicly funded but privately administrated.
    10
       Initially, students whose parents consented to participation in the experiment were in grades 4 to 8 in
the eight schools that participated in the study. The composition changed in the second year. Students
in grade 8 participated during the first year of the experiment, but these students could not be treated or
followed into secondary school. Also one school decided not to continue during the second academic year.
Because randomization was done at the individual level, stratifying by classroom, the main analysis does not
include either the school that dropped out of the program, or the students who were in grade 8 at baseline.
In the appendix, we show the main results when using this "full" sample as a robustness check.
    11
       See Appendix C for more details regarding the sample and the characteristics of students whose parents
consented to participate in the experiment and those whose parents did not consent.


                                                      8
75% of students whose parents had consented to participate were treated; in low-share class-
rooms, 25% of students whose parents had consented were treated. Second, within each
classroom, we randomized students whose parents had consented into treatment or control
status, according to the shares allocated in the first-step randomization.
    Intervention. Figure 2 shows the timeline of the Papas al Dia intervention (as well as
of the data collection). The school year in Chile runs from March to December, with two
weeks of winter vacation in July. A first welcoming message was sent to all participants in
May of 2014. The intervention started before the winter break, and lasted until December
2015. The summer break happened from mid-December to early March.

                                              Figure 2: Timeline
                           1st year             Summer recess                 2nd year

                  Baseline survey     Follow-up survey                                    Follow-up survey



            Mar               Jul             Dec              Mar              Jul              Dec

              Welcome          Intervention and                      Intervention and
              text             data collection                       data collection
              message

       Note: The figure shows the timeline of the intervention and data collection implemented in 2014 and 2015.




    Parents in the treatment group received weekly messages on attendance, and monthly
messages on classroom behavior and math test scores (separately). We told parents how
many days the child had attended school out of the previous school week (usually five
days). We provided parents with the number of positive, neutral, and negative classroom
behaviors that teachers had recorded in the classroom notebook over the prior month. We
provided monthly updates on the record of all math test scores in the semester, the average
of these scores, and the classroom average score for the same tests. Hence, parents learned
information about their own child's math performance, as well as how their child performed
relative to the classroom average. In addition, parents in both the treatment and the control
group received text messages about school meetings, holidays, and other general school
matters throughout the year. We refer to these as "general" messages.12 Parents of students
in the control group continued learning about their child's academic performance through
report cards that were sent home every quarter.
    We collected data on attendance, grades, and behavior from school classroom books.
Our research team scanned and entered these data into a digital platform, which then au-
  12
    Appendix D explains in detail the intervention: production of messages, timeline, and delivery. Ap-
pendix Table D.1 provides a script of each type of message sent to parents.


                                                          9
tomated the sending of messages each week. We sent more than 44, 000 text messages over
16 months: 68% provided information on attendance, 16% on math grades, and 16% on
classroom behavior.13


4        Data
Data Sources. We use information from four data sources. First, we collected data on all
students' math grades, daily attendance, and all behavior notes from classroom books for the
years 2014 and 2015. These are daily-, weekly- and monthly-frequency data that, in some
cases, we aggregate at an annual level. Second, we use student-level records provided by
the central Ministry of Education of Chile. These records contain information on students'
end-of-the-year school performance, including test scores, annual attendance rate, and grade
retention, as well as basic demographic information. They are available for our sample
of schools for the period from 2013 to 2015 and are use for allocating funding/subsidies
across school. We use these data as pre-treatment controls and, also, to validate our main
results. Third, we recorded all text messages' information such as day- and time-stamps,
the messages' content, the name of the recipient parent, and the delivery status of the text
message (i.e., whether the phone number received the message). Fourth, we administered
several surveys to all parents and children participating in the experiment. Surveys were
administered before the intervention took place (baseline), at the end of the first academic
year, and at the end of the second academic year. Student surveys were conducted in class;
parent surveys were administered during an initial parent meeting or sent home with children,
who were encouraged to ask their parents to complete and return the surveys.14
    Outcome Variables.15 We use data recorded by teachers in classroom books to measure
our primary student outcomes: math grades, attendance rates and classroom behavior which
we aggregate at the annual level. Using school records, we also measure outcome variables
(i.e., grades, attendance rates, and an indicator for whether the student passed the grade)
at an annual frequency at the end of each school year to validate our main sources.16 Using
classroom books we also constructed monthly math grades and attendance rates. All math
    13
      Behavior data were difficult to collect. In Chile, each classroom has a notebook in which teachers can
make comments about particularly good or bad behaviors of specific students. For example, the teacher might
write, "Samuel concentrated well in reading," or "Taryn hit her friend during math class." We developed a
system for categorizing such behavior "notes" as positive or negative, and followed these definitions in all
classrooms.
   14
      Appendix Section E provides more details and information on these data sources.
   15
      Appendix F describes in detail each of the outcome and control variables used in this paper. It shows
the specific data sources, and provides a description of how the variables were constructed.
   16
      We relegate most of the results using these data to the appendix.



                                                    10
grades were standardized using the corresponding grade-year control mean and standard
deviation.17 In addition, we built two indicator variables for meaningful thresholds required
to pass the grade: 85% of annual attendance for passing the grade, and the 4.0 math grade for
passing the subject. Using classroom books we also measured negative behavior by adding
all the behavioral entries during the school year (post-treatment) and then standardized the
sum using the grade-year control distribution.
    Our secondary outcome variables were designed to capture information gaps and certain
behavioral responses to the treatment among students and parents. First, we built measures
of information gaps by comparing survey questions that asked parents about their children's
recent grades, absences, and behavior. We then compared parents' responses to students'
responses and administrative records. Second, we asked parents and children a series of
questions to compute pre-specified measures (i.e., several items that are aggregated into
one variable usually referred to as a "scale") of study habits, academic efficiency, parental
support, parental supervision, parental school involvement, and parental positive reinforce-
ment. These were intended to capture any changes in home behaviors and parent-child or
parent-school relationships that might result from the intervention. We administered a set of
survey items from three sources: The University of Chicago Consortium on Chicago School
Research; the Manual for the Patterns of Adaptive Learning Scales (PALS) developed by
the University of Michigan; and scales on positive parenting developed by the Prevention
Group at Arizona State University. We aggregated categorical answers into scales using a
maximum likelihood principal components estimator. We then standardized answers using
the mean and standard deviation of the control group. Overall, we find that each scale
has good psychometric properties.18 We asked parents and their children a similar set of
questions. Scales are highly correlated both across survey waves and between children and
parents ­further suggesting that the quality of these scales is high (See Tables F.5 and F.6).
    Finally, to assess how much parents value the information provided through out interven-
tion, follow-up surveys asked parents about their willingness to pay for the text messages.19
Parents were randomly assigned a value $V of (low) $500 Chilean pesos, (medium) $1000
and (high) $1500 price (where $ is Chilean pesos per month, and where $1,000 is about USD
   17
      In computing the control mean and standard deviations we only use information of the students to
consented to participate in the study.
   18
      Appendix F.1 describes how the scales were built. For both parents and students, we show the eigenvalue
of each latent factor, the loading associated with each variable, and the Cronbach's alpha for each survey
wave.
   19
      We asked: "It is possible that next year your daughter's/son's school can send you regular text messages
with information about their school performance (attendance, grades, and classroom behavior) four times a
month. However, there might not be enough funds to provide this service free of charge. Thinking about
how valuable this service would be for you, please tell us whether you will be willing to pay $V pesos a
month to receive four text messages a month, from April to December."


                                                     11
1.50).
    At-risk index. We build an index to measure each student's risk of failing classes or drop-
ping out later in life. Specifically, we rely on three variables measured before the intervention
began: standardized attendance (Ziattendance ), math grades (Zigrades ), and negative behavioral
notes (Zibehavior ).20 The at-risk index is then defined as a simple average of these measures
(at - risk indexi = (-Ziattendance - Zigrades + Zibehavior )/3). The higher the value of this
index, the worse grades, worse attendance, and worse classroom behavior the student has at
baseline. Throughout the analysis, we rely on this index to assess the differential impact of
the intervention on the primary and secondary outcomes for students with different values
of the index.
    Response rates. Baseline data from administrative sources are available for all students
in the experimental sample (except for a handful of students who joined the schools mid-year
in 2014). Administrative data are also complete for the first year of the experiment. During
the second year of the experiment, due to the normal churn of students changing schools,
we have information for 90% of the students. This attrition rate is similar for treated and
control students. Regarding survey data, students' response rates were between 80% and
91% in the three waves. More data were missing for parents, particularly from follow-up
surveys, for which response rates were between 54% and 73%. Response rates were similar
across treated and control students and parents.21


5        Estimation and experimental validity
5.1      Empirical strategy
Intention-to-treat effects (ITT). To identify the effect of sending parents high-frequency
academic information on students' and parents' outcomes we use the two school years of the
intervention and estimate individual-level regressions of the form:

                                             0
                        Yicjgt =  + Ticjg + Xicjg + cjg + t + g + icjgt                                    (1)

where Yicjgt is the outcome of student (or parent) i in classroom c of school j , in grade-level
g , and year t; Ticjg is an indicator for whether a child's parents were part of the randomized
group that received the information treatment, and it is constant over time; g are grade-
    20
      We use final attendance and math grades from the academic year prior to the beginning of the inter-
vention and accumulated negative behavioral marks during the month prior to the start of the intervention.
   21
      Appendix G shows the response rates for the different samples, years, and data sources. It also describes
attrition from and entry to the sample, and the characteristics of those students in terms of their treatment
status.


                                                      12
level fixed effects; and t are year fixed effects.22 Xicjg
                                                       0
                                                           are the baseline standardized math
grade and attendance rate.23 Finally, cjg are classroom-level fixed effects (strata in the
experimental design). Despite the main randomized variation being at the student level, to
be conservative, we cluster standard errors at the classroom level.24  captures the intention-
to-treat (ITT) effect. Because we include classroom-level fixed effects (c jg ),  is identified
through differences in individual-level treatment status within each classroom.
    Average treatment effects on the treated (ATT). Even though the implementation of the
treatment was perfect ­ in the sense that all parents in the treatment group were sent
text messages, and no parent in the control group was sent text message with academic
information ­ not all parents received all text messages. We discuss this further in Section
5.3. Thus, we estimate the average treatment effects among those who received the text
messages (the ATT) using an instrumental variables approach. The second stage takes the
following form:

                                              0
                        Yicjgt =  + Dicjgt + Xicjg + cjg + t + g + icjgt                                    (2)

where Dicjgt is the share of topic-specific (i.e., attendance, math grades, or classroom be-
havior) text messages received by student i's parent in year t. We instrument Dicjgt with
the individual-level randomized treatment variable, Ticjg . For each outcome we use the topic
specific share of messages received.25
     Spillover effects. We exploit the differential exposure to treatment to estimate spillover
effects of the intervention. Let Ecjg be an indicator variable equal to one if classroom c of
grade-level g in school j was randomized to have 75% of students treated and is equal to zero
if it was randomized to have 25% of students treated instead. We estimate the parameters
of the following model:

                                                   0
               Yicjgt =  + Ticjg + Ticjg × Ecjg + Xicjg + cjg + t + g + icjgt                               (3)

    The coefficient  measures the differential treatment effect of the text-message interven-
   22
      g and t are not all collinear because there are 25 students who repeated a grade-level. Results are
robust to the exclusion of these grade-level dummies.
   23
      For a handful of students baseline values are missing. In those cases, we impute the control baseline
variables using the classroom-level mean. We add an indicator variable in the regression model equal to one
for these observations.
   24
      A classroom is a unique combination of school, grade-level, and section in the first year of the interven-
tion.
   25
      For instance, in the attendance equation, we instrument the share of received text messages related
to attendance with the randomized treatment indicator variable. The correlations between the share of
attendance, math grades, and classroom behavior text messages received are all larger than 0.95. Hence,
results do not change when using different shares.



                                                      13
tion in classrooms where a larger proportion of students was treated. Because of random-
ization, this coefficient's estimate allows us to quantify the size of the spillover effect on the
treated students. Notice that if  > 0 the intervention could also affect the control group. In
that case the estimate of  would be biased downward and thus represent a lower bound of
the effect of text messages on all students' outcomes.26
    In addition, because of imperfect compliance in text message delivery we estimate the
ATT using instrumental variables, in which we augment equation (2) with a term Dicjgt ×Kcjg
(where Kcjg is the share of students in the classroom whose parents received at least half of
the text messages that were sent to them) which we instrument with Ticjg × Ecjg .


5.2     Balance on pre-treatment observable characteristics
We compare the observable characteristics of students and parents assigned to the treatment
and control groups before the intervention began. Table 1 shows total observations with
available data (column 1); the average of each variable for the treatment group (column 2)
and the control group (column 3); and the p-value of the null hypothesis that, conditioning
on classroom (strata) fixed effects, the differences between treatment and control averages
are zero (column 4).27
    In our sample, 46% of students are female. The median age is 10. Students in treatment
and control groups have similar grades at baseline, with math and language scores around
5.1 (on a 1-7 scale), and similar attendance rates (90 percent). About 95% passed their
grade in the year prior to the experiment. Panels B and C show parents' and students'
scales from the baseline surveys.28 Before the intervention began, students in the treatment
and control groups reporting putting in similar effort when studying at home, received the
same family support and parental supervision. Their parents seemed to be equally involved
in their school life. Finally, we built an indicator variable of whether parents graduated from
high school using the highest level of completed education among all listed guardians in the
household (mother, father, or other guardian, who is often a grandmother). We find that
70% of parents had completed high school, with no difference between treated and control
  26
      In our experimental design (i.e., with classroom fixed effects associated to the strata in which the
treatment was individually randomized), we cannot estimate the differential spillover effects to compare
the effects on a non-treated student in a classroom with a high or low share of treated peers in his or her
classroom.
   27
      Appendix Table A.1 shows that observable characteristics are similar between treatment and control
students when the full sample is used. Additionally, Appendix Table A.2 reports a similar balance table to
that shown in Table 1; it includes an additional variable to indicate whether the classroom was randomized
to receive a high or low share of treatment, and the interaction with Ticjg . Results are virtually the same as
those shown in shown in Table 1.
   28
      The survey items used to build these scales can be found in Appendix Tables F.2 and F.3.



                                                      14
groups.

                      Table 1: Students and parents pre-treatment characteristics

                                                          Obs.            Treatment             Control           p-value of
                                                                            Mean                 Mean              adj. dif.
                                                            [1]                [2]                 [3]                [4]

 Panel A: Administrative records
   Female                                                 1066                0.45                0.47               0.57
   Age                                                    1066                9.81                9.79               0.41
   New student                                            1066                0.08               0.07                0.42
   Language grade                                          976                5.10                5.07               0.85
   Math grade                                              976                5.14               5.19                0.37
   Final avg. grade                                        976                5.57                5.59               0.47
   Attendance rate                                         976                0.89                0.89               0.53
   Passed grade                                           1018                0.95               0.96                0.57
   Missing grades/attendance/pass data                    1066                0.09                0.08               0.41
   At-risk index                                          1066                0.04               ­0.01               0.36

 Panel B: Parents' Survey Data
   Study habits                                            704                ­0.07               0.00               0.51
   Academic efficiency                                     730                ­0.09               0.00               0.16
   Family Support                                          739                ­0.12               0.00               0.06
   Low Family Supervision                                  709                ­0.06               0.00               0.72
   Parent School Involvement                               716                ­0.01               0.00               0.66
   Positive reinforcement                                  738                ­0.06               0.00               0.31
   Parents completed high school                           775                 0.71               0.68               0.74

 Panel C: Students' Survey Data
   Study habits                                            909                ­0.19               0.00               0.10
   Academic efficiency                                     915                ­0.14               0.00               0.15
   Family Support                                          864                ­0.15               0.00               0.12
   Low Family Supervision                                  859                 0.05               0.00               0.60
   Parent School Involvement                               858                ­0.12               0.00               0.59
   Positive reinforcement                                  868                ­0.04               0.00               0.90

Note: Column [1] shows the number of observations with non-missing data, columns [2] and [3] the mean value of each
baseline characteristic in the treated and control group, respectively. Column [4] reports the p-value on the treatment
coefficient in a regression using each baseline characteristic as the dependent variable. All regressions include classroom fixed
effects and robust standard errors are clustered at this level. Observable variables in Panel A correspond to 2013 except for
new student variable that refers to 2014.




5.3       Delivery of text messages
All text messages were sent to parents as planned. However, not all text messages were
actually received. Several factors contributed to reception failure. A message was more likely
to fail if the network was very busy, if some technical problem surfaced within the network,
or if a parent had changed their phone number during the experiment. To maximize the

                                                                  15
chances that text messages reached parents, we sent the messages on Mondays, when the
network was not as busy as on other days.29 At the beginning of the second school year
during which the experiment took place, we also recontacted all consenting parents to verify
or update their cellphone numbers.
    Table 2 shows estimates obtained with equation (1) where the dependent variable is
the total number of messages sent (first row) or received (second row) during the course of
the experiment. The variables are computed for each type of message (attendance, grades,
classroom behavior, general, and all) using information from the digital platform described
in Section 3. Each point estimate shows the coefficient  , which estimates the differences in
the total number of text messages sent to/received by parents in the treatment group and
those in the control group.
    By the end of 2015, when the experiment had run for one and a half school years, an
average of 44 more text messages per year had been sent to parents in the treatment group
than to parents in the control group. Over the same period, an average of 26 messages per
year had been received by parents in the treatment group. This implies that almost 60% of
sent text messages were successfully received by the end of the intervention. A success rate
similar to those reported in the literature. Bergman and Chan [2019], for instance, report
that about a third of treated parents never received messages that were sent.
    Most of the messages were about attendance because these were sent weekly while class-
room behavior and grade messages were sent monthly. These treatment messages were only
sent to, and received by, parents assigned to the treatment group. By contrast, parents of
students in the control group were sent (and received) general text messages at largely the
same rate as those in the treatment group (column 5).30
    The data suggest that the probability of receiving text messages is unlikely to be corre-
lated with family-level characteristics that also affect child outcomes of interest. We might
worry, for instance, that parents who have low attachment to the labor market and unstable
incomes are also more likely to switch cell numbers. They would then be less likely to receive
text messages about their children's academic performance. Children in these families may
also have worse school outcomes. To assess this possibility, we estimated a model in which
the dependent variable was the total share of successfully delivered text messages (total re-
ceived/total sent) on baseline attendance and math grades, age, gender and classroom fixed
effects. Students with higher baseline grades or attendance are no more (or less) likely to
  29
     During the first month of the experiment, messages were sent on Fridays.
  30
     Appendix Table A.3 reports the treatment compliance in each year of the intervention (2014 and 2015).
More messages were sent in 2015, when the intervention was implemented for a full school year, than in
2014 when the intervention was implemented during the second half of the school year. Appendix Table A.4
presents the compliance for the full sample.



                                                   16
receive text messages (see Appendix D.3 for further discussion).

                                Table 2: Compliance by type of text message

                                      All            Attendance           Behavior             Grades             General
                                       [1]                [2]                 [3]                 [4]                [5]

 Text messages sent               43.804***           29.876***           6.699***            7.298***             ­0.070
                                   [0.714]             [0.454]             [0.086]             [0.132]             [0.077]

 Text messages received           26.333***           17.651***           4.505***            4.334***             ­0.157
                                   [0.775]             [0.452]             [0.122]             [0.127]             [0.122]

 Observations                         2011               2011                2011               2011                2011

Note: "Text messages sent" refers to the cumulative number of text messages sent to student's parents. "Text messages
received" refers to the cumulative number of text messages with a confirmed delivery status. Columns [2]-[5] report the Ticjg
coefficient of equation (1) with the annual number of each type of text message as the dependent variable. Column [1] adds all
types of text messages. Attendance, grades, and classroom behavior text messages were sent only to the treatment group.
General text messages were sent to all treatment and control individuals. All models include the baseline math grade,
attendance rate as control variables, classroom (randomization strata), year and grade-level fixed effects. If baseline values of
baseline math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level mean and added an indicator
variable for these imputed observations. Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in brackets). * significant
at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




    Beyond the matter of whether parents received text messages that were sent, there is
also the question of whether the parents read the text of the messages that they received. In
the follow-up surveys we asked parents if they had received text messages with information
on their children school outcomes. We found that parents in the treatment group were more
likely to answer that they had received text messages regarding their child's attendance,
grades, and classroom behavior. Moreover, treated students were also aware that their
parents were receiving this information from the school.31 We take this as evidence that
parents in the treatment group read the text messages and, at the very least, discussed with
their children the fact that they were receiving such message.


6        Results
6.1       Main results: improved students' academic outcomes
Table 3 presents the main results of our paper. We show the estimates of the intention-to-
treat (ITT, equation 1) and average treatment effects among those who actually received
the text messages (ATT, equation 2) on our primary students' outcomes measured using
    31
    See Appendix Table A.5, which provides evidence of compliance with surveys for both parents and
students.


                                                                17
classroom books: math-grade outcomes at the end of each year (column 1), an indicator
for whether the annual math grade was a passing grade (above 4.0) (column 2), yearly
attendance rate (column 3) for each year, an indicator for whether attendance was above
the 85% cutoff required for the student to pass the grade (column 4), and standardized total
annual negative behavioral notes (column 5).32
    The ITT estimates show positive and significant effects on students' school performance.
Math grades improved by 0.081 of a standard deviation, and attendance improved by 1
percentage point.
    Given that the text message reception rate was imperfect, as reported in Table 2, the
ATT gives a more accurate picture of the impact of actual exposure to the text messages.
First, text messages received by parents significantly increased students' math grades by
more than 0.127 of a standard deviation. This positive impact on math grades pushed more
students over the 4.0 cutoff for passing the subject by increasing this probability by more
than 4 percentage points. Second, the information intervention also increased students'
annual attendance rate by 1.5 percentage points. The treatment led to a 7.2 percentage
point increase in the number of students who met the 85% attendance rate threshold needed
to pass the grade. Third, on average for all students, the treatment did not have an impact
on the occurrence of negative classroom behaviors. 33 , 34


6.2     Information benefited more at-risk students
Table 4 shows estimates for students with different pre-treatment risk of failing grades. To
estimate these effects, we interacted the at-risk index described in Section 4 with the ran-
domized treatment indicator variable (in equation 1, Panel A) or the share of text messages
that were received (in equation 2, Panel B). In the latter case, we used the interaction of the
random treatment assignment and the subgroup indicator variables as an instrument.
   32
       Appendix Table A.6 presents treatment effects on a set of outcomes measured with administrative data
from the Ministry of Education. Results are essentially the same. In addition we find positive treatment
effects on language (statistically significant at normal levels) and on science and history (although these are
not statistically significant).
    33
       Appendix Table A.7 presents results separately for each year of the intervention (2014 and 2015). While
the effects on math grades are larger in 2014, the impact on attendance rates appears to be stronger in the
the second year of the intervention. Although in neither case we can reject equality of the point estimates
across years.
    34
       As a robustness test, we present the results for the full sample (i.e., including students in grade 8 in
2014, and the school that dropped out of the program in 2015) (Panel A), and for the main sample but
without controls (Panel B) (see Appendix Table A.8). Furthermore, Table A.9 changes the econometric
specification by replacing strata fixed effects by school-grade fixed effects, and including baseline controls at
the classroom level. Results do not qualitatively change in any case. All coefficients' signs remain positive.
Even though many coefficients become statistically not significant at standard levels, we cannot reject the
null that they are equal to those reported in Table 3.


                                                       18
          Table 3: Treatment Effects on Grades, Attendance and Classroom Behavior

                      Math grade            Math grade            Attendance           Cumulative            # negative
                                              >4.0                   rate              attendance            beh. notes
                                                                                         >85%
                           [1]                   [2]                   [3]                   [4]                  [5]

 ITT                     0.081*               0.027**                0.009*               0.045*                 0.007
                         [0.044]              [0.013]                [0.005]              [0.024]               [0.075]

 ATT                     0.127*               0.042**                0.015*               0.072*                 0.011
                         [0.067]              [0.020]                [0.008]              [0.037]               [0.114]

 Observations             2011                  2011                  2011                 2011                  2011

Note: ITT refers to the intention-to-treat effects estimates shown on each column for each outcome. Coefficients of equation
(1) were estimated using OLS. ATT refers to the estimates of the average treatment effects on the treated shown on each
column for each outcome. Coefficients of equation (2) were estimated using IV where the share of topic-specific text messages
received over those sent was instrumented with the randomized assignment to treatment. All models include the baseline
math grade, attendance rate as control variables, classroom (randomization strata), year and grade-level fixed effects. If
baseline values of baseline math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level mean and added
an indicator variable for these imputed observations. Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in brackets).
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




    The intervention had the largest impacts on math grades, attendance and improvements
in behavior for students that were more at-risk before the intervention started. The treatment
effects almost double for students with an at-risk index one standard deviation larger than
the mean (which by construction of the index is zero for the control group). In Appendix
Table A.10 we show the treatment effect heterogeneity by each of the sub-components of the
index. A one-standard-deviation increase in baseline math grades significantly lowers the
effect of text messages on grades by 0.1 of a standard deviation.
    Figure 3 explores this result in more detail by plotting the linear prediction of the treat-
ment effects on monthly math grades (Panel A) and attendance rates (Panel B) along the
distribution of the respective standardized baseline variable. We find that effects are larger
and statically significant only for students with low baseline grades and attendance. Note
that these results are consistent with the treatment increasing the probability of students
achieving the attendance and math grades thresholds for passing the grade and subject.
Appendix Table A.10 also studies the heterogeneity by examining whether students received
a negative classroom behavioral note in the months before the intervention. The interven-
tion seems to have reduced the probability of having a negative behavioral note ­ but only
for those students who misbehaved at baseline. These results are important because, taken
together, they suggest that the intervention was effective precisely for the population of
students who have a higher probability of dropping out in later years.


                                                             19
                    Table 4: Heterogeneity of Treatment Effects by At-Risk Index

                              Math grade          Math grade           Attendance          Cumulative           # negative
                                                    >4.0                  rate             attendance           beh. notes
                                                                                             >85%
                                   [1]                  [2]                 [3]                  [4]                 [5]

 ITT
   T                             0.082*              0.025*               0.009*              0.045*              ­0.015
                                 [0.043]             [0.013]              [0.005]             [0.024]             [0.068]
    T x at-risk index            0.136*               0.027                0.012             0.076***            ­0.208**
                                 [0.070]             [0.019]              [0.007]             [0.028]             [0.093]

 ATT
   D                            0.135**              0.041**              0.015*              0.076**             ­0.034
                                [0.066]              [0.020]              [0.008]             [0.037]             [0.104]
    D x at-risk index           0.225**               0.045               0.020*             0.126***            ­0.339**
                                [0.112]              [0.031]              [0.012]             [0.045]             [0.143]

    Observations                  2011                2011                 2011                2011                 2011

Note: The at-risk index is a simple average of standardized baseline attendance, math grades and negative behavioral notes.
ITT refers to the intention-to-treat effects estimates shown on each column for each outcome. T refers to the randomized
treatment (equal to 1 if parents were sent text-messages and zero otherwise). Coefficients were estimated using OLS. ATT
refers to estimates of the average treatment effects on the treated shown on each column for each outcome. Coefficients were
estimated using IV where the share of topic-specific text messages received over those sent (D ) and its interaction with the
at-risk index variable were instrumented with the randomized assignment to treatment (T ) and its interaction with the same
variable, respectively. All models include the at-risk index variable as control, baseline math grade, attendance rate as control
variables, classroom (randomization strata), year and grade-level fixed effects. If baseline values of baseline math
grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level mean and added an indicator variable for these
imputed observations. Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in brackets). * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                  Figure 3: Predicted Treatment Effect by Baseline Characteristics
                   (a) Math score                                                     (b) Attendance rate




Note: Figure shows linear predictions and 95% confidence intervals of the ATT estimates on math grades and attendance rate.
Computed based on coefficients from columns [1] (interaction with math grade at baseline) and [3] (interaction with attendance
at baseline) of Table A.10, respectively.




                                                               20
6.3      Peer effects: classroom-level spillovers
If there are peer effects in the classroom, we would expect our treatment to affect the
outcomes of other children. For example, the value of skipping school may fall when friends
are no longer truant [Bennett and Bergman, 2021]. Or, if a student's friends are working
harder to improve their grades, that student's own effort to earn better grades may increase or
decrease (if, for instance, there are ranking concerns [Tincani, 2018]). To estimate the indirect
(peer) effects of the intervention from the spillovers associated with others being treated in
the same classroom, we exploit the randomization of the different shares of students who
were part of the treatment group in each classroom.

                                             Table 5: Spillover Effects

                                           Math grade       Math grade       Attendance      Cumulative       # negative
                                                              >4.0              rate         attendance       beh. notes
                                                                                               >85%
                                                [1]               [2]             [3]              [4]             [5]

 Panel A: Treatment Effects
  T                                            0.065            0.005           0.005            0.009           0.117
                                              [0.053]          [0.015]         [0.007]          [0.034]         [0.094]
    T x High-Share                             0.039           0.052*           0.010           0.088*          ­0.253*
                                              [0.092]          [0.027]         [0.010]          [0.047]         [0.151]

 Panel B: Students at-risk
  T                                            0.077           0.003            0.005            0.008            0.066
                                              [0.051]         [0.015]          [0.007]          [0.033]          [0.081]
    T x High-Share                             0.023          0.053**           0.009           0.087*           ­0.197
                                              [0.090]         [0.027]          [0.010]          [0.046]          [0.140]
    T x at-risk index                          0.018          0.033**           0.010           0.097**          ­0.155
                                              [0.064]         [0.016]          [0.011]          [0.038]          [0.139]
    T x High-Share x at-risk index            0.187*          ­0.009            0.003           ­0.035           ­0.082
                                              [0.104]         [0.024]          [0.011]          [0.037]          [0.176]

 Observations                                  2011             2011             2011            2011             2011

Note: Panel A shows intention-to-treat effects estimates from equation (3) shown on each column for each outcome.
Coefficients were estimated using OLS. T refers to the randomized individual-level treatment (equal to 1 if parents were sent
text messages and zero otherwise). High - Share refers to the randomized classroom-level treatment (equal to 1 for
high-share classrooms and zero for low-share classrooms). Panel B adds the interactions with the student-level at risk index.
At-risk index is a simple average of standardized baseline attendance, math grades and negative behavioral notes. All models
include the baseline math grade, attendance rate as control variables, classroom (randomization strata), year and grade-level
fixed effects. If baseline values of baseline math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level
mean and added an indicator variable for these imputed observations. Models in Panel B additionally include the at-risk
index variable as control. Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in brackets). * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




   Table 5 presents the results of the ITT spillovers for the same set of outcomes as in Table
3. Note that the interaction coefficient captures the differential effect of the spillovers by

                                                             21
comparing classrooms with high and low shares of treated students; in other words, it exam-
ines whether there is extra value evident in being in the text messaging program when many
more classmates are also in the program. Such spillovers could be important, especially if
such parent-school communication programs scale up to cover all enrolled students (rather
than just a randomly selected treatment group). In all cases, the differential effect of being
assigned to treatment in a high-share classroom improves educational outcomes of treated
students ­it is larger than the main effect of the treatment in low-share classrooms.35 , 36 This
suggests positive spillovers of the intervention among treated students. A greater presence of
treated peers in the classroom increases math grades and attendance and reduces misbehav-
ior. With a higher share of treated peers, students are significantly more likely to meet the
4.0 passing grade cutoff, to reach the 85% attendance cutoff, and significantly decrease the
number of negative notes. In some cases, however, because we split the sample to estimate
these effects, we lack statistical power to reject that the coefficients are equal.
    Panel B of Table 5 investigate if at-risk students benefit more from having a larger share of
peers receiving the text message intervention. Although results are less precise, we find that
positive impacts on math grade and the attendance rate as well as a reduction in negative
behavior among the more at-risk treated students with a higher share of treated peers in
their class (but these effects are not enough to differentially push these students above the
thresholds for passing to the next grade).
    The spillover results in Table 5 suggest that we would not expect any negative impacts of
scaling up this intervention to cover all students. If anything, we should expect even larger
impacts (and larger for students most at-risk) if everyone is treated.


6.4     Do parents forget about information in the text messages?
Parents who receive text messages might forget about the content of the messages after some
time, and this could affect their decisions about whether to allow their children to miss a day
of school. The majority of the weekly attendance text messages were sent on Mondays. We
use daily attendance data to explore whether the effectiveness of the SMS messages fades
within the week.37 Figure 4 depicts point estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals
for models similar to that of equation (2), which was modified to include an interaction
of the share of text messages received with days-of-the-week indicator variables. We find
that the positive effect on attendance fades out over the week. Attendance by students in
  35
      Appendix Table A.11 presents the ATT.
  36
      The null hypothesis that the treatment effect was zero in high-share classrooms is rejected at the 10%
level in columns 2,3 and 4.
   37
      After the first two months of the intervention, we started to systematically send all the text messages
on Mondays. For this part of the analysis, we restrict the sample to this period.


                                                     22
the treated group is significantly higher than attendance of students in the control group on
Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays; by contrast, attendance rates are of the two groups are
indistinguishable on Thursdays and Fridays.38 Rogers and Feller [2018] find similar results
with a larger impact in the week immediately following the delivery of the treatment. This
result has an important policy implication because it suggests that the treatment effect of
the text messages are somewhat short-lived and therefore information treatments should be
high frequency in order to be more effective.

                                           Figure 4: Weekly Fade-out




Note: Coefficients obtained from the ATT estimates of Appendix Table A.12. Standard errors clustered at the classroom level.
Confidence intervals are at the 90% level.




    A related concern is that parents could at some point stop paying attention to the con-
tent of the communication, or stop internalizing the information after having received such
messages over some period of time. Because our intervention lasted for one and a half school
years we can explore the treatment effects over the months of the intervention. We estimated
effects by month-groups through an instrumental variables model that interacts the share
of text messages received with a set of indicator variables that identify groups of months
since the beginning of the intervention. Panel A and Panel B of Figure 5 plot the estimates
and confidence intervals on the impact on monthly attendance and monthly math grades,
respectively.39
    We find that the impact on attendance is mainly concentrated in the last months of the
   38
      Appendix Table A.12 shows the estimated coefficients used to construct this figure. It also reports the
corresponding ITT estimates.
   39
      Columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table A.13 report the estimated coefficients used to construct this figure.
The table also presents the results over time for the rest of the monthly outcomes and the analogous ITT
estimates.


                                                            23
intervention, although we cannot reject the null that all coefficients are equal. In the case
of math grades, there is no clear pattern in the timing of the effect. This is consistent with
students/parents dynamically optimizing attendance behavior. The intervention could have
more of an impact on absenteeism than grades by the end of the year because that was when
parents/students started to realize that the absences had accumulated enough to matter.
From a policy perspective these results suggest that the effect of the intervention does not
fade out. Thus, this type of information intervention could be sustained over time in order
to increase its effectiveness.

               Figure 5: Treatment Effects on Grades and Attendance Over Time
            (a) Monthly Attendance                                           (b) Monthly Math Grade




Note: Coefficients are obtained from the ATT estimates (columns [1] and [3]) of Appendix Table A.13. Standard errors are
clustered at the classroom level. Confidence intervals are at the 90% level.




7      Why did academic outcomes improve?
We explore some of the underlying mechanisms that can explain why students' school per-
formance improved after their parents received text messages. We show that the treatment
was able to close existing parent-school information gaps about student performance. This
new information seemed to have changed the way parents provide support and supervise
their children at home.


7.1      Narrowed parent-school information gaps
We study whether the text messages reduced the prevailing parental information gaps re-
garding students' academic performance; to do this, we compare the accuracy of information
among parents in the treated and control groups. We construct different measures of the



                                                          24
accuracy of parent's beliefs regarding their child's school performance. Specifically, we con-
trast parents' responses with student surveys, classroom books, and school records. We
then estimate treatment effects using equation 1, in which the outcome variables are the
misinformation measures.
    Table 6 presents the ITT effects. Columns 1-2 measure parental misinformation regarding
a student's attendance. Surveys asked parents about their child's absences with and without
permission in the previous two weeks. We contrast parents' responses to students' own
responses on total absences (column 1) and to actual absences recorded in classroom books
(column 2). Columns 3-4 assess the effect of the intervention on parental information about
students' grades. Columns 5-6 capture parental misinformation about students' misbehavior.
In both cases we also contrast parents' responses with students' surveys responses (column
3 and 5) and with classroom books (column 4 and 6). In all cases, the outcome variable is
an indicator variable that is equal to one if the parent response does not match the student's
responses or school records.40 , 41
    Pane A of Table 6 shows that all point estimates are negative. That is, text messages
reduced information gaps about student attendance, grades and classroom behavior. Be-
cause our sample of parents who responded to the follow-up survey is relatively small, these
reductions in information gaps are not always precisely estimated; nevertheless, coefficients
are large and negative for all outcomes. The ITT estimates, for instance, show that text
messages significantly reduced the probability that parents misreported the number of their
child's absences; the likelihood of such misreporting fell by more than 7.5 percentage points,
in comparison to the results from student surveys. When we compare parents' beliefs with
classroom books, the results also show a decline in information gaps, but not to a degree
that is statistically significant.
    In addition, the information intervention seems to have improved the accuracy or parents'
knowledge of their child's grades. Although not statically significant at conventional levels,
coefficients are negative and stable across outcomes. We also find a significant improvement
in the precision of parents' assessment about their child's misbehavior at school. Overall,
these results suggest that treated parents had more accurate information about their child's
grades, attendance and classroom behavior after the treatment.42
    Panel B of Table 6 tests whether treatment effects vary for students with different base-
line values of the at-risk index. The intervention seems to have improved the accuracy of
  40
      When comparing with classroom books, we allowed for a "mistake" of 1 absence and 0.5 points in the
case of grades.
   41
      Table A.14 in Appendix A presents the results with the outcome at baseline as a control variable; the
results remain unchanged.
   42
      Appendix Table A.15 reports the ATT estimates.



                                                    25
parents' beliefs about their child's grades and behavior for students with a higher at-risk
index (although results are not statistically significant).
    We have also explored effects on parental misinformation on other subjects not specifically
targeted by the intervention. Again, we find negative coefficients, sometimes significant,
across subjects, regardless of whether we compare parent responses with school records or
with student surveys. This suggests that, in addition to reducing information gaps on the
specific topics on which parents received information, the text message intervention seems
to make parents pay more attention to how their children are doing in other (non-math)
subjects. Treated parents have a more precise idea of their child's relative ranking across
subjects (i.e., they show better knowledge of the subjects in which their child has her highest
or lowest score).43

                             Table 6: Treatment Effects on Parental Misinformation

                                      Attendance Misinformation              Grades Misinformation               Behavior Misinformation

                                         All                All            All grades         All grades       Misbehavior        Misbehavior
                                     absenteeism        absenteeism        (Surveys)          (Admin.)          (Surveys)          (Admin.)
                                      (Surveys)          (Admin.)
                                          [1]                [2]               [3]                [4]                [5]               [6]

  Panel A: Treatment Effects
    T                                  ­0.075*             ­0.016            ­0.010             ­0.025           ­0.079**           ­0.083**
                                       [0.039]             [0.040]           [0.046]            [0.036]           [0.034]            [0.038]

  Panel B: Heterogeneity
    T                                  ­0.078*             ­0.010            ­0.019             ­0.028           ­0.069**           ­0.087**
                                       [0.040]             [0.039]           [0.048]            [0.037]           [0.033]            [0.038]
     T x at-risk index                 ­0.005               0.047            ­0.101             ­0.028             0.087             ­0.048
                                       [0.066]             [0.046]           [0.061]            [0.045]           [0.056]            [0.055]

     Control mean                        0.535             0.392              0.398             0.319              0.639              0.470
     Observations                         992              1143                827              1185               1140               1188

Note: Panel A shows intention-to-treat effects estimates from equation (1) shown on each column for each parental misinformation outcome.
Coefficients were estimated using OLS. T refers to the randomized individual-level treatment (equal to 1 if parents were sent text messages and
zero otherwise). Panel B shows estimates of the heterogeneity treatment effects by adding the interaction with the baseline at-risk index. At-risk
index is a simple average of standardized baseline attendance, math grades and negative behavioral notes. All models include the baseline math
grade, attendance rate as control variables, classroom (randomization strata), year and grade-level fixed effects. If baseline values of baseline
math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level mean and added an indicator variable for these imputed
observations. Models in Panel B additionally include the at-risk index variable as control. Column outcomes are indicator variables constructed
by contrasting responses in parent surveys with those of student surveys or administrative records (shown in parentheses). Column [1] measures
parental misinformation in all absenteeism (with and without parent permission in the previous two weeks) contrasting the responses of parents
with those from students. Parents are classified as misinformed if they do not answer at least one of the questions, or if at least one of the
answers (in bracket days) provided by students and parents do not match. Column [2] measures misinformation in all absenteeism (with and
without permission) contrasting parent responses with classroom books. The ends of original bracket days in absences with and without
permission are added to construct new bracket days. Parents are classified as misinformed if they do not answer at least one of the questions, or
if classroom books' records of absences over the previous two weeks do not fall in the range. Column [3] contrasts parent and student responses
and parents are classified as misinformed if they do not answer, or if answered grades' brackets do not match. Column [4] measures parental
misinformation regarding all grades by contrasting parent responses about the student's last end-of-year grades with school records. Parents are
treated as misinformed if they do not answer, or if the absolute difference between answered and actual grades is greater than 0.5. Columns [5]
and [6] measure misinformation about student misbehavior by contrasting parent answers with student answers, and with information from
classroom books, respectively. Using a four-value scale, parents and students were asked about the degree of agreement with the student's
misbehavior statements. For column [5], parents are classified as misinformed if they do not answer at least one of the questions, or if the average
absolute difference between parent and student answers are larger than the median (0.8). For column [6] parents are treated as misinformed if
they do not answer; if the parent's average answer is equal to or larger than the median (2), and student did not misbehave according to
classroom books; or if the parent's average answer is less than the median answer and student misbehaved in class according to books. Standard
errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in brackets). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.



   43
        See Appendix Table A.16.


                                                                        26
7.2      Increased parental involvement at home
By providing parents with information, the intervention led students and parents to respond
with changes in behaviors at home ­ which, in turn, might then have resulted in better
outcomes at school. To examine this, we analyze the responses to survey questions that
were put to both parents (Panel A) and students (Panel B) in an identical manner. Columns
1 and 2 measure students' academic responses. Columns 3-6 looks at parents' behavioral
responses, in terms of providing family support, providing supervision, involving themselves
with school matters, and offering positive reinforcement.44

                      Table 7: Treatment Effects on Parental Behavior at Home

                           Study habits      Academic          Family        Low Family      Parent School      Positive
                                             efficiency        Support       Supervision      Involvement    reinforcement
                                [1]              [2]              [3]             [4]             [5]              [6]

 Panel A: Parent scales
   T                          ­0.094            0.081          ­0.001            0.021           0.031           ­0.049
                              [0.079]          [0.063]         [0.083]          [0.064]         [0.063]          [0.079]

   Observations                1042             1090              1108           1096            1116             1098

 Panel B: Student scales
   T                           0.053           ­0.001          0.116*           ­0.078          0.114**           0.017
                              [0.059]          [0.059]         [0.060]          [0.049]         [0.055]          [0.057]

   Observations                1726             1728              1686           1693            1700             1692


Note: Table shows intention-to-treat effects estimates from equation (1) shown on each column for each outcome. Coefficients
were estimated using OLS. T refers to the randomized individual-level treatment (equal to 1 if parents were sent
text-messages and zero otherwise). Outcomes are scales built with answers to surveys (see tables F.2 and F.3 for details).
Panel A shows results for scales built with answers parents gave to survey questions. Panel B shows results for scales built
with answers students gave to survey questions. All models include the baseline math grade, attendance rate and outcome
scales, classroom (randomization strata), year and grade-level fixed effects. If baseline values of baseline math
grade/attendance or baseline outcomes were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level mean and added an
indicator variable for these imputed observations. Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in brackets). *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




    We do not find a clear pattern nor statistically significant results for the information
provided by parents in terms of how the treatment affected their self-declared behaviors. By
contrast, however, treated students perceived that they received significantly more family
support as a result of the intervention (0.18 of a standard deviation). This scale incorporated
the students' answers to questions such as whether parents checked the child's homework, or
provided motivation to them, or talked to them when needed. Moreover, the treatment also
increased student's perception of their parents' level of school involvement. This perception
was reflected in students' answers to questions about whether their parents contacted the
   44
      See section F.1 in the data appendix for details on how the scales were built, as well as the psychometric
properties of each of them. Appendix Table A.17 reports the ATT estimates for these outcomes.


                                                             27
school director or teachers, or whether their parents attended school meetings. These results
are consistent with those from Bergman [2021] and Bergman and Chan [2019], who find that
the additional information provided to parents increased their contact with the school. 45


7.3     Parents valued the information
In our follow-up surveys, we asked both treatment and control parents to tell us whether
they would be willing to pay for a text message service that provided them with four monthly
messages from schools about their child's performance and behavior in school. We imple-
mented a survey experiment in which we randomized the price at which parents were given a
"take it or leave it" offer: a high price of 1,500 CLP (Chilean pesos, or 2.2 USD) per month,
a medium price of 1,000 CLP (or 1.5 USD) per month, or a low price of 500 CLP (0.74 USD)
per month.
    Parents seem to value the information provided in the text messages. On average, 62
percent of parents who received the message said that were willing to pay to continue with the
service. Table 8 uses this randomization and the survey responses from parents to estimate
demand curves for the complete sample (column 1) and the control group (column 2). In
column 3 we allow each experimental group to have a different response to the randomized
price by including price assignment by treatment assignment interaction terms. In column 4
we explore whether the valuation of the information is different for parents of students with
higher levels of risk of failing grades.
    Overall, the demand curve for a service like the one we offered in our intervention is
downward sloped. Column 1 shows that the share of parents willing to pay for the service
falls by almost 15 percentage points as the price increases from low to medium levels; demand
falls a further 24 percentage points when the price increases from medium to a high level.
These patterns are similar in the control group (column 2). We then analyze whether the
treatment induced parents to value the text messages program differently (column 3). We
do not find that treated parents value the information differently than control parents.
    It is likely, however, that not all families experienced the same "returns" to the text
messages program. For example, the value of such a service may be relatively low for
parents who have children who do well in school. In column 4 of Table 8, we present results
  45
     To further assess whether parenting styles were a constraint to improve students' outcomes, we im-
plemented a complementary randomized control trial to evaluate the effect of providing parents with tools
to relate to their children more positively. The intervention followed an established "positive parenting"
approach and was developed jointly with educational psychologists at Arizona State University. It was
delivered to parents using a set of videos. The estimated coefficients were, in general, positive and large.
However, we lack statistical power to reject the null of no differential treatment effect. Results are shown
and discussed in Appendix H.



                                                    28
                                     Table 8: Parental Willingness to Pay

                           Complete Sample            Control Group                   ITT                ITT (students
                                                                                                            at-risk)
                                    [1]                      [2]                       [3]                      [4]

 Medium Price                   ­0.151***                 ­0.058                    ­0.086                    0.010
                                 [0.043]                  [0.069]                   [0.063]                  [0.123]
 High Price                     ­0.238***                ­0.256***                 ­0.256***                ­0.273***
                                 [0.039]                  [0.064]                   [0.059]                  [0.099]
 T x Low Price                                                                       0.030                    0.049
                                                                                    [0.063]                  [0.096]
 T x Medium Price                                                                    ­0.094                   ­0.104
                                                                                    [0.060]                  [0.129]
 T x High Price                                                                       0.071                  0.245**
                                                                                    [0.069]                  [0.111]

 Observations                     1,124                      556                     1,124                      421

Note: Outcome is an indicator variable for whether the parent reports being willing to pay for continued text message service
(4 text messages per month from the school) after the end of the year. Columns [1] and [2] report estimates of being assigned
a particular randomized priced (1,500 CLP, 1,000 CLP or 500 CLP, the omitted category) for the complete sample (i.e., both
treatment and control groups) and the control-group sample, respectively. Column [3] shows intention-to-treat effects
estimates by interacting these randomized prices with the randomized treatment (equal to 1 if parents were sent text-messages
and zero otherwise). Column [4] shows the same intention-to-treat effects estimates but restricting the sample to those
students with high at-risk index (>mean). At-risk index is a simple average of standardized baseline attendance, math grades
and negative behavioral notes. Coefficients were estimated using OLS. All models include the baseline math grade, attendance
rate as control variables, classroom (randomization strata), year and grade-level fixed effects. If baseline values of baseline
math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level mean and added an indicator variable for
these imputed observations. Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in brackets). * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




that emerge when we restrict to the sample of parents whose children have an at-risk index
above the mean. At the highest price, parents in the treatment group ­who had already
experienced receiving the text messages for several months­ and whose children had not
been not as successful in school to begin with are significantly more likely to say they are
willing to pay the highest price for the continued service relative to control parents. At the
low and medium price levels, there are no statistical differences on the willingness to pay
between the treatment and control group. Figure 6 shows the proportion of parents who
are willing to pay a positive amount to receive information about their children who are at
different levels of risk (of failing classes). Among student at-risk, there are more parents who
are willing to pay for the text message service; especially among those who have experienced
the service before (i.e. those that were treated).




                                                             29
                      Figure 6: Share of parents willing to pay for text messages




                                                           1.0
                      Prop. of parents who reports WTP>0
                                                           0.8
                                                           0.6
                                                           0.4
                                                           0.2




                                                                 -2   -1   0              1         2    3
                                                                               At-risk index

                                                                           Treatment           Control


Note: Y-axis presents the (lowess-smoothed) share of parents who report willing to pay for continued text message service by
the at-risk index and treatment status. Based on parents follow-up surveys.




8      Cost-effectiveness
Our intervention led to 0.08-0.13 standard deviations gains in math grades and 1-1.5 per-
centage points increase in attendance, with larger effects for students at-risk. These effect
sizes are slightly smaller than those found in the rest of the literature. A recent literature
review (Escueta et al. [2020]) that focuses on technology in education in developed coun-
tries finds 13 experiments where information is sent to parents about student performance
(e.g., attendance, behavior, or grades) through text messages and emails. For example, in
Bergman [2021] parents receive automated texts about missing assignments and grades. In a
sample of 462 students in grades 6-11 in Los Angeles, he finds that the intervention decreases
missed assignments by 28% and leads to a gain of 0.21 standard deviations in mathematics
grades. We expect a smaller impact for our intervention, as in the US the GPA depends on
assignment submission, whereas in Chile the grades are based only on performance on class
exams.
    Regarding our intervention cost, as pointed out by Bergman and Chan [2019], these
types of interventions leveraging technology to bridge parent-school communications gaps
are characterized by low variable costs and a once in a life-time setup cost. In their study,
the variable cost per text message was negligible. The fixed setup cost included a per
student training cost of US$7 if schools did not already have an electronic gradebook. In


                                                                                30
our Chilean context, the initial fixed cost of setting up the digital platform was US$1.63 per
student.46 The cost of maintaining the digital platform that automated message sending was
US$0.77 per month per student. And the market value of sending text messages was US$0.05
per message, with 6 text messages sent per month during our intervention, for 10 months
in a school year. This results in a total variable cost per student of US$10.70 per year.
Therefore, the variable cost of a 0.01 standard deviation increase in math grade was US$1.18
per student per year at market prices (US$2 per year if we include the fixed setup cost for the
two year program: 0.5*US$1.63 + US$1.18).47 Our willingness to pay experiment suggested
that about 60 percent of parents were willing to pay US$0.75 per month (or more) for the
program, thus covering more than six times the monthly variable costs of the program.
    A program like Papas al Dia is cost-effective when compared to other interventions de-
signed to improve learning outcomes. Busso et al. [2017] provides information on 21 low-cost
interventions designated to improve student learning in primary schools. Strategies include
tracking, funding for materials, lesson plans, non-monetary incentives and guided technology.
The authors calculate the implementation cost of each intervention implemented in Colom-
bia. The average cost per student for a 0.01 standard deviation gain in learning is US$4.42,
and the median cost is US$2.00.48 Our intervention compares very favorably cost-wise to
these other approaches.


9        Conclusions
We present the results of a simple, effective, and low-cost intervention that uses existing data
regularly collected by schools to improve the accuracy and timeliness of information parents
have about their children' attendance, grades and classroom behavior.
   We show that sending weekly text messages with attendance information, and monthly
    46
      The setup cost for the platform was US$613.4 per school in our intervention. Considering the average
primary school size has 377 students, the cost per student is US$1.63.
   47
      The costs of putting the experiment into the field were higher. The text message cost per treated
child was US$6.5 per year. Once we included platform maintenance costs, a field team coordinator and web
domain costs, the total cost per student comes to US$27 per year.
   48
      Busso et al. [2017] also provides information for 52 evaluations designed to improve student learning
in secondary schools around the world. The strategies for which they find evidence of success include: (i)
monetary incentives to students, (ii) "no excuses" models, (iii) extended school day, and (iv) vouchers,
subsides or scholarships for students. The weighted average of the effect-sizes on test scores are respectively
0.16SD, 0.14SD, 0.08SD and 0.03SD. Although this study does not include intervention costs for these
alternative strategies, it is likely that our text message intervention used fewer resources than any of these
four programs, and therefore was cheaper on a per student basis. McEwan [2015] provides a meta-analysis of
randomized experiments of school-based interventions on learning in primary schools and finds 7 experiments
that involve informational treatments. The mean effect size of these interventions is 0.049 (p-value=0.240).
Andrabi et al. [2017] find that providing report cards to parents in Pakistan lead to a closing in informational
gaps and 0.11SD gain in student outcomes.


                                                      31
text messages with math grades and classroom behavior outcomes decreases the prevailing
information gap between what parents believe about their children's progress in school, and
what schools report is the case. As a result of this more timely and frequent information,
treated students report more family support (parents checked the child's homework, or pro-
vided motivation to them, or talked to them when needed) and more school involvement
by their parents (parents contacted the school director or teachers, or whether their parents
attended school meetings). We find that parents in both treated and control groups valued
receiving information via text message and were willing to pay for it, especially those par-
ents of initially low-achieving children. Treated parents of at-risk students had the highest
willingness to pay for the program.
    Providing parents with this information led to better students academic outcomes: (i)
The intervention led to an increase in math GPA of 0.09 of a standard deviation; (ii) the
probability of earning a passing grade in math increased by 2.7 percentage points (relative to
a mean of 90%); (iii) it reduced school absenteeism by 1 percentage point and (iv) increased
the share of students who satisfied the attendance requirements for grade promotion by
4.5 percentage points. These treatment effects are 60 percent larger when imperfect text
message reception is taken into account ­ that is, when one accounts for the effects solely
among students whose parents did, indeed, receive the texts. Moreover, we find that at-
risk students benefit the most from the intervention: these students exhibit even larger
gains in math and in attendance, and have a much lower chance of notable negative in-class
behavior. At a broad level, these findings suggest that efforts to reduce grade retention and
school dropout in later grades may be supported by early interventions like Papas al Dia
that have large benefits for those most at-risk of grade retention and dropout.
    Our results generate further important insights for policy design. We find evidence that
program effectiveness is higher when a larger share of parents receive the text messages.
These positive spillover effects among the treated suggest that our impact estimates are un-
derestimates of the effects of a scaled up version of this program, in which all students would
be treated. We also find that the timeliness of the information delivery matters: the positive
effect on attendance fades out over the week and that the intervention is effective throughout
the school year but is more effective to reduce school absenteeism when approaching the end
of the year. Taken together, these results suggests that the information treatments studied
in this paper should be high frequency and sustained over time in order to maximize their
effectiveness.




                                              32
References
Andrabi, T., Das, J. and Khwaja, A. I. [2017], `Report cards: The impact of providing school
 and child test scores on educational markets', American Economic Review 107(6), 1535­
 63.
 URL: https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20140774

Angrist, N., Bergman, P. and Matsheng, M. [2020], `School's out: Experimental evidence on
 limiting learning loss using "low-tech" in a pandemic', Available at SSRN 3735967 .

Avvisati, F., Gurgand, M., Guyon, N. and Maurin, E. [2014], `Getting parents involved: A
 field experiment in deprived schools', Review of Economic Studies 81(1), 57­83.

Banerji, R., Berry, J. and Shotland, M. [2017], `The impact of maternal literacy and partic-
  ipation programs: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in India', American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics 9(4), 303­37.
  URL: https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.20150390

Barrera-Osorio, F., Gonzalez, K., Lagos, F. and Deming, D. J. [2020], `Providing performance
  information in education: An experimental evaluation in Colombia', Journal of Public
  Economics 186, 104185.

Bassi, M., Busso, M. and Mu~  noz, J. S. [2015], `Enrollment, graduation, and dropout rates
  in Latin America: Is the glass half empty or half full?', Econom´ia pp. 113­156.

Bennett, M. and Bergman, P. [2021], `Better together? social networks in truancy and the
  targeting of treatment', Journal of Labor Economics 39(1), 1­36.

Bergman, P. [2021], `Parent-child information frictions and human capital investment: Evi-
  dence from a field experiment', Journal of Political Economy 129(1).

Bergman, P. and Chan, E. W. [2019], `Leveraging parents through low-cost technology:
  The impact of high-frequency information on student achievement', Journal of Human
  Resources pp. 1118­9837R1.

Bergman, P., Lasky-Fink, J. and Rogers, T. [2020], `Simplification and defaults affect adop-
  tion and impact of technology, but decision makers do not realize it', Organizational Be-
  havior and Human Decision Processes 158, 66­79.

Bettinger, E. P. [2012], `Paying to learn: The effect of financial incentives on elementary
  school test scores', Review of Economics and Statistics 94(3), 686­698.

Bettinger, E. P., Long, B. T., Oreopoulos, P. and Sanbonmatsu, L. [2012], `The role of
  application assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R block
  FAFSA experiment', The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3), 1205­1242.

Bursztyn, L. and Coffman, L. C. [2012], `The schooling decision: Family preferences, in-
  tergenerational conflict, and moral hazard in the Brazilian favelas', Journal of Political
  Economy 120(3), 359­397.

                                            33
Busso, M., Cristia, J., Hincapi´ e, D., Messina, J. and Ripani, L. [2017], Learning Better:
  Public policy for skills development, Inter-American Development Bank.

Castleman, B. L. and Page, L. C. [2015], `Summer nudging: Can personalized text messages
  and peer mentor outreach increase college going among low-income high school gradu-
  ates?', Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 115, 144­160.

De Walque, D. and Valente, C. [2018], Incentivizing school attendance in the presence of
  parent-child information frictions, The World Bank.

Dinkelman, T. and Mart´  inez A, C. [2014], `Investing in schooling in Chile: The role of
  information about financial aid for higher education', Review of Economics and Statistics
  96(2), 244­257.

Dizon-Ross, R. [2019], `Parents' beliefs about their children's academic ability: Implications
  for educational investments', American Economic Review 109(8), 2728­65.
  URL: https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20171172

Escueta, M., Nickow, A. J., Oreopoulos, P. and Quan, V. [2020], `Upgrading education
  with technology: Insights from experimental research', Journal of Economic Literature
  58(4), 897­996.
  URL: https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jel.20191507

Fryer Jr, R. G. [2016], `Information, non-financial incentives, and student achievement: Ev-
  idence from a text messaging experiment', Journal of Public Economics 144, 109­121.

Gallego, F. A., Malamud, O. and Pop-Eleches, C. [2020], `Parental monitoring and children's
 internet use: The role of information, control, and cues', Journal of Public Economics
 188, 104208.

Jensen, R. [2010], `The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling',
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(2), 515­548.
  URL: https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2010.125.2.515

Kraft, M. A. and Dougherty, S. M. [2013], `The effect of teacher­family communication on
  student engagement: Evidence from a randomized field experiment', Journal of Research
  on Educational Effectiveness 6(3), 199­222.

Kraft, M. A. and Rogers, T. [2015], `The underutilized potential of teacher-to-parent com-
  munication: Evidence from a field experiment', Economics of Education Review 47, 49­63.

Kremer, M., Miguel, E. and Thornton, R. [2009], `Incentives to learn', The Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics 91(3), 437­456.

Lim, M., Tormshak, E. A. S. and Dishion, T. J. [2005], `A one-session intervention for parents
  of young adolescents: Videotape modeling and motivational group discussion', Journal of
  Emotional and Behavioral Disorders 13(4), 194­199.



                                             34
Manacorda, M. [2012], `The cost of grade retention', The Review of Economics and Statistics
 94(2), 596­606.

McEwan, P. J. [2015], `Improving learning in primary schools of developing countries: A
 meta-analysis of randomized experiments', Review of Educational Research 85(3), 353­
 394.

Nguyen, T. [2008], `Information, role models and perceived returns to education: Experi-
  mental evidence from Madagascar', unpublished .

Oreopoulos, P. and Dunn, R. [2013], `Information and college access: Evidence from a ran-
  domized field experiment', The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 115(1), 3­26.
  URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-9442.2012.01742.x

Rogers, T. and Feller, A. [2018], `Reducing student absences at scale by targeting parents'
  misbeliefs', Nature Human Behaviour 2(5), 335­342.

Tincani, M. M. [2018], Heterogeneous peer effects in the classroom, Technical report, Work-
  ing Paper.

UNFPA and ECLAC [2011], Regional population report in Latin America and the Caribbean
 2011: Investing in youth.

Wedenoja, L. [2017], `The dynamics of high school dropout', unpublished .
 URL: https://sites.google.com/site/leighwedenoja/research

York, B. N., Loeb, S. and Doss, C. [2019], `One step at a time: The effects of an early
  literacy text-messaging program for parents of preschoolers', Journal of Human Resources
  54(3), 537­566.




                                            35
A        Online Appendix: Tables

       Table A.1: Students and parents pre-treatment characteristics in the Full-Sample

                                                             Obs.        Treatment       Control      p-value of
                                                                           Mean           Mean         adj. dif.
                                                              [1]            [2]           [3]            [4]

              Panel A: Administrative records
                Female                                       1447           0.45           0.46          0.79
                Age                                          1447          10.37          10.34          0.40
                New student                                  1447           0.07           0.07          0.50
                Language grade                               1334          5.08           5.01           0.54
                Math grade                                   1334           5.12           5.13          0.64
                Final avg. grade                             1334           5.51           5.50          0.53
                Attendance rate                              1334           0.89           0.89          0.60
                Passed grade                                 1388           0.96           0.96          0.51
                Missing grades/attendance/pass data          1447          0.08           0.08           0.49
                At-risk index                                1447           0.04           0.00          0.35

              Panel B: Parents' Survey Data
                Study habits                                  936          ­0.05           0.00          0.58
                Academic efficiency                           974          ­0.06           0.00          0.22
                Family Support                               985           ­0.11           0.00          0.04
                Low Family Supervision                        944          ­0.04           0.00          0.74
                Parent School Involvement                    951           ­0.09           0.00          0.69
                Positive reinforcement                       982           ­0.06           0.00          0.20
                Parents completed high school                1029           0.70           0.68          0.84

              Panel C: Students' Survey Data
                Study habits                                 1241          ­0.10           0.00          0.82
                Academic efficiency                          1257          ­0.03           0.00          0.87
                Family Support                               1197          ­0.07           0.00          0.42
                Low Family Supervision                       1193           0.04           0.00          0.44
                Parent School Involvement                    1194          ­0.10           0.00          0.90
                Positive reinforcement                       1200           0.02           0.00          0.43


Note: Column [1] shows the number of observations with non-missing data in the full sample, columns [2] and [3] the mean
value of each baseline characteristic in the treated and control group, respectively. Column [4] reports the p-value on the
treatment coefficient in a regression using each baseline characteristic as the dependent variable. All regressions include
classroom fixed effects and robust standard errors are clustered at this level. Observable variables in Panel A correspond to
2013 except for new student variable that refers to 2014.




                                                              36
Table A.2: Students and parents pre-treatment characteristics (including High-Share class)

                                                  Obs.          Treatment         Control         T p-value       T × HIGH
                                                                  Mean             Mean                            p-value
                                                   [1]              [2]             [3]              [4]              [5]

 Panel A: Administrative records
   Female                                         1066             0.45             0.47            0.26             0.27
   Age                                            1066             9.81            9.79             0.41             0.86
   New student                                    1066             0.08             0.07            0.48             0.82
   Language grade                                  976             5.10             5.07            0.20             0.09
   Math grade                                      976             5.14             5.19            0.85             0.45
   Final avg. grade                                976             5.57            5.59             0.23             0.43
   Attendance rate                                 976             0.89             0.89            0.37             0.02
   Passed grade                                   1018             0.95             0.96            0.57             0.82
   Missing grades/attendance/pass data            1066             0.09            0.08             0.41             0.75
   At-risk index                                  1066             0.04            ­0.01            0.11             0.14

 Panel B: Parents' Survey Data
   Study habits                                   704              ­0.07            0.00            0.65             0.94
   Academic efficiency                            730              ­0.09            0.00            0.25             0.79
   Family Support                                 739              ­0.12            0.00            0.13             0.73
   Low Family Supervision                         709              ­0.06            0.00            0.61             0.25
   Parent School Involvement                      716              ­0.01            0.00            0.31             0.04
   Positive reinforcement                         738              ­0.06            0.00            0.38             0.87
   Parents completed high school                  775               0.71            0.68            0.49             0.46

 Panel C: Students' Survey Data
   Study habits                                   909              ­0.19            0.00            0.03             0.35
   Academic efficiency                            915              ­0.14            0.00            0.24             0.84
   Family Support                                 864              ­0.15            0.00            0.00             0.02
   Low Family Supervision                         859               0.05            0.00            0.48             0.71
   Parent School Involvement                      858              ­0.12            0.00            0.00             0.00
   Positive reinforcement                         868              ­0.04            0.00            0.74             0.72


Note: Note: Column [1] shows the number of observations with non-missing data, columns [2] and [3] the mean value of each
baseline characteristic in the treated and control group, respectively. Columns [4] and [5] report p-values on the treatment
coefficient and on the interaction between treatment and high-share classrooms in regressions using each baseline
characteristic as the dependent variable. All regressions include classroom fixed effects and robust standard errors are
clustered at this level. Observable variables in Panel A correspond to 2013 except for new student variable that refers to 2014.




                                                              37
                       Table A.3: Compliance by Year and type of text message

                                       All               Attendance       Behavior               Grades               General
                                       [1]                  [2]              [3]                   [4]                  [5]

 Panel A: 2014
   Text messages sent              29.777***             21.216***        4.545***               4.023***             ­0.007
                                    [0.305]               [0.219]          [0.066]                [0.041]             [0.022]

    Text messages received         19.843***             14.124***        3.097***               2.719***             ­0.097
                                    [0.570]               [0.364]          [0.101]                [0.081]             [0.068]

    Observations                     1438                   1438            1438                  1438                 1438

 Panel B: 2015
   Text messages sent              60.225***             40.009***        9.242***           11.068***                ­0.094
                                    [1.332]               [0.864]          [0.156]            [0.252]                 [0.155]

    Text messages received         33.797***             21.660***        6.182***               6.204***             ­0.249
                                    [1.265]               [0.712]          [0.203]                [0.206]             [0.245]

    Observations                     1006                   1006            1006                  1006                 1006


Note:Panel A uses the 2014 data of the intervention. Panel B uses the 2015 data of the intervention. Text messages sent refers
to the cumulative number of text messages sent to student's parents in the full sample. Text messages received refers to the
cumulative number of text messages with a confirmed delivery status. Columns [2]-[5] report the Ticjg coefficient of equation
(1) with the annual number of each type of text message as the dependent variable. Column [1] adds all types of text
messages. Attendance, grades, and classroom behavior text messages were sent only to the treatment group. General text
messages were sent to all treatment and control individuals. All models include the baseline math grade and attendance rate
as control variables and grade dummies. If baseline values are missing, we impute them using the classroom-level mean and
flag these observations in the regression. Regressions additionally include year and classroom fixed effects and robust standard
errors are clustered at the classroom level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%."




                 Table A.4: Compliance in the Full-Sample by type of text message

                                                All        Attendance   Behavior        Grades              General
                                                [1]               [2]       [3]            [4]                [5]

              Text messages sent             41.999***      28.775***   6.436***        6.855***            ­0.067
                                              [0.731]        [0.457]     [0.098]         [0.152]            [0.065]

              Text messages received         25.450***      17.156***   4.340***        4.124***            ­0.171*
                                              [0.722]        [0.425]     [0.119]         [0.125]            [0.103]

              Observations                     2444           2444        2444            2444               2444


Note: Text messages sent refers to the cumulative number of text messages sent to student's parents in the full sample. Text
messages received refers to the cumulative number of text messages with a confirmed delivery status. Columns [2]-[5] report
the Ticjg coefficient of equation (1) with the annual number of each type of text message as the dependent variable. Column
[1] adds all types of text messages. Attendance, grades, and classroom behavior text messages were sent only to the treatment
group. General text messages were sent to all treatment and control individuals. All models include the baseline math grade
and attendance rate as control variables and grade dummies. If baseline values are missing, we impute them using the
classroom-level mean and flag these observations in the regression. Regressions additionally include year and classroom fixed
effects and robust standard errors are clustered at the classroom level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%.




                                                                   38
                 Table A.5: Compliance with Surveys Data by type of text message

                                            All             Attendance            Behavior             Grades
                                            [1]                  [2]                 [3]                  [4]

              Panel A: Parents
                Treatment                0.235***            0.559***             0.533***             0.503***
                                          [0.043]             [0.048]              [0.044]              [0.044]

                 Observations               555                 565                  561                 567

              Panel B: Students
                Treatment                0.173***            0.131***             0.096***             0.163***
                                          [0.039]             [0.032]              [0.026]              [0.037]

                 Observations               838                 838                  838                 838


Note: Columns [1]-[4] report the treatment coefficient in a regression using each column parent's and student's self-declared
text messages' reception as the dependent variable. Panel A uses parents' surveys data. Parents answer on a four-value scale
the frequency in which they have received each type of text message ("never or almost never" to "always or almost always").
Outcomes are indicator variables equal to one if parent answer values 2,3 and 4 and zero otherwise. Panel B uses students'
surveys data. Students indicate yes/no about whether their parents received each type of text message (indicator variable
equals one for yes answer). Column [1] outcome equals one if at least one of the attendance, Grades and Behavior SMS
outcomes equals one. Data comes from Endline 2015 surveys. All regressions include baseline controls and classroom
fixed-effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the classroom level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant
at 1%.




                                                               39
                                  Table A.6: Treatment Effects on Grades, Attendance and Behavior: School Records

                                                 Math          Math        Attendance   Cumulative     Language       Natural       History       Pass
                                                 grade         grade          rate        atten-         grade        science        grade        grade
                                                               >4.0                       dance                        grade
                                                                                          >85%
                                                   [1]           [2]           [3]           [4]          [5]           [6]           [7]           [8]

                               ITT               0.083*        0.019*         0.006        0.023        0.102*         0.051         0.090         0.016
                                                 [0.044]       [0.011]       [0.004]      [0.021]       [0.059]       [0.044]       [0.057]       [0.010]

                               ATT               0.130*        0.030*         0.009        0.036        0.157*         0.078         0.139         0.024
                                                 [0.068]       [0.018]       [0.006]      [0.032]       [0.087]       [0.066]       [0.086]       [0.016]

                               Observations       2011          2011          2011         2011          1946          1916          1916          2011


     Note: Table shows treatment effects estimates on outcomes coming from school administrative records. ITT refers to the intention-to-treat effects estimates shown on each
     column for each outcome. Coefficients of equation (1) were estimated using OLS. ATT refers to the estimates of the average treatment effects on the treated shown on each
     column for each outcome. Coefficients of equation (2) were estimated using IV where the share of topic-specific text messages received over those sent was instrumented with
     the randomized assignment to treatment. All models include the baseline math grade, attendance rate as control variables, classroom (randomization strata), year and
     grade-level fixed effects. If baseline values of baseline math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level mean and added an indicator variable
     for these imputed observations. Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in parentheses). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




40
           Table A.7: Treatment Effects by Year on Grades, Attendance and Behavior

                        Math grade         Math grade >4.0       Attendance rate         Cumulative          # negative beh.
                                                                                      attendance >85%            notes
                             [1]                  [2]                   [3]                   [4]                  [5]

 Panel A: 2014
   ITT                    0.126**              0.049***               0.009*                 0.034               ­0.045
                          [0.050]               [0.015]               [0.005]               [0.028]              [0.091]

    ATT                  0.186***              0.072***              0.014**                 0.050               ­0.068
                          [0.072]               [0.021]              [0.007]                [0.039]              [0.132]

    Observations            1063                 1063                  1063                  1063                 1063

 Panel B: 2015
   ITT                      0.043                0.004                 0.013                0.065*                0.066
                           [0.064]              [0.021]               [0.008]               [0.033]              [0.076]

    ATT                     0.072                0.006                0.022*               0.111**                0.107
                           [0.103]              [0.033]               [0.013]              [0.054]               [0.119]

    Observations            948                   948                   948                  948                   948


Note: Panel A uses information of the frist year of the intervention (2014). Panel B uses information of the second year of the
intervention (2015). ITT refers to the intention-to-treat effects estimates shown on each column for each outcome. Coefficients
of equation (1) were estimated using OLS. ATT refers to the estimates of the average treatment effects on the treated shown
on each column for each outcome. Coefficients of equation (2) were estimated using IV where the share of topic-specific text
messages received over those sent was instrumented with the randomized assignment to treatment. All models include the
baseline math grade, attendance rate as control variables, classroom (randomization strata), year and grade-level fixed effects.
If baseline values of baseline math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level mean and
added an indicator variable for these imputed observations. Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in
parentheses). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                              41
        Table A.8: Treatment Effects on Grades, Attendance and Behavior: Robustness

                                               Math grade       Math grade        Attendance          Cumulative       # negative
                                                                  >4.0               rate             attendance       beh. notes
                                                                                                         >85%
                                                       [1]           [2]              [3]                 [4]                 [5]

 Panel A: Full-Sample with Controls
   ITT                                             0.060            0.018            0.006              0.041*            0.001
                                                  [0.042]          [0.013]          [0.005]             [0.022]          [0.063]

    ATT                                            0.094            0.028            0.009              0.066**           0.002
                                                  [0.064]          [0.020]          [0.008]             [0.033]          [0.095]

    Observations                                   2444             2444             2444                2444             2444


 Panel B: Main Sample with No Controls
   ITT                                             0.032           0.023*           0.012*              0.054**           0.021
                                                  [0.055]          [0.013]          [0.006]             [0.027]          [0.073]

    ATT                                            0.050           0.036*          0.020**              0.086**           0.033
                                                  [0.084]          [0.020]         [0.010]              [0.042]          [0.111]

    Observations                                   2011             2011             2011                2011             2011


Note: ITT refers to the intention-to-treat effects estimates shown on each column for each outcome. Coefficients of equation
(1) were estimated using OLS. ATT refers to the estimates of the average treatment effects on the treated shown on each
column for each outcome. Coefficients of equation (2) were estimated using IV where the share of topic-specific text messages
received over those sent was instrumented with the randomized assignment to treatment. Panel A uses the full sample (i.e.
includes grade 8 in 2014 and the dropped school). Models include the baseline math grade, attendance rate as control
variables, classroom (randomization strata), year and grade-level fixed effects. If baseline values of baseline math
grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level mean and added an indicator variable for these
imputed observations. Panel B uses the main sample. Models only include classroom (randomization strata) and year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in parentheses). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
*** significant at 1%.




Table A.9: Treatment Effects on Grades, Attendance and Behavior: School-Grade FE Spec-
ification

                     Math grade          Math grade >4.0        Attendance rate          Cumulative               # negative beh.
                                                                                      attendance >85%                 notes
                          [1]                    [2]                   [3]                      [4]                     [5]

 ITT                     0.068                0.021*                  0.006                    0.030                   0.037
                        [0.045]               [0.011]                [0.004]                  [0.023]                 [0.072]

 ATT                     0.107                0.033**                0.009*                    0.048                   0.058
                        [0.070]               [0.016]                [0.006]                  [0.035]                 [0.110]

 Observations            2011                  2011                   2011                     2011                    2011


Note: ITT refers to the intention-to-treat effects estimates shown on each column for each outcome. ATT refers to the
estimates of the average treatment effects on the treated shown on each column for each outcome. Equations (1) and (2) are
modified to include baseline math grade and attendance rate class-level averages as controls and shcool-grade fixed effects
instead of classroom fixed effects. Additionally, models include the baseline math grade, attendance rate as control variables,
year and grade-level fixed effects. If baseline values of baseline math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them using
the classroom-level mean and added an indicator variable for these imputed observations. Standard errors are clustered at the
school-grade level (shown in parentheses). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                              42
               Table A.10: Treatment Effects Heterogeneity: At-risk index components

                              Math grade           Math grade >4.0         Attendance rate           Cumulative            # negative beh.
                                                                                                  attendance >85%              notes
                                   [1]                     [2]                     [3]                     [4]                    [5]

 ITT
   T                             0.079*                 0.026**                 0.009*                  0.045*                   0.011
                                 [0.044]                [0.013]                 [0.005]                 [0.024]                 [0.075]
     T x math grade              ­0.078                 ­0.014                  ­0.005                  ­0.030                   0.031
                                 [0.048]                [0.013]                 [0.004]                 [0.020]                 [0.045]

     T                           0.081*                  0.026*                 0.009*                  0.046*                   0.013
                                 [0.045]                 [0.013]                [0.005]                 [0.024]                 [0.076]
     T x attendance              ­0.062                  ­0.015                 ­0.008                 ­0.046**                  0.037
                                 [0.057]                 [0.013]                [0.006]                 [0.020]                 [0.049]

     T                           0.083*                  0.026*                 0.009*                  0.046*                  ­0.009
                                 [0.043]                 [0.013]                [0.005]                 [0.025]                 [0.067]
     T x behavior                 0.030                   0.005                  0.003                   0.020                 ­0.169**
                                 [0.027]                 [0.009]                [0.004]                 [0.018]                 [0.068]

 ATT
   D                             0.127*                 0.041**                 0.015*                  0.072**                  0.017
                                [0.068]                 [0.020]                 [0.008]                 [0.037]                 [0.115]
     D x math grade             ­0.122*                  ­0.022                 ­0.008                   ­0.048                  0.048
                                [0.074]                 [0.019]                 [0.007]                 [0.030]                 [0.068]

     D                           0.132*                 0.041**                 0.016**                0.077**                   0.017
                                 [0.069]                [0.020]                 [0.008]                 [0.038]                 [0.115]
     D x attendance              ­0.102                 ­0.025                   ­0.013                ­0.073**                  0.056
                                 [0.089]                [0.021]                 [0.009]                 [0.029]                 [0.072]

     D                          0.130**                 0.041**                 0.015*                  0.073*                 ­0.021
                                [0.066]                 [0.020]                 [0.008]                 [0.038]                [0.101]
     D x behavior                0.052                   0.008                   0.005                   0.036                ­0.303***
                                [0.044]                 [0.016]                 [0.006]                 [0.031]                [0.110]

     Observations                 2011                    2011                    2011                   2011                    2011


Note: Table shows treatment effects heterogeneity estimates by each of the at-risk index components (standardized baseline attendance, math
grades and negative behavioral notes). ITT refers to the intention-to-treat effects estimates shown on each column for each outcome. T refers to
the randomized treatment (equal to 1 if parents were sent text-messages and zero otherwise). Coefficients were estimated using OLS. ATT refers
to the estimates of the average treatment effects on the treated shown on each column for each outcome. Coefficients were estimated using IV
where the share of topic-specific text messages received over those sent (D) and its interaction with the baseline standardized variable were
instrumented with the randomized assignment to treatment (T) and its interaction with the same variable, respectively. All models include the
heterogeneity variable as control, always baseline math grade, attendance rate as control variables, classroom (randomization strata), year and
grade-level fixed effects. If baseline values of baseline math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level mean and
added an indicator variable for these imputed observations. Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in parentheses). *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                      43
                                      Table A.11: Spillover Effects (ATT)

                                        Math grade        Math grade        Attendance        Cumulative         # negative
                                                            >4.0               rate           attendance         beh. notes
                                                                                                 >85%
                                            [1]                [2]               [3]               [4]               [5]

 Panel A: Treatment Effects
   D                                       0.055            ­0.050             ­0.003            ­0.078            0.441*
                                          [0.160]           [0.047]            [0.019]           [0.091]           [0.268]
   D x High-Share                          0.227            0.288*              0.053            0.458*            ­1.368
                                          [0.500]           [0.151]            [0.052]           [0.234]           [0.833]

 Panel B: Students at-risk
   D                                       0.079            ­0.052             ­0.001            ­0.068             0.301
                                          [0.156]           [0.046]            [0.018]          [0.090]            [0.242]
   D x High-Share                          0.204            0.291*              0.050           0.436*             ­1.088
                                          [0.505]           [0.151]            [0.050]          [0.228]            [0.782]
   D x at-risk index                      ­0.148             0.064              0.014           0.201**            ­0.155
                                          [0.184]           [0.042]            [0.028]          [0.102]            [0.366]
   D x High-Share x at-risk index         1.001*            ­0.046              0.017            ­0.189            ­0.504
                                          [0.580]           [0.135]            [0.057]          [0.212]            [0.913]

 Observations                              2011              2011               2011              2011              2011


Note: Panel A shows estimates of the average treatment effects on the treated shown on each column for each outcome.
Coefficients were estimated using IV where the share of topic-specific text messages received over those sent (D) and its
interaction the classroom-level true share of consenters that received more than 50% of the text messages were instrumented
with the randomized assignment to treatment (T) and its interaction with the random high-share classroom assignment.
Panel B adds the interactions with the student-level at risk index. At-risk index is a simple average of standardized baseline
attendance, math grades and negative behavioral notes. These variables are instrumented analogously. All models include the
baseline math grade, attendance rate as control variables, classroom (randomization strata), year and grade-level fixed effects.
If baseline values of baseline math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level mean and
added an indicator variable for these imputed observations. Models in Panel B additionally include the at-risk index variable
as control. Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in parentheses). * significant at 10%; ** significant at
5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                              44
                 Table A.12: Treatment Effects Over the Week (Weekly Fade Out)

                                                    Daily Attendance       Daily Attendance
                                                          (ITT)                 (ATT)
                                                            [1]                   [2]

                                 T x Monday               0.013*                0.022*
                                                          [0.007]               [0.012]
                                 T x Tuesday              0.016**               0.026**
                                                          [0.006]               [0.011]
                                 T x Wednesday            0.012*                 0.021*
                                                          [0.007]               [0.012]
                                 T x Thursday              0.004                  0.007
                                                          [0.006]               [0.010]
                                 T x Friday                0.004                 0.007
                                                          [0.007]               [0.012]

                                 Observations             222827                222827


Note: Attendance outcome is measured at a daily basis. ITT refers to the intention-to-treat effects estimates. T refers to the
randomized treatment (equal to 1 if parents were sent text-messages and zero otherwise) and is interacted with each
day-of-the-week indicator variables. Coefficients were estimated using OLS. ATT refers to the estimates of the average
treatment effects on the treated. Coefficients were estimated using IV where the share of topic-specific text messages received
over those sent (D) and its interaction with each day-of-the-week indicator variables were instrumented with the randomized
assignment to treatment (T) and its interaction with the same variables, respectively. All models include the day-of-the-week
indicator variables as controls, baseline math grade, attendance rate as control variables, classroom (randomization strata),
month, year and grade-level fixed effects. If baseline values of baseline math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them
using the classroom-level mean and added an indicator variable for these imputed observations. Standard errors are clustered
at the classroom level (shown in parentheses). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                             45
                                 Table A.13: Treatment Effects Over Time

                                               Math grade           Attendance rate       Negative beh. note
                                                   [1]                     [2]                    [3]

             ITT     T x months 1­3               0.111*                  0.007                 ­0.015
                                                 [0.057]                 [0.006]                [0.075]
                     T x months 4­6                0.048                  0.007                 ­0.026
                                                 [0.054]                 [0.007]                [0.045]
                     T x months 7­9                0.069                  0.003                  0.051
                                                 [0.071]                 [0.007]                [0.077]
                     T x months 10­12            0.109**                 0.014*                  0.045
                                                 [0.054]                 [0.008]                [0.051]
                     T x months 13­17              0.054                 0.016*                  0.015
                                                 [0.050]                 [0.009]                [0.054]

             ATT     D x months 1­3               0.167*                  0.010                 ­0.023
                                                 [0.086]                 [0.010]                [0.113]
                     D x months 4­6               0.072                   0.011                 ­0.040
                                                 [0.080]                 [0.010]                [0.067]
                     D x months 7­9               0.112                   0.004                  0.082
                                                 [0.113]                 [0.011]                [0.123]
                     D x months 10­12            0.182**                 0.024*                  0.072
                                                 [0.091]                 [0.014]                [0.081]
                     D x months 13­17             0.087                  0.027*                  0.024
                                                 [0.081]                 [0.016]                [0.086]

                     Observations                10,391                  15,912                 15,214


Note: Outcomes are measured at a monthly basis. ITT refers to the intention-to-treat effects estimates shown on each column
for each outcome. T refers to the randomized treatment (equal to 1 if parents were sent text-messages and zero otherwise)
and is interacted with each group-of-months indicator variables. Coefficients were estimated using OLS. ATT refers to the
estimates of the average treatment effects on the treated shown on each column for each outcome. Coefficients were estimated
using IV where the share of topic-specific text messages received over those sent (D) and its interaction with each
group-of-months indicator variables were instrumented with the randomized assignment to treatment (T) and its interaction
with the same variables, respectively. All models include the group-of-months indicator variables as controls, baseline math
grade, attendance rate as control variables, classroom (randomization strata), month, year and grade-level fixed effects. If
baseline values of baseline math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level mean and added
an indicator variable for these imputed observations. Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in
parentheses). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                            46
Table A.14: Treatment Effects on Parental Misinformation (Baseline Outcome as Control)

                                    Attendance Misinformation               Grades Misinformation              Behavior
                                                                                                            Misinformation
                                All absenteeism    All absenteeism       All grades         All grades       Misbehavior
                                   (Surveys)          (Admin.)           (Surveys)          (Admin.)          (Surveys)
                                       [1]                [2]                [3]                [4]                [5]

 Panel A: Treatment Effects
   T                                ­0.069*             ­0.016             ­0.014             ­0.024            ­0.084**
                                    [0.039]             [0.039]            [0.044]            [0.035]            [0.036]

    D                               ­0.101*             ­0.024             ­0.020             ­0.035            ­0.123**
                                    [0.055]             [0.056]            [0.061]            [0.050]            [0.050]

 Panel B: Heterogeneity
   T                                ­0.070*             ­0.010             ­0.024             ­0.027            ­0.075**
                                    [0.039]             [0.039]           [0.047]             [0.037]            [0.034]
    T x at-risk index                0.002               0.050            ­0.109*             ­0.033             0.091*
                                    [0.063]             [0.045]           [0.059]             [0.046]            [0.055]

    D                               ­0.103*             ­0.014            ­0.042              ­0.040            ­0.106**
                                    [0.056]             [0.055]           [0.067]             [0.053]            [0.050]
    D x at-risk index                0.005               0.075            ­0.167*             ­0.048             0.139*
                                    [0.088]             [0.065]           [0.087]             [0.065]            [0.078]

    Control mean                     0.535              0.392              0.398              0.319              0.639
    Observations                      992               1143                827               1185               1140


Note: Panel A shows intention-to-treat effects estimates (T) and estimates of the average treatment effects on the treated (D)
on each column for each parental misinformation outcome. Panel B shows treatment effects heterogeneity. See Tables 6 and
A.15 for details on the estimation and outcomes. All models additionally include the outcome in the baseline survey as a
control. If missing, we impute the mean and flag the observation in the regression. Misbehavior misinformation contrasted to
classroom books (column [6] in Table 6) is not available because baseline outcome can not be computed with available data.
Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in parentheses). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%.




                                                                47
                    Table A.15: Treatment Effects on Parental Misinformation (ATT)

                                       Attendance Misinformation               Grades Misinformation               Behavior Misinformation


                                          All                All             All grades         All grades       Misbehavior        Misbehavior
                                      absenteeism        absenteeism         (Surveys)          (Admin.)          (Surveys)          (Admin.)
                                       (Surveys)          (Admin.)
                                            [1]                [2]               [3]                [4]                [5]                [6]

 Panel A: Treatment Effects
   D                                    ­0.111**            ­0.023             ­0.014             ­0.037           ­0.114**           ­0.120**
                                         [0.055]            [0.056]            [0.063]            [0.051]           [0.048]            [0.054]

 Panel B: Heterogeneity
   D                                    ­0.115**            ­0.014            ­0.034              ­0.041           ­0.098**           ­0.126**
                                         [0.057]            [0.055]           [0.069]             [0.053]           [0.048]            [0.054]
     D x at-risk index                   ­0.006              0.070            ­0.155*             ­0.041            0.132*             ­0.071
                                         [0.092]            [0.066]           [0.089]             [0.063]           [0.080]            [0.081]

     Control mean                         0.535              0.392              0.398              0.319             0.639              0.470
     Observations                          992               1143                827               1185              1140               1188


Note: Panel A shows the estimates of the average treatment effects on the treated from equation (2) shown on each column for each parental
misinformation outcome. Coefficients were estimated using IV where the share of topic-specific text messages received over those sent (D) was
instrumented with the randomized assignment to treatment. Panel B adds the interaction with the student-level at risk index. At-risk index is a
simple average of standardized baseline attendance, math grades and negative behavioral notes. Coefficients were estimated using IV where D
and its interaction with the at-risk variable were instrumented with T and its interaction with the same variable, respectively. All models include
the baseline math grade, attendance rate as control variables, classroom (randomization strata), year and grade-level fixed effects. If baseline
values of baseline math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level mean and added an indicator variable for
these imputed observations. Models in Panel B additionally include the at-risk index variable as control. Column outcomes are indicator variables
constructed by contrasting responses in parent surveys with those of student surveys or administrative records (shown in parentheses). Column
[1] measures parental misinformation in all absenteeism (with and without parent permission in the previous two weeks) contrasting the responses
of parents with those from students. Parents are classified as misinformed if they do not answer at least one of the questions, or if at least one of
the answers (in bracket days) provided by students and parents do not match. Column [2] measures misinformation in all absenteeism (with and
without permission) contrasting parent responses with classroom books. The ends of original bracket days in absences with and without
permission are added to construct new bracket days. Parents are classified as misinformed if they do not answer at least one of the questions, or
if classroom books' records of absences over the previous two weeks do not fall in the range. Column [3] contrasts parent and student responses
and parents are classified as misinformed if they do not answer, or if answered grades' brackets do not match. Column [4] measures parental
misinformation regarding all grades by contrasting parent responses about the student's last end-of-year grades with school records. Parents are
treated as misinformed if they do not answer, or if the absolute difference between answered and actual grades is greater than 0.5. Columns [5]
and [6] measure misinformation about student misbehavior by contrasting parent answers with student answers, and with information from
classroom books, respectively. Using a four-value scale, parents and students were asked about the degree of agreement with the student's
misbehavior statements. For column [5], parents are classified as misinformed if they do not answer at least one of the questions, or if the average
absolute difference between parent and student answers are larger than the median (0.8). For column [6] parents are treated as misinformed if
they do not answer; if the parent's average answer is equal to or larger than the median (2), and student did not misbehave according to
classroom books; or if the parent's average answer is less than the median answer and student misbehaved in class according to books. Standard
errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in parentheses). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                        48
                                  Table A.16: Treatment Effects on Parental Misinformation: Other Subjects Grades

                                              Math                     Language         History and Soc. Sciences        Nat. Sciences                   Ranking


                                    Admin.           Surveys   Admin.        Surveys     Admin.       Surveys         Admin.       Surveys        Best         Worse
                                      [1]              [2]       [3]              [4]      [5]          [6]             [7]          [8]           [9]             [10]

                  ITT               ­0.034           ­0.013    ­0.078**      ­0.020      ­0.045        0.012          ­0.049       ­0.019      ­0.072**        ­0.051
                                    [0.039]          [0.044]    [0.032]      [0.048]     [0.044]      [0.042]         [0.042]      [0.038]      [0.035]        [0.032]

                  ATT               ­0.050           ­0.020    ­0.115**      ­0.029      ­0.067        0.018          ­0.073       ­0.029      ­0.107**       ­0.076*
                                    [0.056]          [0.062]    [0.046]      [0.067]     [0.062]      [0.060]         [0.060]      [0.054]      [0.051]       [0.046]

                  Control mean       0.432            0.430     0.499         0.456       0.534        0.484           0.493        0.442        0.311         0.326
                  Observations       1184             1124      1142          1123         973         1118             972         1124          974           974


     Note: ITT refers to the intention-to-treat effects estimates shown on each column for each outcome. Coefficients of equation (1) were estimated using OLS. ATT refers to the
     estimates of the average treatment effects on the treated shown on each column for each outcome. Coefficients of equation (2) were estimated using IV where the share of
     topic-specific text messages received over those sent was instrumented with the randomized assignment to treatment. All models include the baseline math grade, attendance
     rate as control variables, classroom (randomization strata), year and grade-level fixed effects. If baseline values of baseline math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed
     them using the classroom-level mean and added an indicator variable for these imputed observations. Columns [1]-[8] measure parental misinformation in specific subject
     grades (Math, Language, History and Social Sciences and Natural Sciences). In columns [1], [3], [5] and [7] parents are treated as misinformed if they do not answer or if the




49
     answered grade bracket does not match to the actual grade from administrative data. In columns [2], [4], [6] and [8] parents are treated as misinformed if parent they do not
     know or if student and parent answered grades' brackets do not match. Columns [9] and [10] measure parental misinformation regarding student's best and worse subjects
     based on grades. Parents are treated as misinformed if they do not answer or if the best (worse) subject based on administrative school records does not match the best
     (worse) subject indicated by the parent according to answered brackets for each subject. In case the parents answer the same grades' bracket for all subjects they are
     considered as not-misinformed. Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in parentheses). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
               Table A.17: Treatment Effects on Parental Behavior at Home (ATT)

                             Study habits      Academic         Family         Low Family          Parent       Positive rein-
                                               efficiency       Support        Supervision         School        forcement
                                                                                                Involvement
                                  [1]              [2]              [3]             [4]             [5]              [6]

 Panel A: Parent scales
   D                            ­0.139            0.120           ­0.002           0.030           0.044           ­0.071
                                [0.111]          [0.090]          [0.115]         [0.090]         [0.088]          [0.111]

    Observations                 1042             1090             1108            1096            1116             1098

 Panel B: Student scales
   D                             0.082           ­0.001           0.179**         ­0.120          0.175**           0.026
                                [0.088]          [0.089]          [0.091]         [0.074]         [0.082]          [0.084]

    Observations                 1726             1728             1686            1693            1700             1692


Note: Table shows estimates of the average treatment effects on the treated from equation (2) shown on each column for each
outcome. Coefficients were estimated using IV where the share of topic-specific text messages received over those sent (D) was
instrumented with the randomized assignment to treatment. Outcomes are scales built with answers to surveys (see Tables
F.2 and F.3 for details). Panel A shows results for scales built with answers parents gave to survey questions. Panel B shows
results for scales built with answers students gave to survey questions. All models include the baseline math grade, attendance
rate and outcome scales, classroom (randomization strata), year and grade-level fixed effects. If baseline values of baseline
math grade/attendance or baseline outcomes were missing, we imputed them using the classroom-level mean and added an
indicator variable for these imputed observations. Standard errors are clustered at the classroom level (shown in parentheses).
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                             50
B     Appendix: Prior Research

Table B.1 presents an overview of the literature studying interventions providing information
to children or parents to improve student's school outcomes.




                                             51
                                                                               Table B.1: Literature Review
     Study                 Method   Sample                         Information                             Intensity                    Effect                                  Explored mechanisms

     Kraft        and      RCT      140 students, grades 6 and     Student's academic progress and         Daily    teacher-to-parent   Increased the odds of completing        Teacher­student relation-
     Dougherty [2013]               9, summer school program,      class behavior, upcoming homework       phone calls and daily        homework by 40%, decreased in-          ships, parental involve-
                                    Boston                         assignments and tests, and sugges-      written messages for five    class misbehavior by 25%, and in-       ment, student motivation
                                                                   tions for student's improvement         consecutive days             creased class participation rates by
                                                                                                                                        15%

     Avvisati   et   al.   RCT      34    middle-schools,  96      Advice on how to support and mon-       Three parent­school meet-    Reduced truancy by 25% and the          Parent's school-and home-
     [2014]                         classes, 2008-2009 school-     itor children with school work          ings every two-three weeks   probability of being sanctioned and     based involvement
                                    year, Paris                                                                                         increased positive behavior (effects-
                                                                                                                                        size around 15% of a sd), no test
                                                                                                                                        scores improvement

     Castleman       and   RCT      5,753 recent high school       Text messages intervention: tasks       A series 10 texts messages   Increased by 3 p.p. the likelihood to                  -
     Page [2015]                    graduates identified as        required by the students' intended      sent to students and their   enroll at two-year institutions, more
                                    college-intending, summer      college required for successful ma-     parents about every five-    effective on students with low ac-
                                    2012, Dallas, Boston and       triculation + offer of counselor as-    days                         cess to college-planning supports
                                    Philadelphia                   sistance via messages

     Kraft and Rogers      RCT      435 high school students in    Child's performance and behavior        Weekly one-sentence indi-    Decreased the percentage of stu-        Parent-child       interactions'
     [2015]                         a summer credit-recovery       in school: on what their students       vidualized messages from     dents who failed to earn course         content
                                    program in the Northeast-      were doing well and should continue     teachers to the parents      credit by 41%
                                    ern US                         doing (Positive treatment), or what
                                                                   their students needed to improve
                                                                   upon (improvement treatment)

     De Walque and         RCT      Girls in the last two grades   Child's attendance (three treat-        Weekly attendance infor-     Effect of 4.5 p.p. on attendance        Parental monitoring
     Valente [2018]                 of primary school, 173         ments: (i) "information only"; (ii)     mation through a report      (as large as 75% of the effect of the
                                    schools, 2016 school year,     (i) + cash transfers to parents con-    card over the school year    CCT treatment)




52
                                    Mozambique                     ditional on regular attendance; (iii)
                                                                   (i) + cash transfers to girls in form
                                                                   of a voucher conditional on regular
                                                                   attendance)

     Rogers and Feller     RCT      28,080 students, kinder-       Treatments: (i) reminder on im-         Up to five rounds of mail-   Most effective versions reduced to-     Parent's beliefs about to-
     [2018]                         garten to 12th grade; 2014-    portance of absences, (ii) student's    based messaging through-     tal absences by 6% and chronic ab-      tal absences and relative
                                    2015 school-year, School       number of absences, and (iii) stu-      out the school year          senteeism by 10% or more, spillover     absences
                                    District of Philadelphia       dent's relative absences                                             effects on untreated cohabiting stu-
                                                                                                                                        dents, no effect on student perfor-
                                                                                                                                        mance
     York et al. [2019]     RCT      1,031 preschoolers, 2013-     Parenting strategies                  Three    type   of  text-    Effect of 0.15 to 0.29 sd on parental                -
                                     14 and 2015-16 school                                               messages     each   week     involvement at home and school
                                     years,   San    Francisco                                           during eight months          and of 0.11 SD on child's early lit-
                                     Unified School District                                                                          eracy
                                     (SFUSD)

     Bergman         and    RCT      1,137 students, grades 5      Missed assignments, grades, and       Weekly alerts for assign-    Reduced course failures by 28%, in-     Accuracy of parents' be-
     Chan [2019]                     to 11, 22 middle and high     class absences                        ments and absences and       creased class attendance by 12%,        liefs about child's per-
                                     schools during 2015-2017,                                           monthly alerts for grades,   and increased student retention by      formance, parental behav-
                                     West Virginia                                                       32,000 text-messages         1.5 pp, increased in-class exam         ioral responses
                                                                                                                                      scores by 0.1 SD (larger effects for
                                                                                                                                      below-median GPA students and
                                                                                                                                      high school students)

     Dizon-Ross [2019]      RCT      3,451 households with at      Student's average performance on      Once after baseline survey   Improved what parents knew about        Parent's beliefs
                                     least two children enrolled   school tests (Report Cards)           visit                        their children and causes family ed-
                                     in grades 2­6, 39 schools,                                                                       ucational investments to adjust
                                     Malawi

     Angrist   et     al.   RCT      4,500     families   with     Treatments: (i) SMS text messages     Weekly treatment over 4      The combined treatment increased        Children cognitive skills
     [2020]                          primary-school-aged           with basic numeracy "problems of      months                       the average numerical operation         effects vs. effort effects.
                                     children, April-July 2020     the week", (ii) (i) + phone calls                                  learned by 0.12 SD, the SMS mes-        Parental educational in-
                                     (COVID-19       Pandemic),    which walk-through of the learning                                 sages only treatment effective when     vestment.
                                     Botswana                      activities sent via text message                                   targeted

     Barrera-Osorio         RCT      4,371 students, grades 4 to   Children's    reading   and math      Information delivered once   Effect of 0.09 SD to 0.10 SD in         Information gap between
     et al. [2020]                   6, 31 public schools, Man-    achievement + suggestions about       at the end of the baseline   student's performance (math and         beliefs and performance,
                                     izales, Colombia              how parents could engage with         household interview          reading scores) in the first two        parental behavioral re-
                                                                   their children's education                                         semesters, effect fades out in year     sponses.
                                                                                                                                      two

     Bergman [2021]         RCT+     279 students, grades 6        Missed assignments and grades         Emails, text messages and    0.19 SD increase in GPA and classes     Parent's     beliefs  about
                            struc-   to 11, 2010-2011 school                                             phone calls several times    missed by students decreased by         child's efforts and parental
                            tural    year, low-income commu-                                             a month over a six-month     28%                                     monitoring




53
                            model-   nities in Los Angeles                                               period
                            ing

     Bergman    et    al.   RCT      7,000 parents, 12 middle-     Missed classes, missed assignments    Weekly automated text-       Automatically enrolling parents im-     Enrollment defaults and
     [2020]                          and high-schools, 2015,       and low-grades                        message alerts from Jan-     proved student GPA by 0.06 points       simplification in technol-
                                     Washington DC                                                       uary to June                 and reduced course failures by 9%       ogy adoption, decision-
                                                                                                                                                                              makers beliefs on imple-
                                                                                                                                                                              mentation strategies

     Gallego   et     al.   RCT      7,700 children, grades 7      Children's last week internet use     Weekly   SMS    messages     Information treatment reduced chil-     Parenting behavior (pun-
     [2020]                          and 8, 2013, Chile            and/or offering assistance with in-   mainly sent during sum-      dren's internet use by 6­10%, no        ishment and discussions
                                                                   stalling parental control software    mer vacation                 significant impacts from helping        about internet use), sub-
                                                                                                                                      parents directly control their chil-    stitution for the presence
                                                                                                                                      dren's internet access                  of a parent at home with-
                                                                                                                                                                              out lowering parental in-
                                                                                                                                                                              volvement
C     Appendix: Sample and Recruitment of parents

C.1     Sample of students

In early 2014, we worked with education leaders in a deprived administrative of Santiago de
Chile to recruit schools to join our study. Eight schools consented to work with the program.
All students enrolled in grades 4 through 8 in each of these schools were included in the study
(a total of 85 classrooms and 1,447 students). Throughout the paper, we call this sample
"full sample".

    During 2015 one school (with 65 students) decided not to continue during the second
academic year. Similarly, students in grade 8 participated during the first part of the exper-
iment (a total of 316 students across the remaining schools). These students could not be
treated or followed into secondary school. We also dropped them from the main analysis.
Because randomization was done at the individual level stratifying by classroom we drop this
school from the main analysis without invalidating the experimental design. Throughout the
paper, we call this sample "main sample".


C.2     Recruitment of participants

During a series of school meetings, we invited parents of all children in grades 4-8 to par-
ticipate in the project and over 50 percent of parents signed consent. Consent rates were
very similar across grade-levels (Table C.1). Younger students, those not new to the school,
and those with better baseline attendance and math grades were somewhat more likely to
consent (see Table C.2).

                             Table C.1: Consent rate by grade level

                         Grade level       Full Sample            Main Sample

                                                [1]                    [2]

                         4                     0.57                   0.58
                         5                     0.49                   0.50
                         6                     0.54                   0.55
                         7                     0.52                   0.52
                         8                     0.53

                         Total                 0.53                   0.54


                     Note: N=2,720 for the full sample and N=1,987 for the main sample.




                                                      54
                                        Table C.2: Likelihood to Consent

                                                       Full Sample                   Main Sample

                                                            [1]                            [2]

                    Age                                   -0.013**                      -0.017**
                                                           [0.006]                       [0.008]
                    New student in 2014                  -0.092***                      -0.087**
                                                           [0.035]                       [0.039]
                    Attendance rate in 2013              0.744***                       0.743***
                                                           [0.116]                       [0.138]
                    Math grade in 2013                      0.013                         0.009
                                                           [0.010]                       [0.011]

                    Students                               2720                           1987


Note: The table shows the estimated coefficients of a regression of an indicator for whether the parent's student consented to
participate in the intervention as the dependent variable. Column [1] uses the full sample (i.e. including grade 8 in 2014 and
the dropped school). Column [2] uses the main sample.




D        Appendix: Intervention

D.1        Text messages: Production

The experiment offered each participating parent the chance to receive high frequency in-
formation about their selected child via text message. The specific information covered
attendance, behavior and mathematics test scores of their child. In addition to the infor-
mation text messages, parents of both treatment and control groups received general text
messages about school meetings, holidays and other general school matters throughout the
year.

    Once the intervention began our project teams digitized the classroom books described
in Section E.2, which contained information on attendance, behavior, and math score. This
information was collected weekly and uploaded to a platform designed for the purpose of this
study (called, in Spanish, Pap´as al D´
                                      ia ) which turned the information into text messages for
the treatment groups. Treated parents received weekly messages on attendance, and monthly
messages on behavior and math test scores. In the case of attendance information, we told
parents how many days out of the last week (usually five days) the child was in school. In
the case of behavior information, we provided parents the number of positive, neutral and
negative behavior notes recorded in the classroom books over the prior month. Regarding
the math test scores, we provided monthly updates on the record of all math test scores,
the average of these scores, and the class average score. Hence, parents learned information
about their own child, as well as how their child performed relative to the class mean.




                                                             55
D.2         Timeline of distribution of text messages

The Chilean school year runs from March to December, with two weeks of winter vacation
in July. We introduced parents to the intervention at school meetings located at school
premises in May, and collected consent forms at these meetings. Since school meetings were
not always well attended, we also sent project introduction materials and consent forms
home with students and followed up by phone to get verbal and written consent.

    In Chile, receiving a text message is free. The cost of text messages was paid by the
research team.

    Table D.1 presents the first day and text of each of the text messages. On May 23rd, we
first sent all participants, including those randomized to the control group, in seven out of
eight schools a welcome text message to introduce the intervention and let them know they
might expect further free messages from their child's school. The child was mentioned by
name. This message helped identifying valid phone numbers for caregivers, following up on
all undelivered welcome messages to correct phone numbers. After that, we started sending
behavior text messages on July 9th, 2014; attendance text messages around June 13th, 2014;
and math test scores text messages around July 14th 2014. The 8th school was incorporated
into the experiment slightly later. The implementation milestones for this school were as
follows: July 28th, 2014 (welcome message); August 1st, 2014 (first attendance message);
August 11th 2014 (first math test score message); and August 12th, 2014 (first behavior
message). Because winter vacations are taken in July, differential timing of the start of the
intervention for the 8th school is of little consequence. The intervention continued for a
second year. From April 2015 to December 2015, we continued to send text messages to
treated parents in a retained sample of students. We recorded all text message information
such as day and time, the message's content, the name of the recipient parent, etc.

                                     Table D.1: Text messages

 text message Type    Frequency           Start Date                     Text

 Behavior             Monthly text mes-   July 9th, 2014 (August 12th,   {Name parent}, according the school's
                      sage                2014 for 8th school)           record of {month}, {Name student}
                                                                         had {Number} positive notes and
                                                                         {Number} negative notes. Papas al dia

 Attendance           Weekly text mes-    June 13th, 2014 (August 1st,   {Name parent}, according the school's
                      sage                2014 for 8th school)           record, {Name student} attended to
                                                                         school {week attendance days} of
                                                                         {week total days}. Papas al dia.

 Mathematics Scores   Monthly text mes-   July 14th 2014 (August 11th,   {Name parent}, the math scores of
                      sage                2014 for 8th school)           {Name student} are {List of student's
                                                                         grade} and his/her average now is
                                                                         {Current GPA}. The average in the
                                                                         class is {Average class GPA}. Papas
                                                                         al dia




                                                       56
D.3         Text messages: Delivery

All text messages were sent as planned. However, not all text messages sent were delivered
or received. Several factors contributed to message failure. A message was more likely to
fail if the network was very busy, if there was some technical problem with the network,
if parents turned off their phones or if they changed their numbers during the experiment.
To maximize the chances of message receipt, we changed the dates of message delivery
from Friday to Monday in August 2014, early on in the intervention. We also re-contacted
all consenting parents in March 2015 to verify and/or update their cellphone numbers, to
minimize the chance of message failure due to new phone numbers. We also gathered these
data on the delivery status of the text message (i.e. whether the phone number received the
message).

    Technical reasons affecting whether a text message is successfully delivered or not (e.g.
network overload at certain times of the day/week) are unlikely to be correlated with family-
level unobservables that also affect child outcomes. However, we check this possibility by
regressing the total share of successful text messages (total received/total sent) of each type
(attendance, grades, behavior and general text messages) on baseline attendance and math
grades, age, gender and classroom fixed effects. Table D.2 shows that students with higher
baseline grades or attendance behaviors were no more (or less) likely to receive text messages
that were sent.

                            Table D.2: Likelihood to receive sent text messages

                                           Main Sample                                            Full Sample


                         Attendance     Grades      Behavior      General      Attendance    Grades       Behavior      General
                             [1]          [2]           [3]           [4]         [5]           [6]          [7]           [8]

 Attendance in 2013        ­0.155       ­0.074       ­0.101          0.075      ­0.100        ­0.054       ­0.068        0.021
                           [0.212]      [0.205]      [0.204]        [0.168]     [0.200]       [0.195]      [0.200]      [0.144]
 Math grade in 2013         0.019        0.017        0.016          0.007       0.009         0.007        0.015        0.001
                           [0.017]      [0.019]      [0.017]        [0.011]     [0.016]       [0.017]      [0.015]      [0.011]

 Students                   530           530          530           1066         710          710           710         1447


Note: Table shows the coefficients of a regression of the total share of successful text messages (total received/total sent) of
each column type (attendance, grades, behavior and general text messages) on attendance and math grades at baseline.
Columns [1]-[4] present results for the main sample and columns [5]-[8] for the full sample. Regressions of columns [1]-[3] and
[5]-[7] use the sample of treated students. Regressions of columns [4] and [8] use the sample of treated and control students.
All regressions include controls for class fixed-effects, age and gender. Robust standard errors are clustered at the class level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                               57
E     Data Sources

E.1    School Records

Our analysis takes advantage of rich administrative data collected from several sources
throughout the project. First, before the intervention, we collected basic demographic data
(age, gender) and school performance data (e.g. average test scores, annual attendance rate,
and grade repetition) from administrative school records (i.e. transcripts, called Actas in
Spanish) provided by the Ministry of Education of Chile (MINEDUC). After that, to mea-
sure the impact of the intervention, we collected administrative school records for our sample
schools at midline (end of year 1) and endline (end of year 2) using the same source. For
students who left our sample of schools during the experiment, we collected their aggregate
data on attendance and scores (subject-specific GPA) from the municipality school records
and tried to track the remaining students by phone. This allowed us to fill in the missing
midline and endline data.


E.2    Classroom books

Our research team also collected data (attendance, behavior note, and mathematics score) on
a weekly basis throughout the duration of the experiment. Table E.1 highlights the sources,
frequency, and availability of this information. Once the intervention began, each of our
project teams visited their assigned school once per week and collected the administrative
data by photographing daily attendance entries, behavior reports, and all recent mathematics
test records for all children in treated classrooms. For attendance data, the information was
originally reported at a daily frequency (0: absent, 1: attended class, .: not in roster of
students). We then aggregated this information at a weekly, monthly and yearly frequencies
(as sum of days and percentage of days) to facilitate comparison with other sources of
information. These attendance data are available since the school year starts in 2014. In the
case of behavior outcomes, we collected all positive and negative notes recorded on a daily
basis if they exist. We collected these data since June 2014. For aggregating the number
of positive/negative records at the monthly level we considered only the months when the
student was in the school. In the case of mathematics score, we collected all test scores
recorded for each student on each month. We then aggregated these simple averages into a
monthly score. The semester and annual averages were computed in the same way. Math
scores data are available since when we started to send text messages in July 2014.


E.3    Surveys

We administered surveys to all participating parents and all children in all grades. Surveys
were administered before treatment (baseline, around June 2014), at midline (end of year


                                             58
                                   Table E.1: Classroom books data

          Outcomes                  Data Source               Years                      Frequency

          Attendance                Attendance     register   2014 (since March), 2015   Daily
                                    pictures

          Behavior                  Behavior records pic-     2014 (since June), 2015    Daily
                                    tures

          Mathematics Test Score    Test records pictures     2014 (since July), 2015    Monthly




1) and endline (end of year 2). Student surveys were administered in class; parent surveys
were administered at the first parent meeting or sent home with children and encouraged to
be returned to the school.

    Baseline and follow-up parent surveys collected information on what parents knew about
their child's attendance (questions were for a specific child in our sample), grades and be-
havior; their level of involvement with the school and the child; demographics and economic
characteristics; and any concerns they had with schooling. Some of these questions were
later used to form scales on study habits, academic efficiency, parental support, parental
supervision, parental school involvement and parental positive reinforcement. We describe
the estimation process underlying scales construction in detail in section F.1. Child surveys
collected demographics, self-reported performance, engagement in schooling, engagement of
parents, and information on their peer networks within the classroom. We also tested them
on a few age-appropriate simple math problems.

    Follow-up surveys also included specific questions regarding the intervention. For exam-
ple, we asked parents how much they were willing to pay (WTP) to continue receiving text
messages from their school. We randomly assigned one out of three WTP amounts to this
question for each parent. In particular, we ask parents: "It is possible that next year your
daughter's/son's school can send you regularly text messages with information about their
school performance (attendance, grades, and behavior) four times a month. However, there
might not be enough funds to provide this service free of charge. Thinking about how valuable
would this service be for you, please tell us whether you will be willing to pay a month to
receive four text messages a month, from April to December." Parents were assigned with
equal probability to a value of $500, $1000 or $1500. In addition, we asked if parents were
receiving text messages with general school information and student's attendance, behavior
and grades.



F     Variables' Construction and Description

Table F.1 lists all the variables used in the paper, including details on their construction and
sources.



                                                        59
                                                        Table F.1: Variable definitions and sources

     Variable definition               Variable name          Sources                 Description

     Baseline characteristics
     Age                               age                    Administrative school   A student's age is computed based on his/her date of birth
                                                              records (Actas)
     Gender                            female                 provided by the         Dummy equal to 1 if female student; 0 if male student
                                                              MINEDUC
     Control variables
     Standardized Annual        Math   math std2013                                   Baseline annual average math test raw scores are standard-
     Test Score 2013*                                         Administrative school   ized within grade-cohort by the mean and standard deviation
                                                              records (Actas)         observed in the control group at 2013.
                                                              provided by the
     Annual     Attendance      Rate   attendance2013         MINEDUC                 Baseline annual attendance rate recorded at the end of 2013.
     2013*


     Outcomes variables
     Standardized Monthly Math         A month std                                    Monthly average raw scores are computed as a simple aver-




60
     Test Score                                                                       age of all the test scores recorded on each month. All these
                                                                                      monthly raw scores are standardized within grade-cohort by
                                                                                      the mean and standard deviation observed in the control group
                                                                                      at the corresponding point of measurement (2014 and 2015).

     Standardized    Annual     Math   A annual std                                   Annual average scores are computed as a simple average from
     Test Score                                                                       each semester average. Each semester average is computed
                                                              Mathematics Test        from the simple average of all monthly test scores recorded
                                                              Records Pictures        in the semester. All these annual raw scores are standard-
                                                                                      ized within grade-cohort by the mean and standard deviation
                                                                                      observed in the control group at the corresponding point of
                                                                                      measurement (2014 and 2015).

     Annual Math Test Score higher     A month 4 std                                  Dummy equal to 1 if a student scores above the passing score
     than 4.0                                                                         (4.0); 0 if a student scores below the passing score.

     *
         The baseline data exist for all students that were enrolled in our sample schools in 2013. For about half of the students who joined our
         sample schools in 2014, we collected their aggregate data on attendance and math scores from the municipality school records. For the
         remaining new students joining our sample schools in 2014, we assign classroom-level mean attendance and math grades to fill in the
         missing baseline data.
     Variable definition                 Variable name             Sources                           Description

     Monthly Attendance Rate             attendance month                                            Monthly attendance rate is calculated by dividing the total
                                                                                                     number of days the student is present by the total number of
                                                                                                     days of attendance registered in each month.

     Annual Attendance Rate              attendance year                                             Annual attendance rate is calculated by dividing the total
                                                                   Daily Attendance
                                                                                                     number of days the student is present by the total number
                                                                   Register Pictures
                                                                                                     of days of attendance registered in each school year.

     Annual    Attendance        Rate    highattendance                                              Dummy equal to 1 if student's annual attendance rate is higher
     higher than 85%                                                                                 than 85%; 0 if student's annual attendance rate is below 85%.

     Monthly Number of Positive          beh month pos                                               Total number of positive notes recorded on each month.
     Notes
                                                                   Daily Behavior
     Monthly Number of Negative          beh month neg             Records Pictures                  Total number of negative notes recorded on each month.
     Notes

     Standardized     Annual    Math     math std                                                    Annual average math test raw scores are standardized within
     Test Score*                                                                                     grade-cohort by the mean and standard deviation observed in
                                                                                                     the control group at the corresponding point of measurement




61
                                                                   Administrative school             (2014 and 2015).
                                                                   records (Actas)
     Annual Attendance Rate*             attendance                provided by the                   Annual attendance rate recorded at the end of each year.
                                                                   MINEDUC
     Passing grade                       pass                                                        Dummy equal to 1 if a student passes grade; 0 if a student
                                                                                                     repeats grade.


     Treatment variables
     Individual Level Treatment          T                                                           Dummy equal to 1 if treated student; 0 if control student.

     Strata                              strata                                                      Individual level treatment is stratified by school-grade-section
                                                                                                     level.
                                                                   Treatment dataset
     Year                                year                                                        This variable is used to indicate each year: 2014 and 2015.

     Main sample                         constant                                                    Dummy equal to 1 if a consenting student remains in our sam-
                                                                                                     ple school during the two consecutive years; 0 if a consenting
                                                                                                     student drops our sample school during the intervention.

     *   Annual math scores and attendance rates are available at (Actas) for most students excluding for those who change schools and are no longer observed in our
         sample schools by the end of the year. In that case, we fill in the missing data on math scores and attendance with the annual data coming from math test records
         and attendance register for each year.
F.1    Survey Data: Construction of scales

Throughout the questionnaires we asked students and parents a series of questions (items)
that we later used to form scales on: study habits, academic efficiency, parental support,
parental supervision, parental school involvement and parental positive reinforcement. The
survey items were drawn from: The University of Chicago Consortium on Chicago School
Research, the Manual for the Patterns of Adaptive Learning Scales (PALS) developed by
the University of Michigan, and scales on positive parenting developed by the Prevention
Group at Arizona State University. These items were randomly mixed into the student and
parents' survey instruments. Students and parents could give categorical answers of the type
"strongly agree", "agree", etc. to each statement.

    We aggregated student and parent answers into scales (indices) using a maximum like-
lihood (ML) principal components estimator where only one latent factor was retained to
describe all responses to the same category of questions. The models were estimated on
the treatment and control groups for baseline scales. For follow-up scales, models were es-
timated only in the control group and then results were applied to the full sample. After
the prediction was computed to produce each scale, we standardized them using the mean
and standard deviation of the control group. Each scale was pre-specified and had been
previously used and validated in other studies.

   In the Tables F.2 and F.3 we describe these scales and their properties at baseline.
Column 1 states the scale name, the eigenvalue of each latent factor, and the Cronbach's
alpha. Column 2 presents the items that belong to each scale. Column 3 shows the loading
associated with each item. Rather than repeating the information, Table F.4 summarizes the
properties of these scales by the eigenvalue and Cronbach's Alpha for follow-up measures,
both for parents and students.




                                            62
                                  Table F.2: Student Scales -- Baseline

Scale                       Variable                                                                                   Loadings
Study Habits                I always study for the exams                                                                0.622
Eigenvalue: 2.134           I spend free time doing homework and study                                                  0.516
Cronbach's Alpha: 0.750     I try to do well my school work even though I do not find interesting                       0.448
                            If I must study I do not spent time with friends                                            0.428
                            I always know the homework that I must present                                              0.532
                            I organize well my time to do my school work                                                0.745
                            I can organize school tasks and spent time with friends and family                          0.507
Academic efficiency         I am sure that I can dominate all the school subjects                                       0.674
Eigenvalue: 2.279           I am sure that I can understand the hardest things                                          0.779
Cronbach's Alpha: 0.801     I can do almost all the work or I give up                                                   0.540
                            Even though subjects are hard I can learn                                                   0.696
                            I can do the hardest homework if I try                                                      0.664
Family support              My   parents   or   guardians   checked that I really made my homework                      0.454
Eigenvalue: 2.100           My   parents   or   guardians   motivated me to work hard at school                         0.489
Cronbach's Alpha: 0.753     My   parents   or   guardians   supported me in activities outside school                   0.565
                            My   parents   or   guardians   heard me when I needed to talk with them                    0.507
                            My   parents   or   guardians   showed that they were proud of me                           0.739
                            My   parents   or   guardians   helped me to take decisions                                 0.729
Low family supervision      I went alone to school                                                                      0.757
Eigenvalue: 1.490           My parents or guardians checked the behavior and attendance book                            -0.187
Cronbach's Alpha: 0.575     I returned to home alone                                                                     0.716
                            I stayed alone at home without adult supervision                                             0.347
                            I left home without letting know my parents where I went or who I was with                  0.367
                            I allowed that my parents or guardians spoke with my school friends                         -0.042
                            I went to school and did not enter or left home saying I will not assist                     0.214
                            I signed in school but I left before class' end                                              0.255
Parent school involvement   My   parents   or   guardians   met with school's director                                  0.549
Eigenvalue: 1.782           My   parents   or   guardians   met with school teachers                                    0.529
Cronbach's Alpha: 0.665     My   parents   or   guardians   contacted the director through e-mail                       0.649
                            My   parents   or   guardians   contacted teacher through e-mail                            0.650
                            My   parents   or   guardians   went to school meetings                                     0.106
                            My   parents   or   guardians   went to school events                                       0.396
                            My   parents   or   guardians   volunteered at school                                       0.435
Positive reinforcement      My   parents   or   guardians   thanked me for helping with housework                       0.549
Eigenvalue: 3.405           My   parents   or   guardians   told me they have fun with me                               0.727
Cronbach's Alpha: 0.862     My   parents   or   guardians   congratulated me for my effort                              0.794
                            My   parents   or   guardians   told me that I have outstanding qualities                   0.578
                            My   parents   or   guardians   told me that they were proud of me                          0.770
                            My   parents   or   guardians   congratulated me for having done well or having improved    0.721
                            My   parents   or   guardians   encouraged me when I was doing something hard               0.706




                                                                 63
                                   Table F.3: Parent Scales -- Baseline

Scale                       Variable                                                                         Loadings
Study Habits                My son always studies for the exams                                               0.693
Eigenvalue: 3.187           My son spends free time doing homework and study                                  0.627
Cronbach's Alpha: 0.846     My son tries to do well my school work even though he do not find interesting     0.631
                            If my son must study he does not spent time with friends                          0.450
                            My son always knows the homework that he must present                             0.654
                            My son organizes well time to do his school work                                  0.858
                            My son can organize school tasks and spent time with friends and family           0.740
Academic efficiency         I am sure that my son can dominate all the school subjects                        0.773
Eigenvalue: 2.854           I am sure that my son can understand the hardest things                           0.823
Cronbach's Alpha: 0.860     My son can do almost all the work or he gives up                                  0.504
                            Even though subjects are hard my son can learn                                    0.781
                            My son can do the hardest homework if he tries                                    0.845
Family support              I   checked that my son really made his homework                                  0.555
Eigenvalue: 2.156           I   motivated my son to work hard at school                                       0.481
Cronbach's Alpha: 0.747     I   supported my son in activities outside school                                 0.471
                            I   heard my son when he needed to talk with me                                   0.533
                            I   showed that I was proud of my son                                             0.752
                            I   helped my son to take decisions                                               0.738
Low family supervision      My son went alone to school                                                        0.715
Eigenvalue: 1.586           I checked the behavior and attendance book                                        -0.219
Cronbach's Alpha: 0.576     My son returned to home alone                                                     0.872
                            My son stayed alone at home without adult supervision                              0.377
                            My son left home without letting me know where he went or with who he was         0.235
                            My son allowed that I speak with my school friends                                -0.130
                            My son went to school and did not enter or left home saying he will not assist    0.179
                            My son signed in school but he left before class' end                             0.139
Parent school involvement   I   met with school's director                                                     0.629
Eigenvalue: 1.874           I   met with school teachers                                                       0.481
Cronbach's Alpha: 0.651     I   contacted the director through e-mail                                          0.727
                            I   contacted teacher through e-mail                                               0.714
                            I   went to school meetings                                                       -0.071
                            I   went to school events                                                          0.301
                            I   volunteered at school                                                          0.338
Positive reinforcement      I   thanked my son for helping with housework                                     0.440
Eigenvalue: 2.960           I   told my son I have fun with me                                                0.617
Cronbach's Alpha: 0.839     I   congratulated my son for his effort                                           0.756
                            I   told my son that he has outstanding qualities                                 0.654
                            I   told my son that I was proud of him                                           0.732
                            I   congratulated my son for having done well or having improved                  0.638
                            I   encouraged my son when he was doing something hard                            0.666




                                                           64
                            Table F.4: Parent and Student Scales at Follow-Up

                    Year    Respondent     Scale                            Eigenvalue        Cronbach's
                                                                                                Alpha

                    [1]     [2]            [3]                                  [4]               [5]

                    2014    Parent         Study habits                        2.775             0.809
                    2014    Parent         Academic efficiency                 2.992             0.877
                    2014    Parent         Family Support                      1.974             0.733
                    2014    Parent         Family Supervision                  1.554             0.578
                    2014    Parent         Parent School Involvement           1.644             0.631
                    2014    Parent         Positive reinforcement              3.755             0.867
                    2015    Parent         Study habits                        2.895             0.831
                    2015    Parent         Academic efficiency                 2.642             0.840
                    2015    Parent         Family Support                      2.236             0.778
                    2015    Parent         Family Supervision                  1.480             0.537
                    2015    Parent         Parent School Involvement           1.716             0.666
                    2015    Parent         Positive reinforcement              3.458             0.858
                    2015    Parent         Parent feelings                     1.080             0.539

                    2014    Student        Study habits                        2.442             0.784
                    2014    Student        Academic efficiency                 2.486             0.826
                    2014    Student        Family Support                      2.412             0.795
                    2014    Student        Family Supervision                  1.514             0.604
                    2014    Student        Parent School Involvement           1.902             0.685
                    2014    Student        Positive reinforcement              4.087             0.891
                    2015    Student        Study habits                        2.246             0.760
                    2015    Student        Academic efficiency                 2.623             0.837
                    2015    Student        Family Support                      2.418             0.794
                    2015    Student        Family Supervision                  1.236             0.478
                    2015    Student        Parent School Involvement           1.832             0.676
                    2015    Student        Positive reinforcement              4.145             0.890


Note: See Table F.2 and F.3 for details on variables used in each scale. Parent feelings scale was only asked for parents in
endline 2015.




F.2       Correlations between parental and student's scales

Table F.5 shows, for each scale, the cross-sectional correlation between parents and students
values. We find that there is a stable positive correlation between parent and student scales
across the different survey waves (baseline, midline and endline).

   Table F.6 analyzes the correlation of each scale over time (baseline-midline and baseline-
endline), both for parents (Panel A) and students (Panel B). This correlation appears to be
positive and stable in all cases.

   Taken as a whole, this information suggests that scales seem to be capturing constructs
that are similar across the different survey waves.




                                                              65
                          Table F.5: Parents and Students' Scales Correlation

                                                      Baseline             Follow-Up 1           Follow-Up 2

                                                         [1]                    [2]                  [3]

                    Study habits                        0.34                  0.40                  0.34
                    Academic efficiency                 0.25                  0.28                  0.18
                    Family Support                      0.23                  0.31                  0.27
                    Low Family Supervision              0.65                  0.66                  0.69
                    Parent School Involvement           0.22                  0.26                  0.29
                    Positive reinforcement              0.29                  0.29                  0.32


Note: Columns [1], [2] and [3] show the Pearson's correlation coefficient between parent and student scales at baseline
(mid-2014), midline (end 2014) and endline (end 2015), respectively. Correlation figures are calculated with the main sample
(excluding grade 8 in 2014 and dropped school).




                                  Table F.6: Scales' Correlation Over Time

                                                               Baseline - FU1         Baseline - FU2

                                                                    [1]                    [2]

                          Panel A: Parents' Scales
                            Study habits                            0.56                   0.51
                            Academic efficiency                     0.46                   0.39
                            Family Support                          0.56                   0.51
                            Low Family Supervision                  0.73                   0.57
                            Parent School Involvement               0.43                   0.42
                            Positive reinforcement                  0.54                   0.53

                          Panel B: Students' Scales
                            Study habits                            0.49                   0.38
                            Academic efficiency                     0.39                   0.33
                            Family Support                          0.59                   0.46
                            Low Family Supervision                  0.69                   0.56
                            Parent School Involvement               0.44                   0.35
                            Positive reinforcement                  0.63                   0.50


Note: Columns [1] and [2] show the Pearson's correlation coefficient between scales at baseline and midline (end 2014) and
between scales at baseline and endline (end 2015), respectively. Panel A focus on scales constructed with parent answers.
Panel B focus on scales constructed with student answers. All correlation figures are calculated with the main sample
(excluding grade 8 in 2014 and dropped school).




                                                               66
G        Data Quality

G.1        Response rates

Table G.1 summarizes the response rates of consenting students for the data sources described
in Section E. Columns 1 and 2 present the response rate of all consenting students in our
experiment with non-missing data for each year (i.e., full sample). Columns 3 and 4 show
the statistics of consenting individuals in our main sample.

                                            Table G.1: Response Rates

                                                           Full sample                 Main sample
                                                        Total      Found(%)         Total     Found(%)
                                                       sought                      sought

                    Consent                             1447          1.000         1066         1.000
                    Panel A: Administrative Data
                    Student outcomes
                    2013                                1334          0.922          976         0.916
                    2014                                1439          0.994         1063         0.997
                    2015                                1090          0.753          955         0.896
                    Panel B: Survey Data
                    Student surveys
                    Baseline 2014                       1332          0.921         970          0.910
                    Endline 2014                        1283          0.887         947          0.888
                    Endline 2015                         906          0.626         854          0.801
                    Parent surveys
                    Baseline 2014                       1045          0.722         782          0.734
                    Endline 2014                        775           0.536         609          0.571
                    Endline 2015                        612           0.423         578          0.542


Note: Column [2] presents the response of consenting individuals with non-missing data. Column [4] presents the response
rate of consenting individuals in the main sample (excluding all students enrolled in Grade 8 at the baseline and those from
dropped school) who have non-missing data. Administrative data is considered available for a student if an individual has
data on grades, attendance, and pass/fail/exited school status at the end of the year.



    Administrative data is considered available for a student if an individual has data on
math scores, attendance, and pass/fail/exited school status at the administrative school
records (actas ) by the end of the year. These data is available for most students excluding
those who withdraw before the end of the school year. We use the administrative data of
the last school in case students change schools during the school year to one of the schools
in our sample.49

   Panel A of Table G.1 shows that we have baseline data for 92.2% of the full sample, and
91.6% of the main sample. The baseline data exist for all students enrolled in our sample
schools in 2013, and for about half of the students who joined the school in 2014.50 For these
   49
      In very few cases, we further use classroom books to impute missing data on math scores and attendance
with the annual data coming from math test records and attendance register, respectively.
   50
      We collected their aggregate data on attendance and math scores (subject-specific GPA) from the
municipality school records.


                                                               67
students who joined our sample schools in 2014, we assign classroom-level mean attendance
and math grades to fill in missing baseline data. In all regressions, we use these imputed
values and include an indicator variable denoting that the attendance/math grade baseline
data are imputed. Focusing on the main sample, in 2014, these administrative data exist for
99.7% and in 2015 for 89.6% of the sample.

    Most of the students who drop out of the full sample between 2014 and 2015 are those
enrolled in grade 8 in 2014. As mentioned above, when they pass to grade 9, many of them
change schools. Other students who left our sample include those who repeated grade 4 and
those who left the schools and move out of the municipality. Section G.2 discusses these
issues in detail.

   Panel B shows the response rates for parents and student surveys. Whereas students
present high response rates (90% in baseline and end of 2014, and 80% in 2015 for the main
sample), parents have more missing data, specially in follow-up surveys.


G.2     Attrition and entry

Table G.2 describes the possible data status a student can have according to different data
dimensions. Specifically, we analyze whether students change school or not, their final aca-
demic status in 2014, whether and when they were sent general text messages, and data
availability (school records and classroom books). For each of these dimensions, we classify
students into mutually exclusive categories. About 90% of the students are always in the
same school and the majority of the attrition happens after the change of academic years.

   General observations by panel:


   · School status. Change of school can be to an in-sample or to an out-of-sample schools
     (out of the municipalities participating in the study). Students that drop out of the
     sample are very likely moving to other municipalities (and changing school as a conse-
     quence).

   · Final status 2014. We asses the final students that changed school during 2014 from the
     end of the year school records at their new school. However, there might be students
     for which we do not have information (those that in panel A appear as not found or
     to have changed to schools).

   · Text message status. Those students with never sent general text messages are mainly
     students retired in 2014 and not found in 2015 (12 out of 18 in the main sample). From
     those 18, most of the treated students did not received either treatment text messages
     in 2014. 6 students never appear in text messages data.

   · Data Availability (school records). 4 students were not found in the school records
     (actas ) for which school, grades, and final status were imputed using classroom books.


                                            68
                                          Table G.2: Data Classification

              Dimension                  Category                                Main Sample      Full Sample

              School status              Same school always                           942              991
                                         Change school during 2014                     5                5
                                         Change school between 2014 and 2015          17               59
                                         Change school during 2015                     5                6
                                         Not found between 2014 and 2015               97              321

              Final status 2014          Passed                                       1011            1312
                                         Failed                                        28              38
                                         Retired                                       27              32

              Text messages status       Sent messages in 2014 and 2015               907              958
                                         Sent messages only in 2014                   139              399
                                         Sent messages only in 2015                    2                 2
                                         Never sent                                   18                23

              Data availability status
               School records            Available 2014 and 2015                      955             1041
                                         Available 2014 and missing 2015              108             335
                                         Missing 2014 and 2015                         3               6

                Classroom books          Available 2014 and 2015                      948             1004
                                         Available 2014 and missing 2015              115             371
                                         Missing 2014 and 2015                         3               7


Note: Table presents the frequency distribution of students in the main and full samples for different dimensions and their
categories. For all dimensions, N=1,066 for main sample and N=1,382 for full sample. The full sample does not include the
school not participating in the study in year 2.




    · Data Availability (classroom books). We use annual (rather than high frequency)
      attendance and grades. Data is considered not missing when both attendance and
      grades are available. There are a few cases (15) in which the student withdrew early
      in the year and attendance takes very low values (more than half of the observations
      are zeros) and there are no available grades.

    Minor observations:

    · We found two students in the main sample who only receive text messages in 2015.
      They have complete administrative data. It is likely that we did not have their correct
      phone number.
    · Students with missing data in 2014 and 2015 (school records and classroom books)
      drop out of their schools before treatment (April/May/June of 2014).
    · Within students that changed school during 2014 there is one that also changes school
      between 2014 and 2015 returning to the original one.

   Table G.3 presents how students are distributed when we consider the combination of
the defined categories of Table G.2. We find that almost 90% of the sample passed 2014,
and either remain in the same school and we have data for both years, or we do not find
them in 2015 and, consequently, we only have data for 2014.

                                                             69
                                                          Table G.3: Data classification: Combined Categories

                   School status           Final status 2014        text messages status          Data Actas              Data Books        Freq.

                Same school always              Passed             Sent messages in 2014      Available 2014 and       Available 2014 and   873
                                                                         and 2015                    2015                     2015
                Not found between               Passed             Sent messages only in      Available 2014 and       Available 2014 and    69
                  2014 and 2015                                            2014                 missing 2015             missing 2015
                Same school always              Passed             Sent messages only in      Available 2014 and       Available 2014 and    26
                                                                           2014                      2015                     2015
                Same school always               Failed            Sent messages in 2014      Available 2014 and       Available 2014 and    18
                                                                         and 2015                    2015                     2015
                Not found between               Retired            Sent messages only in      Available 2014 and       Available 2014 and    11
                  2014 and 2015                                            2014                 missing 2015             missing 2015
                Not found between               Retired                 Never sent            Available 2014 and       Available 2014 and    9
                  2014 and 2015                                                                 missing 2015             missing 2015
                Same school always              Passed             Sent messages only in      Available 2014 and       Available 2014 and    8
                                                                           2014                 missing 2015             missing 2015
                                                                    Other combinations                                                       52
                                                                           Total                                                            1066


     Note: Table shows the frequency distribution for the main sample of the combination of categories in Table G.2.




70
G.3     Administrative records: no differential attrition

We next estimate an OLS regression model where the dependent variable is an indicator vari-
able for each possible status and the independent variable is the treatment binary variable.
Table G.4 shows that there are no systematic differences between treatment and control
students regarding all possible status of each dimension.


G.4     Survey data: no differential response rates

Table G.5 shows that there are no significance differences in the surveys' response rate
between the treatment and control group. This is true for all survey waves (baseline and the
two follow-up) and both for students and parents.




                                            71
                       Table G.4: Differential attrition of administrative records

                           Dep. var                                         Treatment coeff.
                                                                      Main Sample     Full Sample

                           School status
                           Same school always                             0.001            -0.005
                                                                         [0.025]           [0.020]
                           Change school during 2014                     -0.002            -0.001
                                                                         [0.005]           [0.004]
                           Change school between 2014 and 2015           -0.008            -0.003
                                                                         [0.012]           [0.015]
                           Change school during 2015                     -0.005            -0.005
                                                                         [0.006]           [0.004]
                           Not found between 2014 and 2015                0.014             0.015
                                                                         [0.022]           [0.022]

                           Final status 2014
                           Passed                                        0.032*           0.031**
                                                                         [0.016]          [0.013]
                           Failed                                        -0.020            -0.018
                                                                         [0.014]          [0.011]
                           Retired                                       -0.012            -0.012
                                                                         [0.012]          [0.009]

                           Text messages status
                           Sent messages in 2014 and 2015                -0.033            -0.040
                                                                         [0.029]           [0.024]
                           Sent messages only in 2014                     0.031            0.041*
                                                                         [0.028]           [0.024]
                           Sent messages only in 2015                     0.002             0.002
                                                                         [0.002]           [0.001]
                           Never sent                                    -0.000            -0.003
                                                                         [0.009]           [0.007]

                           Data availability status
                            School records
                            Available 2014 and 2015                      -0.010            -0.011
                                                                         [0.023]          [0.022]
                             Available 2014 and missing 2015              0.011             0.015
                                                                         [0.023]          [0.021]
                             Missing 2014 and 2015                       -0.002           -0.004*
                                                                         [0.002]          [0.002]
                             Classroom books
                             Available 2014 and 2015                     -0.000            -0.017
                                                                         [0.024]          [0.021]
                             Available 2014 and missing 2015              0.002             0.022
                                                                         [0.024]          [0.022]
                             Missing 2014 and 2015                       -0.002           -0.005*
                                                                         [0.002]          [0.003]


                           Students                                       1066              1382


Note: Column [1] shows the dependent variable of a regression of each category dummy on the treatment variable. The
coefficients for the main sample and full sample are presented in column [2] and [3], respectively. text messages status relates
to general text messages. All regressions are estimated by OLS including classroom fixed-effects (strata). Robust standard
errors are clustered at the section level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                              72
                                Table G.5: Surveys Differential Response Rate

                                                         Obs.          Treatment         Control           p-value
                                                                         Mean             Mean

                                                          [1]              [2]              [3]              [4]

               Panel B: Parents' Survey Data
                 Baseline 2014                           1066             0.74             0.73             0.59
                 Endline 2014                            1066             0.58             0.57             0.36
                 Endline 2015                            1066             0.55             0.54             0.70

               Panel C: Students' Survey Data
                 Baseline 2014                           1066             0.92             0.91             0.84
                 Endline 2014                            1066             0.90             0.88             0.38
                 Endline 2015                            1066             0.80             0.80             0.95


Note: Column [1] shows the number of observations with non-missing data, column [2] and [3] the average response rate for
treatment and control group, respectively, for the estimating sample (excluding grade 8 and dorpped school). Column [4]
reports the p-value on the SMS coefficient in a regression using a dummy indicating response as the dependent variable. All
regressions include controls for class fixed-effects (strata) and robust standard errors clustered at the section level.* significant
at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                73
H      Information and parenting styles

The effects of information interventions such as the one analyzed in this paper could be
mediated by parenting styles (generally understood as the strategies parents use in raising
their children). To examine this issue, we implemented a complementary randomized control
trial to evaluate the effect of providing parents with tools to relate to their children more
positively using an established "positive parenting" intervention.

    We worked with educational psychologists at Arizona State University to adapt videos
of their successful parenting intervention, "Family Check-up", which has been delivered
to hundreds of low-income schools in the US (Lim et al. [2005]). These training videos
provided parents with specific guidance about how to use the school-provided information
on attendance, grades, and classroom behavior. The videos were distributed in DVD format.
We stratified by school grade-level, and randomly allocated classrooms to receive or not
receive the informational videos. Hence, this video-intervention was orthogonal to the text
message intervention. Control classrooms received a placebo DVD with music. The video
distribution was implemented in the fall of 2014. Let Vcjg be an indicator variable equal to
one if a parent of student i in classroom c of school j , grade-level g received the video.

    We are interested in estimating the effects on students of inducing parents to use a more
positive parenting style when processing the information received via text message. Thus, we
interact the individual-level treatment variable Ticjg with the classroom-level video treatment
Vcjg to estimate an intention-to-treat effect. Table G.1 presents the results for additional
effects (beyond the effects of the text message treatment) of receiving the parenting video
treatment. Estimated coefficients of additional parent training through the video-delivered
parenting intervention are, in general, positive and large. However, we lack statistical power
to reject the null of no differential treatment effect for parents who received the parenting
treatment. We take this as suggestive evidence that parents could benefit from receiving
tools to improve their parenting styles towards a more positive one.

    In order to assess if, upon receiving the information from the school, parents knew how
to use it to change their children's behavior, we implemented a video-delivered parenting
intervention which was randomly assigned to the experimental sample. This complementary
intervention was designed to foster a more positive parenting style. We find that those parents
that received the text message information treatment and the positive parenting intervention
had larger treatment effects than those that did not. However, we lack statistical power to
reject the null of no differential treatment. We take this as suggestive evidence that parents
could benefit from receiving tools to improve their parenting styles towards a more positive
one.




                                              74
                   Table G.1: Additional Treatment Effects by Parental Training

                    Math grade         Math grade >4.0       Attendance rate         Cumulative         # negative beh.
                                                                                  attendance >85%           notes
                         [1]                  [2]                   [3]                  [4]                  [5]

 T                      0.071               0.034*                 0.008                0.028               ­0.038
                       [0.057]              [0.018]               [0.007]              [0.036]              [0.113]
 TxV                    0.020               ­0.013                 0.001                0.033                0.089
                       [0.087]              [0.026]               [0.010]              [0.048]              [0.152]

 Observations          2,011                 2,011                2,011                 2,011                2,011


Note:Table shows intention-to-treat effects estimates shown on each column for each outcome. Coefficients were estimated
using OLS. T refers to the randomized individual-level treatment (equal to 1 if parents were sent text messages and zero
otherwise). V refers to the classroom-level video treatment (equal to 1 for classrooms in which the DVD was distributed and
zero otherwise). All models include the baseline math grade, attendance rate as control variables, classroom (randomization
strata), year and grade-level fixed effects. If baseline values of baseline math grade/attendance were missing, we imputed
them using the classroom-level mean and added an indicator variable for these imputed observations. Standard errors are
clustered at the classroom level (shown in brackets). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                            75
