                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DIGITAL RESILIENCE:
       HOW WORK-FROM-HOME FEASIBILITY AFFECTS FIRM PERFORMANCE

                                       John (Jianqiu) Bai
                                       Erik Brynjolfsson
                                           Wang Jin
                                       Sebastian Steffen
                                           Chi Wan

                                      Working Paper 28588
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28588


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




Erik     Brynjolfsson    thanks     the     Stanford     Digital     Economy      Lab    (https://
digitaleconomy.stanford.edu/) for financial support for this research. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by John (Jianqiu) Bai, Erik Brynjolfsson, Wang Jin, Sebastian Steffen, and Chi Wan. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Digital Resilience: How Work-From-Home Feasibility Affects Firm Performance
John (Jianqiu) Bai, Erik Brynjolfsson, Wang Jin, Sebastian Steffen, and Chi Wan
NBER Working Paper No. 28588
March 2021
JEL No. D23,J21,L0,L25,O0,O33

                                           ABSTRACT

Digital technologies may make some tasks, jobs and firms more resilient to unanticipated shocks.
We extract data from over 200 million U.S. job postings to construct an index for firms' resilience
to the Covid-19 pandemic by assessing the work-from-home (WFH) feasibility of their labor
demand. Using a difference-in-differences framework, we find that public firms with high pre-
pandemic WFH index values had significantly higher sales, net incomes, and stock returns than
their peers during the pandemic. Our results indicate that firms with higher digital resilience, as
measured through our pre-pandemic WFH index, performed significantly better in general, and in
non-essential industries in particular, where WFH feasibility was necessary to continue operation.
The ability to use digital technologies to work remotely also mattered more in non-high-tech
industries than in high-tech ones. Lastly, we find evidence that firms with lower pre-pandemic
WFH feasibility attempted to catch up to their more resilient competitors via greater software
investment. This is consistent with a complementarity between digital technologies and WFH
practices. Our study's results are robust to a variety of empirical specifications and provide a first
look at how WFH practices improved resilience to a major, unanticipated social and economic
shock.

John (Jianqiu) Bai                                Sebastian Steffen
D'Amore-McKim School of Business                  Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Northeastern University                           ssteffen@mit.edu
j.bai@northeastern.edu
                                                  Chi Wan
Erik Brynjolfsson                                 College of Management
Stanford Digital Economy Laboratory               University of Massachusetts
366 Galvez Street, Room 238                       Boston, MA 02125
Stanford, CA 94305                                United States
and NBER                                          chi.wan@umb.edu
erik.brynjolfsson@gmail.com

Wang Jin
245 First Street, Room E94
MIT Initiative on the Digital Economy
Cambridge, MA 02142
jwangjin@mit.edu
    Digital Resilience: How Work-From-Home Feasibility
                   Affects Firm Performance

   By John (Jianqiu) Bai, Erik Brynjolfsson, Wang Jin, Sebastian
                      Steffen, and Chi Wan


          Digital technologies may make some tasks, jobs and firms more re-
          silient to unanticipated shocks. We extract data from over 200 mil-
          lion U.S. job postings to construct an index for firms' resilience to
          the Covid-19 pandemic by assessing the work-from-home (WFH)
          feasibility of their labor demand. Using a difference-in-differences
          framework, we find that public firms with high pre-pandemic WFH
          index values had significantly higher sales, net incomes, and stock
          returns than their peers during the pandemic. Our results indicate
          that firms with higher digital resilience, as measured through our
          pre-pandemic WFH index, performed significantly better in gen-
          eral, and in non-essential industries in particular, where WFH
          feasibility was necessary to continue operation. The ability to
          use digital technologies to work remotely also mattered more in
          non-high-tech industries than in high-tech ones. Lastly, we find
          evidence that firms with lower pre-pandemic WFH feasibility at-
          tempted to catch up to their more resilient competitors via greater
          software investment. This is consistent with a complementarity
          between digital technologies and WFH practices. Our study's re-
          sults are robust to a variety of empirical specifications and provide
          a first look at how WFH practices improved resilience to a major,
          unanticipated social and economic shock.
          Keywords: Digital Resilience, Work-From-Home, IT Complemen-
          tarity, Firm Performance, Covid-19


  "We are finding we can reorganize our companies electronically very rapidly
and that's the only type of organization that can begin to keep pace with the
changing business conditions."

                                                                             - Steve Jobs, 1990

  As digital technologies proliferate, work-from-home (WFH), sometimes referred
to as telework, telecommuting, or remote work, has become an increasingly com-

    Bai:   D'Amore-McKim School of Business (Northeastern University), Boston, MA 02115,
j.bai@northeastern.edu. Brynjolfsson: Digital Economy Lab (Stanford University), Stanford, CA 94305,
and NBER, Cambridge, MA 02138 erikb@stanford.edu. Jin: MIT Sloan School of Management, Cam-
bridge, MA 02142, jwangjin@mit.edu. Steffen: MIT Sloan School of Management, Cambridge, MA
02142, ssteffen@mit.edu. Wan: College of Management (University of Massachusetts Boston) Boston,
MA 02125, chi.wan@umb.edu.
                                                 1
2


mon practice and constitutes an important dimension in the future of work.1 A
recent survey by Gallup estimated that more than 43% of workers reported work-
ing remotely at least once a week in 2017, and this number rose sharply during
April and May of 2020 (Erik Brynjolfsson, John J Horton, Adam Ozimek, Daniel
Rock, Garima Sharma and Hong TuYe, 2020) and is expected to increase signif-
icantly in the coming decades.2 While the unanticipated coronavirus outbreak
highlights the importance of work flexibility and has forced many firms to shift
to WFH practices as the new work norm, firms varied greatly in their adoption
of WFH practices before the onset of the outbreak. In this paper, we study the
impact of pre-Covid-19 WFH feasibility, as a measure of firms' resilience to the
Covid-19 pandemic, on firms' performance and investments.
   The Covid-19 pandemic, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, is an ongoing out-
break. As of December 2020, the pandemic has infected more than 66.3 million
people and claimed over 1.52 million lives worldwide.3 In the United States, the
pandemic has resulted in significant disruptions to social and economic activi-
ties, as lockdowns forced non-essential businesses to close and individuals to stay
home.4
   The limited number of studies regarding WFH adoption on firm performance
have found a small, but positive effect (Brittany Harker Martin and Rhiannon
MacDonnell, 2012; Nicholas Bloom, James Liang, John Roberts and Zhichun Jenny
Ying, 2015) and as well as a contingency on complementary HR practices (An-
gel Mart´ inez S´
                anchez, Manuela P´ erez P´
                                         erez, Pilar de Luis Carnicer and Maria Jos´
                                                                                   e
Vela Jim´  enez, 2007; Angel Mart´ inez-S´
                                         anchez, Manuela P´   erez-P´
                                                                    erez, Mar´
                                                                             ia Jos´
                                                                                   e
Vela-Jim´  enez and Pilar De-Luis-Carnicer, 2008).
   In many cases, the implementation of WFH practices can enable firms to con-
tinue operation during the pandemic. However, some jobs cannot feasibly be
shifted to work from home, rendering some firms less resilient and potentially
unable to operate at all. Thus, while virtually all firms were incentivized to shift
to WFH practices through the pandemic, it was more feasible for some to do so
than others. The WFH feasibility of pre-pandemic hiring therefore serves as an
exogenous shifter of the impact of the pandemic.
   In addition, government-issued stay-at-home orders also forced many firms to
reduce basic operations and others to cease operations entirely. This especially af-
fected non-essential industries, leading to substantial, and potentially permanent,
loss of sales, customers, and profits. Even where firms were allowed to continue
their operations, the risk of Covid-19 often significantly reduced the efficiency of
on-premise employees and operations compared to WFH employees. Thus, all else

   1 See U.S. Census report:       https://www.census.gov/library/visualizations/2013/comm/home_
based_workers.html.
   2 https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/15/us/remote-workers-work-from-home.html.
   3 https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html.
   4 As of April 4, 2020, most of the U.S. states have instituted some form of stay-at-home executive or-
der. See https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-stay-at-home-order.html for
details.
                       DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                         3


equal, the feasibility of shifting employees to WFH practices should have helped
firms become more resilient during the pandemic.
   To test our hypothesis, we merge the near-universe of U.S. job postings from
Burning Glass Technologies (BGT) with a recently developed occupational WFH
feasibility indicator by Dingel and Neiman (2020) to construct, for the first time,
a firm-level measure of the percentage of its workforce that has the WFH option
­ a firm-level WFH feasibility index. We then estimate a difference-in-differences
(DID) regression model to examine whether and how much a firm's WFH feasi-
bility prior to the Covid-19 pandemic influences its financial and stock market
performance during this crisis.
   Our key finding is that firms with high pre-pandemic WFH feasibility, and
thus higher resilience to the pandemic, fared significantly better ­ with roughly
15% higher net incomes, 4% higher sales, and better stock market performance
(measured by stock returns and volatility) compared to firms with lower pre-
pandemic WFH indices. In contrast, as a response to the pandemic, firms with
lower pre-Covid-19 WFH indices retained a significantly higher percentage of
software investment, as they attempt to catch up in IT to facilitate remote work
and to continue operation during the pandemic.
   We also find that pre-pandemic WFH feasibility is associated with better per-
formance during the pandemic for all firms but especially those in non-essential
industries. These are the ones whose operations were more likely to be adversely
affected by Covid-19 and the associated government restrictions. In addition, we
find that firms in non-essential industries with lower pre-pandemic WFH indices
spent a significantly larger share on IT investments, while essential firms, which
were legally guided to continue operation did not. Moreover, these results are
stronger in non-high-tech industries as high WFH firms in these industries had
the largest relative advantages over their competitors. Conversely, in high-tech in-
dustries, a higher percentage of firms were already able to support remote work,
such that even the low WFH firms in high-tech industries did not fare much
worse than their high WFH peers. Our findings provide further evidence that
WFH practices and complementary digital technologies were critical to continue
operation Rahul De', Neena Pandey and Abhipsa Pal (2020), especially for those
non-essential businesses that were forced to adjust. These results are robust to
empirical specifications that control for a host of firm-level characteristics and
fixed effects.
   Our identifying assumption for causal estimates is that firm's pre-pandemic
WFH index is orthogonal to the timing of the Covid-19 pandemic. In other words,
firms were unable to anticipate the pandemic and were unable to fully prepare for
it by hiring for more WFH feasible jobs or preemptively altering their business
operation in the short-term (Cosmin Ilut, Matthias Kehrig and Martin Schneider,
2018). We believe this to be a reasonable assumption, given the unanticipated
nature of the public health crisis as well as the delayed governmental and state
responses.
4


   Our study contributes to two strands of literature. By studying the determi-
nants of firm resilience during the Covid-19 pandemic, our paper joins a recent
body of research that examines contributing factors to firms' differential perfor-
mance during the crisis episodes. Rui Albuquerque, Yrjo Koskinen, Shuai Yang
and Chendi Zhang (2020) and Karl V Lins, Henri Servaes and Ane Tamayo (2017)
find that firms with high environmental and social ratings tend to perform bet-
ter during the Covid-19 pandemic and the 2007-2008 financial crisis, respectively.
Other studies find evidence that firms with access to liquidity (Viral V Acharya
and Sascha Steffen, 2020), high cash holdings (Stefano Ramelli and Alexander F
Wagner, 2020), or a strong balance sheet (Wenzhi Ding, Ross Levine, Chen Lin
and Wensi Xie, 2020) tend to perform better in the first quarter of 2020. During
crises, firms also tend to accelerate the restructuring of their production towards
routine-biased technologies and their complementary workers (Brad Hershbein
and Lisa B. Kahn, 2018). Our study expands the understanding of the deter-
minants of firm resilience during a crisis period by taking a more labor-oriented
focus. Specifically, our evidence suggests that digitally-enabled flexible work ar-
rangements such as WFH can significantly reduce operational disruptions that
firms experience in difficult times and help with their resurgence in the aftermath
of the crisis.5

  Second, our study contributes to the recent literature that studies the shift of
workplace norms towards more flexible work settings, such as working from home.
In particular, Brynjolfsson et al. (2020) survey a nationally-representative sample
of the U.S. population. Their results suggest that over 30 percent of workers
switched to remote work during the pandemic and also report that the switch
to WFH can be predicted by the incidence of Covid-19. This further supports
our use of WFH feasibility as a measure of pandemic resilience. By conditioning
on firms' ex ante WFH indices we mitigate endogeneity concerns that may arise
from heterogeneity in firms' shift towards WFH practices during the pandemic.
Thus, by investigating how differences in resilience lead to differential performance
during the pandemic, we also provide further evidence for the value created by
digitally-enabled WFH practices.

  The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section I develops a set of
testable hypotheses. Section II discusses the data and summary statistics. We
present our empirical findings in Section III and conclude in Section IV.


    5 Several other papers that examine the labor aspects during the Covid-19 crisis include the following:
Seth G Benzell, Avinash Collis and Christos Nicolaides (2020) compare the actual closures of commercial
locations to their recommendation of what should be closed first, and generate implications for the optimal
sequence of re-openings when policymakers revive the economy. Andrew G Atkeson (2020) analyzes the
economic consequences of the Covid-19 pandemic and how they correlate with various assumptions about
the ratio between the susceptible ­ infected ­ and recovered groups in the population. Eliza Forsythe,
Lisa B Kahn, Fabian Lange and David Wiczer (2020) and Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko and
Michael Weber (2020) study the labor market implications of the Covid-19 pandemic.
                      DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                        5


                         I.   Hypothesis Development

  A large body of prior literature explores the effect of WFH or remote work
practices on work-related outcomes at the individual-level including higher job
satisfaction (Timothy D Golden and John F Veiga, 2005; Timothy D Golden,
2006), prolonged work hours and higher work efficiency (Mary Madden and Syd-
ney Jones, 2008; Bloom et al., 2015), lower worker stress (Ravi S Gajendran and
David A Harrison, 2007), and potentially lower turnover (Phyllis Moen, Erin L
Kelly and Rachelle Hill, 2011; Eleni T Stavrou, 2005). In contrast, relatively few
studies focus on firm and organizational outcomes (Bloom et al. 2015; also see
Tammy D Allen, Timothy D Golden and Kristen M Shockley (2015) for a review)
possibly because large-scale firm-level data on the adoption of WFH practices is
hard to come by. Among limited firm-level studies, the effect of WFH on firm
performance is found to be positive (Christine Siegwarth Meyer, Swati Mukerjee
and Ann Sestero, 2001), but the magnitude tends to be small (Martin and Mac-
Donnell, 2012) and contingent on complementary human resource management
practices (S´
            anchez et al., 2007; Mart´inez-S´
                                            anchez et al., 2008).


Higher Resilience Through WFH during the Pandemic.               -- Although the
digital technologies that make WFH practices were known and implemented long
before 2020, the global pandemic has drastically accelerated their adoption (Bryn-
jolfsson et al., 2020). The pandemic led the government, states, and local author-
ities to impose strict rules that limited mobility of employees through March
and April (through stay-at-home orders). In addition, many workers voluntarily
stayed home to minimize the risk of infection. In combination, firms had to ag-
gressively apply digital tools and adjust towards WFH practices. These enabled
many firms to continue operation during the pandemic. For instance, digital tools
allowed firms' employees to maintain continuous communication with customers
and suppliers while working remotely, thereby ensuring a less disrupted operation
during the period of a lockdown. Digital tools and the WFH practices they en-
abled were therefore critical components of firm resilience against the pandemic.
   However, the feasibility of remote work was more feasible for some firms and
workers than others. While some industries, such as the information-services-
providing industries, naturally had higher feasibility for WFH practices, there
are still important within-industry differences between firms' adoption of these
practices. Firms rely on different production methods, management, levels of au-
tomation, or logistics and may thus have workforces that consist of very different
occupations with varying degrees of WFH feasibility.


Essential vs. Non-Essential Industries. -- Although the aforementioned
resilience-improving effect of WFH is dispersed widely across industries, the ex-
tent to how much firms benefit from WFH feasibility will be conditional on how
6


much of their operations were disrupted by the pandemic. For instance, stay-
at-home orders affected some firms and industries more than others. A natural
way to think about the level of constraints that the government order has put on
different industries is through the definition of essential industries. If an indus-
try was deemed essential, such as the food retail or health care industries, it was
allowed to continue operation on premise during the pandemic. Thus, firms in
these industries are less likely to depend on the WFH feasibility of their employ-
ees. In contrast, many firms in non-essential industries were forced to cease or
modify their operation due to the risk of Covid-19. Therefore, firms' feasibility
to have their workers work remotely becomes crucial in these industries. Digital
resilience, as measured by ability to work remotely, is likely to be a greater deter-
minant of success or even survival during the pandemic in non-essential compared
to essential industries.


WFH and Complementary IT Investment. -- Digital technologies create the
potential for increased resilience in firms' work arrangements. As early as the
1980s, Mancur Olson (1982) pointed out that the prospect of telecommuting
work originated from the advancement of information and communication tech-
nology (ICT). Further development on storage, communication, and other trans-
formational technologies in IT unleashed the power of storage, transmission, and
sharing of knowledge and information across time and space, facilitated coor-
dination among geographically dispersed workers, and significantly transformed
workplace practices (Paul M Leonardi and Diane E Bailey, 2008). With the
rise of the digital economy (Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, 2014), a
significantly higher percentage of jobs became suitable for WFH or remote work
(Joseph Migga Kizza, 2017). Meanwhile, complementary ICT investment on both
infrastructure and software (e.g. high-speed internet and Zoom) were on the rise
despite the drastically falling unit cost, corroborated with the argument that
IT enables WFH. Such evidence has been found in both case studies (Michael
Collins, 2005) and large-scale research (Gerald S Oettinger, 2011). As pandemic
forced firms to adopt WFH (Brynjolfsson et al., 2020), the laggards (those firms
with low pre-pandemic WFH feasibility) might suffer from a lack of proper ICT
infrastructure and/or software to support such change in operation and hence are
likely to (sustain or increase) investment in ICT during the pandemic.

             II.   Variable Construction and Summary Statistics

                                     A.   Data


WFH Index. -- To construct a firm-level WFH index, we proceed in several
steps: First, we obtain detailed job postings data from Burning Glass Tech-
nologies (BGT) - a high-quality data source with comprehensive coverage of job
                              DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                                           7


posting portals beginning in 2010 and with increasing popularity in recent eco-
nomic research (Hershbein and Kahn, 2018; David Deming and Lisa B Kahn,
2018; Jos´ e Azar, Ioana Marinescu, Marshall Steinbaum and Bledi Taska, 2020;
Subhro Das, Sebastian Steffen, Wyatt Clarke, Prabhat Reddy, Erik Brynjolfsson
and Martin Fleming, 2020; Daron Acemoglu, David Autor, Jonathon Hazell and
Pascual Restrepo, 2020).6 BGT annotates each job posting with an occupational
title (6-digit SOC code), industry code, employer information, job posting date,
and more. We aggregate this data to the employer-SOC (6-digit) level to obtain
a measure of how many job postings the employer posts in each month, quarter,
and year for each SOC occupation.
   Second, we merge this data with the WFH feasibility data from Jonathan Din-
gel and Brent Neiman (2020). They provide a binary index at the 8-digit Oc-
cupational Information Network (O*NET) code level,7 as well as a continuous,
aggregated index at the 6-digit Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) level,
which takes employment shares into account.8
   Finally, we take the weighted average over each firm's occupational WFH in-
dices, weighted by its number of job postings for each occupation. This procedure
enables us to construct, for each firm, the percentage of its labor demand that
has WFH feasibility. Ideally, one would like to have such a measure constructed
over all existing employees, which would capture the actual prevalence of WFH
feasibility within an organization. Since such data is not available, we take the
next best alternative and use the average value of each firm's quarterly WFH
index over the 2010-2019 period.
   Notably, our measure is a forward-looking demand measure and we do not
observe whether firms manage to fill these positions. In principle, it could bias
our results if employers (job seekers) were able to anticipate the pandemic and
adjust the job postings (offers) and hire (accept) towards occupations with higher
WFH feasibility. However, due to the unanticipated nature of the pandemic, this
seems highly unlikely. In fact, while we observed significant changes in average
quarterly WFH indices during the pandemic (relative to the average indices in the
first quarter of 2019), there are no significant differences among the quarters prior
to the pandemic in 2019 regardless of whether firms had high or low pre-pandemic
WFH indices as can be seen in Figure 1.
   A more serious concern might be that we do not observe the large number of

    6 BGT provides partial coverage for 2007, but does not provide any coverage of job postings in 2008
or 2009. We therefore use BGT data starting from 2010.
    7 O*Net is a free online database that contains hundreds of occupational definitions to help students,
job seekers, businesses and workforce development professionals to understand today's world of work in
the United States. It was developed under the sponsorship of the US Department of Labor/Employment
and Training Administration (USDOL/ETA) through a grant to the North Carolina Employment Secu-
rity Commission (now part of the NC Commerce Department) during the 1990s.
    8 Technically, their measure is at the 6-digit SOC hybrid level defined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
for the Occupational Employment Survey (OES). The BLS implemented this slightly altered taxonomy as
an interim solution between the switch from the 2010 SOC system to the 2018 SOC system, which will be
fully used for the 2020 OES. The BGT data uses the 6-digit 2010 SOC system, for which a crosswalk to the
6-digit hybrid system is readily available on the BLS website: https://www.bls.gov/oes/soc_2018.htm.
8


layoffs and furloughs during the pandemic. Again, for our main question in which
we are interested in the effect of pre-pandemic WFH feasibility (firm resilience),
this is not a concern.9 Therefore, in the subsequent sections, high WFH index
always refers to a high pre-pandemic WFH index, unless otherwise specified.

Accounting Fundamentals and Stock Return Data. -- We obtain quarterly
accounting information from 2019 Q1 to 2020 Q3 from Compustat and stock
return data from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). This data
provides us key outcome and explanatory variables including sales, net income,
capital expenditures, stock returns, and total assets.

Merging Data from Compustat and Burning Glass Technologies. -- Since
Compustat and BGT do not share a common firm identifier, we take a multi-step
approach to merge the two databases. Specifically, we use a combination of name
and address fuzzy matching to construct a bridge between Compustat and BGT
data. We use several methods including Soundex and Levenshtein distance to
ensure match quality.
  In some cases, an employer name in the BGT data is a subsidiary of a Compus-
tat firm but its name is distinct from its parent, thus the existing algorithm cannot
recognize their connection. To resolve this problem, we follow M. Campello, J.
Gao and Q. Xu (2019) and match the remaining employers to the subsidiaries of
Compustat firms using information extracted from historical Orbis data provided
by Bureau van Dijk (BvD). Orbis traces the evolution of firms' organizational
structure through time, maintaining the parent-subsidiary correspondence. This
historical information is robust to subsidiary opening, closing, and ownership
changes, which is crucial for accurate matching.10 We manually check the links
identified to ensure the accuracy of our matching.

                                      B.   Summary Statistics

   Following the procedure in section II.A, we are able to match over 3,800 unique
firms in Compustat. For instances where a Compustat firm has multiple sub-
    9 However, this does matter for studying how firms dynamically adjust their hiring during the pan-
demic. Firms with low pre-pandemic WFH indices, particularly in non-essential industries, likely had
stronger pressure to fire workers in occupations that were not WFH feasible or hire more workers in oc-
cupations that permit remote work to continue operation. Many firms were forced to alter their business
operations entirely towards higher work-from-home feasibility as can be seen in schools or management
consulting. Since we do not observe the number of layoffs or reductions in hours, our WFH index during
the pandemic is a noisy signal of resilience. A decline in a firm's WFH index during the pandemic may
even be a sign of recovery as the firm begins to rehire previously fired workers in non-WFH occupations.
Indeed, we do observe these trends and further analyze the recovery dynamics in a parallel study. De-
spite the potential endogeneity of the WFH indices during the pandemic, the pre-pandemic WFH indices
are still an exogenous shifter of firms' pandemic performance, because the pandemic was unanticipated
and significant change in WFH feasibility for large public firms through hiring is highly unlikely in the
short-term (Ilut, Kehrig and Schneider, 2018).
   10 We refer interested readers to Campello, Gao and Xu (2019) for a more detailed description of this
part of the matching exercise.
                            DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                                      9


sidiaries, our firm-level WFH index uses a weighted average of all the subsidiaries'
WFH indices, where the weight is each subsidiary's number of job postings. After
the cleaning process,11 our final analytical sample includes 9,550 observations cor-
responding to 2,176 unique public firms. The average WFH index by sectors based
on firms in our sample is presented in Figure 2. Information, finance, education,
and professional services are among the sectors with the highest WFH indices
while retail, health care, and accommodation sectors have the lowest average
WFH indices for both 2019 and 2020, consistent with the general presumption.
   Table 1 Panel A shows that the mean value of the WFH index is 0.575 with a
standard deviation of 0.286, which indicates a sizeable amount of variation in the
cross section. Panel B further breaks down the key variables into pre- and post-
Covid-19 periods and contrasts their values between subsamples of firms in the
top quarter pre-Covid-19 WFH index (HighWFH=1) and the rest (HighWFH=0).
We observe a differential impact of Covid-19 on high- and low-WFH firms. For
instance, while the two groups of firms have similar average quarterly stock returns
before the pandemic (7.0% vs. 6.9%), the high-WFH firms experience a relatively
higher cumulative return during the period after the breakout of the disease than
low-WFH firms (4.3% vs. -1.5%). Similarly, while the average net income of
high-WFH firms increased modestly from $281.7 million in 2019 to $316.8 million
in 2020, the measure for low-WFH firms has only increased from $199.3 million to
$212.5 million over the same period. This indicates a significantly higher growth
of net income (12.5% vs. 6.6%) between the high-WFH firms and the rest of the
firms during the same period. Although large in magnitude, these differences in
means could be driven by the distribution of WFH indices within and/or across
industry and therefore demand multivariate analyses, which we turn to in the
next section.

                        III.    Empirical Methodology & Results

                                   A.   Empirical Methodology

  To test our hypothesis, we employ a difference-in-differences (DID) research de-
sign. Specifically, we estimate the following multi-variate fixed effects regression:

(1)           Yit =  (HighWFHi × Covid-19t ) + Xi,t-1 + i + t +                     i,t


where subscript i and t index firm and time (i.e., quarter), respectively.12 Yit
specifies the firm-level outcome variables for both financial and stock market per-
formance. In particular, we examine sales, net income, total capital investment,
  11 We require all observations to have non-missing information for key variables for our empirical
exercise and hence have less unique firms in our analytic sample than in the matched sample.
  12 In particular, by including firm and time fixed effects, we already control for individual firms'
indicators for belonging to the top WFH quartile (HighW F Hi ) as well as for the indicators for time
periods during the pandemic (Covidt ).
10


software capital investment, stock returns, and return volatility. HighW F Hi is
an indicator variable, which takes the value of one if firm i's average WFH index
calculated based on its annual job posting data during the pre-Covid-19 period
(2010-2019) falls into the top quartile of the sample distribution and zero oth-
erwise. Covid - 19t is an indicator variable that is set equal to one for 2020
Q1-Q3 and zero otherwise. The parameter of interest is  , which captures the
differential impact of Covid-19 on firms with high versus the rest of the firms
(with lower pre-pandemic WFH indices). X is an array of time-varying firm-level
controls including firm size (total asset), cash holdings, leverage ratio, R&D in-
dicator, and the dividend payout indicator. i specifies firm-fixed effects, which
controls for time-invariant firm-level characteristics. t specifies the time-fixed
effects. Note that the inclusion of both firm-fixed effects and time-fixed effects
absorbs the main effect of HighWFH and Covid-19. Throughout our empirical
analyses, robust standard errors are clustered at the firm level.13

                                       B.    Empirical Results

  In this section, we present regression results on the impact of pre-Covid-19
WFH on firm performance through the first three quarters of 2020. We focus our
attention primarily on firms' financial and stock market outcomes.


Financial Performance. -- We first investigate whether WFH drives better
financial performance during the first three quarters of 2020 (Table 2). After
controlling for time and firm fixed effects as well as time-varying firm-level char-
acteristics such as firm size, cash holdings, leverage ratio, and R&D, firms that
had high WFH indices prior to the Covid-19 pandemic earned 15.5% higher net
income and 3.8% higher sales relative to their low-WFH peers (Columns 1 and
2, respectively) during the pandemic - both coefficients are significant at the 1%
level. Interestingly, these firms also retained a higher level of overall capital in-
vestment but allocated a smaller share towards software capital investment. The
finding that high-WFH firms had a lower software capital investment rate than
their low-WFH peers during the pandemic shows that IT investments are com-
plementary to WFH practices. Firms with lower pre-Covid-19 WFH indices had
to retain IT investment as well as shift hiring towards more WFH feasible jobs to
continue their operation, while firms with high pre-Covid-19 WFH indices already
happened to have these very valuable elements in place before the unprecedented
pandemic.14
   13 In an alternative specification, we augment the time-fixed effect with state-quarter fixed effects,
which is motivated by the recent findings in Brynjolfsson et al. (2020) that the Covid-19-induced switch
to WFH is highly correlated with the incidence of the pandemic in each state. Our baseline results are
fully retained after controlling for the interactions of time and state (based on firm headquarters) fixed
effects.
   14 Note that there is a significant percentage of firms that reported missing capital investment on
software in Compustat. We treat them as zeroes in the main analysis. However, our results are robust
                             DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                                           11


Stock Market Performance. -- Using a similar regression framework, we ex-
amine whether firms' stock market performance during the Covid-19 pandemic is
correlated with their ex ante WFH feasibility. In March 2020, the Covid-19 pan-
demic and the oil price war between Russia and the Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries (OPEC) resulted in the most significant stock market crash
in the last decade. In particular, between February 12, 2020 and March 23,
2020, all three major stock indices (i.e., the Dow Jones Industrial Average, the
NASDAQ Composite, and S&P 500 Index) experienced larger than 20% declines.
   Since reaching a bottom in March 2020, all three stock indices have not only
rebounded, but have reached new heights by November 2020. This is due to a va-
riety of reasons ranging from expectations of an effective vaccine, unprecedented
liquidity injections by the Federal Reserve, to historic stimulus packages passed
by Congress. At a micro-level, firms that were well-known to have high WFH
feasibility (e.g. mainly firms in the Information sector) or that specialized in
WFH-complementary technologies (e.g. Zoom and DocuSign) significantly out-
performed the traditional firms.
   We examine specifically firm-level WFH feasibility on outcome variables such
as stock returns and volatility, and report the results in Table 3. We find that,
compared to low-WFH firms, firms with high levels of WFH prior to the Covid-
19-induced shutdown had significantly higher returns and abnormal returns, and
meanwhile, lower volatility and idiosyncratic volatility.15 Concretely, our esti-
mates in Column 2 of Table 3 suggest that, ceteris paribus, firms in the top
pre-pandemic WFH quartile (i.e., HighWFH=1 ) earned a 4.3% higher abnormal
return than other firms during the pandemic. These results together suggest that
high values of pre-pandemic WFH, as a proxy of firms' resilience to the pandemic,
caused firms to perform significantly better.


Robustness Tests. -- We conduct several robustness checks to address addi-
tional concerns and obtain similar results as in the main findings. First, we
examine the effect of WFH feasibility before the Covid-19 pandemic to explore
the existence of pre-trends. That is, the identified performance effect of high
pre-Covid-19 WHF should only be evident in the first quarter of 2020 and not in
the quarters preceding the pandemic (as merely a continuation of a potential pre-
trend). To address this concern, we examine the timing of the treatment effects
and report our results in Figure B1 Panels A and B. The specifications mirror
our baseline models. The only modification is that we explore the differences
between firms with high vs. lower pre-Covid-19 WFH indices by quarter. These
figures show that firms with high pre-Covid-19 WFH indices had either similar or

and consistent using only firms with a history of reporting their capital investment in software. Results
are available upon request.
  15 Return volatility and idiosyncratic volatility are calculated as the standard deviation of daily returns
over a quarter and that of residuals obtained from fitting a CAPM using daily returns in a quarter. Our
construction of idiosyncratic volatility is in line with Andrew Ang, Robert J Hodrick, Yuhang Xing and
Xiaoyan Zhang (2006). Table 1 Panel A details the variable definitions.
12


somewhat worse performance prior to the pandemic with a sharp turning point
between 2019 Q4 and 2020 Q1, which coincides with the timing of the pandemic
and thus confirms the non-existence of pre-trends.
  Second, our identification strategy exploits the fact that the pandemic was
unanticipated and that some firms happened to be more resilient than their peers
due to their pre-Covid hiring. There is still a possibility that performance dif-
ferences during the pandemic are driven by other, unobserved firm-level char-
acteristics that our resilience measure does not capture. We thus perform both
propensity score matching and coarsened exact matching to construct samples
that consist of similar firms (using pre-pandemic observables) with high and low
WFH indices. More specifically, we matched the firms using return on asset
and size prior to the pandemic within 2-digit NAICS level industries based on
each outcome variable.16 Within this matched subsample, we find consistent and
robust results that are similar to our main findings.17
  Lastly, we consider an alternative WFH proxy (WFH index) by using a con-
tinuous WFH index instead of an indicator as our key explanatory variable. We
also test an alternative specification augmenting the time fixed effect with state-
quarter fixed effects in Appendix E.
  In all aforementioned robustness tests, we find that our baseline results are fully
retained. These results can be found in the appendix.

                                   C.    Industry Heterogeneity

  So far, we reported the average effects of high WFH feasibility on firm perfor-
mance using the entire analytic sample. In this section we explore specific groups
of industries in more detail.


Essential vs.        Non-Essential Industries.              -- In Table A1, we break down
our sample and separately examine the impact of WFH in essential and non-
essential industries based on 4-digit NAICS codes as in Dimitris Papanikolaou
and Lawrence D W Schmidt (2020)).18 We find that high WFH firms in non-
essential industries had 18.3% and 5.9% higher sales and net incomes, respectively,
than their peers with lower pre-Covid-19 WFH indices. In contrast, for firms in
essential industries, these differentials are generally smaller and sometimes noisy.
Meanwhile, we find more salient differences in results for stock market perfor-
mance between the essential and non-essential industries. While high WFH firms
in the non-essential industries seem to enjoy significantly higher returns and lower
   16 We match the treatment and control groups through propensity score matching using the nearest
neighbor method imposing common support with 3 neighbors and 0.001 caliper.
   17 In order to rule out the possibility that our WFH indices are picking up random effects, we also
perform a placebo test by constructing an alternative index using the rank of firms by firms' name in
alphabetical order. The results are reported in Appendix G.
   18 For more details on the definition of the essential and non-essential industries (at 4-digit NAICS
level), please see Papanikolaou and Schmidt (2020)
                            DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                                        13


volatility than their peers, the effect of high WFH feasibility is more moderate
in essential industries. This is consistent with the argument that pre-pandemic
WFH suitability within non-essential industries played a crucial role for firms re-
silience and their ability to effectively continue their operation. In addition, our
results indicate that the significant differences in capital investments on software
primarily load on firms in non-essential industries where the continuation of oper-
ation hinges on such investments more strongly. This finding further corroborates
the notion of complementarity between work-from-home practices and IT.19

High-Tech vs. Non-High-Tech. -- We follow Ryan A Decker, John Haltiwanger,
Ron S Jarmin and Javier Miranda (2017) to separate our sample into high-tech
and non-high-tech industries and re-estimate our main regressions separately in
these subsamples.20 Conventional wisdom suggests that firms in high-tech indus-
tries are more able to adopt WFH due to the nature of their work, while firms in
other industries generally do not have such flexibility. The results of this exercise
are presented in Table A2.
  Panels A and B of Table A2 present the financial performance results for the
high-tech and non-high-tech industries, respectively. Overall, we find that our re-
sults are consistently smaller and mostly insignificant in the high-tech industries,
but are more pronounced in the non-high-tech industries. Panels C and D display
a similar pattern for firms' stock market performance. While these results may
appear somewhat surprising at first glance, they are consistent with the notion in
(Erik Brynjolfsson and Paul Milgrom, 2012): once WFH practices are adopted,
which is likely the case in the high-tech industry,21 further improving WFH adop-
tion may not be feasible or may not generate additional comparative advantages
in firm performance.
  Although we find some industry variation in the effects of the pre-Covid-19
WFH index on firm resilience during the pandemic, we note that our sample is
comprised of large public firms that are likely operating in multiple industries
simultaneously, which could lead to measurement errors, especially when firms
are relatively evenly split among multiple industries.

                                         IV.    Conclusion

  The digital tools and workforce capability to work from home have the potential
to enable firms to maintain enterprise value despite the challenges of the Covid-
   19 We further explore the heterogeneous effects of the WFH on firm resilience during the Covid-19
pandemic by breaking down our sample by sectors. Using the baseline specification similar to those in
Tables 2 and 3, we estimate the marginal effects of the interaction term between the high WFH indicator
and the pandemic indicator and plot them in Appendix F Figure F1. We find that the identified effect
of WFH loads primarily on manufacturing, finance, insurance and real estate, and service sectors. The
definitions of sectors are reported in Appendix H1.
   20 The high-tech industry is defined as in Decker et al. (2017) and can be found in Appendix Table H2.
   21 The mean and median of WFH indices for high-tech industries are 0.71 and 0.78 respectively with a
standard error of 0.25 while the mean and median of WFH indices for other industries are 0.55 and 0.56
with a larger standard error of 0.29.
14


19 pandemic. Firms with greater WFH opportunities can provide more safety
for their workers, and thereby increase the resilience of the firm's operations.
However, large-scale evidence on the actual effectiveness of WFH practices, is
scarce.
   In this paper, we exploit the near-universe of U.S. job postings from the BGT
database to construct a novel firm-level WFH index to give us insight into the re-
silience this capability creates. We find that firms with high pre-pandemic WFH
index values before the unanticipated crisis performed significantly better during
the crisis compared to their peers on several dimensions ranging from financial
performance, such as sales and net income, to stock returns and return volatility.
The magnitude and significance of our results are robust to a range of robustness
checks including tests for pre-trends, propensity score and coarsened exact match-
ings, continuous and dummy measures of WFH index, and the inclusion of state
and quarter fixed effects. Moreover, we find evidence that non-essential industries,
which were more vulnerable to government mandated restrictions on traditional
work arrangements, benefited significantly more compared to essential industries.
Non-high-tech industries also benefited more from high pre-Covid-19 WFH feasi-
bility compared to high-tech industries during the pandemic. Our study provides
some of the first evidence on how WFH practices helped firms cope with major
adverse social and economic shocks and quantifies the magnitudes and significance
of such effects within and across industries.
   Our results imply that the pandemic further increased within-industry inequal-
ity. This is because larger firms (including "digital superstars") tend to be more
IT-intensive (e.g. Amazon, Microsoft, Apple, IBM, Google, and Facebook to
name a few) and are more likely to be in the high pre-pandemic WFH group.
They therefore suffered significantly less than smaller firms. It thus seems likely
that the pandemic further exacerbated the rising issue of market concentration.
   Further investigation into the exact mechanisms through which WFH practices
are linked to performance is a fruitful area for future research. A deep understand-
ing of these underlying issues is particularly valuable to ensure a more efficient
and smooth adoption of and transition into WFH as employers and employees
alike embrace the new reality in the aftermath of the crisis. Striking the right
balance between cost efficiency and supporting the firms and individuals who suf-
fered the most from the pandemic will be critical to ensure a faster and equitable
recovery.

                                 REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, Jonathon Hazell, and Pascual Re-
 strepo. 2020. "AI and Jobs: Evidence from Online Vacancies." National Bu-
 reau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 28257.

Acharya, Viral V, and Sascha Steffen. 2020. "The Risk of Being a Fallen
 Angel and the Corporate Dash for Cash in the Midst of COVID." The Review
                     DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                     15


  of Corporate Finance Studies, 9(3): 430­471.

Albuquerque, Rui, Yrjo Koskinen, Shuai Yang, and Chendi Zhang.
 2020. "Resiliency of Environmental and Social Stocks: An Analysis of the Ex-
 ogenous COVID-19 Market Crash." The Review of Corporate Finance Studies,
 9(3): 593­621.

Allen, Tammy D, Timothy D Golden, and Kristen M Shockley. 2015.
 "How Effective Is Telecommuting? Assessing the Status of Our Scientific Find-
 ings." Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 16(2): 40­68.

Ang, Andrew, Robert J Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang.
 2006. "The Cross-Section of Volatility and Expected Returns." The Journal of
 Finance, 61(1): 259­299.

Atkeson, Andrew G. 2020. "What Will be the Economic Impact of COVID-19
 in the US? Rough Estimates of Disease Scenarios." Research Department Staff
 Reports (Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis), 1­25.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F Katz, Christina Patterson,
 and John Van Reenen. 2020. "The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of
 Superstar Firms." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(2): 645­709.

Azar, Jos´
         e, Ioana Marinescu, Marshall Steinbaum, and Bledi Taska.
 2020. "Concentration in US labor markets: Evidence from online vacancy
 data." Labour Economics, 66.

Benzell, Seth G, Avinash Collis, and Christos Nicolaides. 2020. "Ra-
 tioning social contact during the COVID-19 pandemic: Transmission risk and
 social benefits of US locations." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
 ences, 117(26): 14642 LP ­ 14644.

Bloom, Nicholas, James Liang, John Roberts, and Zhichun Jenny Ying.
  2015. "Does Working from Home Work? Evidence from a Chinese Experi-
  ment*." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(1): 165­218.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Andrew McAfee. 2014. The second machine age:
 Work, progress, and prosperity in a time of brilliant technologies. WW Norton
 & Company.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Paul Milgrom. 2012. "Complementarity in Organi-
 zations." In The Handbook of Organizational Economics. , ed. ROBERT GIB-
 BONS and JOHN ROBERTS, 11­55. Princeton University Press.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, John J Horton, Adam Ozimek, Daniel Rock,
 Garima Sharma, and Hong TuYe. 2020. "Covid-19 and Remote Work:
 an Early Look At Us Data." NBER Working Paper, , (June 220): 1­30.
16


Campello, M., J. Gao, and Q. Xu. 2019. "Personal Income Taxes and La-
 bor Downskilling: Evidence from 27 Million Job Postings." Kelley School of
 Business Research Paper.

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber. 2020. "La-
 bor Markets During the COVID-19 Crisis: A Preliminary View." NBER Work-
 ing Paper 27017.

Collins, Michael. 2005. "The (not so simple) case for teleworking: A study at
 Lloyd's of London." New Technology, Work and Employment, 20(2): 115­132.

Das, Subhro, Sebastian Steffen, Wyatt Clarke, Prabhat Reddy, Erik
 Brynjolfsson, and Martin Fleming. 2020. "Learning Occupational Task-
 Shares Dynamics for the Future of Work." AIES '20, 36­42. New York, NY,
 USA:Association for Computing Machinery.

Decker, Ryan A, John Haltiwanger, Ron S Jarmin, and Javier Miranda.
 2017. "Declining Dynamism, Allocative Efficiency, and the Productivity Slow-
 down." American Economic Review, 107(5): 322­326.

Deming, David, and Lisa B Kahn. 2018. "Skill Requirements across Firms
 and Labor Markets: Evidence from Job Postings for Professionals." Journal of
 Labor Economics, 36(S1): S337­S369.

De', Rahul, Neena Pandey, and Abhipsa Pal. 2020. "Impact of digital surge
 during Covid-19 pandemic: A viewpoint on research and practice." Interna-
 tional Journal of Information Management, 55(Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
 on Information Management Research and Practice: Editorial Perspectives).

Dingel, Jonathan, and Brent Neiman. 2020. "How Many Jobs Can be Done
 at Home?" Becker Friedman Institute White Paper, , (March): 16­24.

Ding, Wenzhi, Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie. 2020. "Corpo-
 rate Immunity to the COVID-19 Pandemic." National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Forsythe, Eliza, Lisa B Kahn, Fabian Lange, and David Wiczer. 2020.
  "Labor demand in the time of COVID-19: Evidence from vacancy postings and
  UI claims." Journal of public economics, 189: 104238.

Gajendran, Ravi S, and David A Harrison. 2007. "The Good, the Bad, and
 the Unknown About Telecommuting: Meta-Analysis of Psychological Media-
 tors and Individual Consequences." Journal of Applied Psychology, 92(6): 1524­
 1541.

Golden, Timothy D. 2006. "The role of relationships in understanding telecom-
 muter satisfaction." Journal of Organizational Behavior, 27(3): 319­340.
                     DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                     17


Golden, Timothy D, and John F Veiga. 2005. "The Impact of Extent of
 Telecommuting on Job Satisfaction: Resolving Inconsistent Findings." Journal
 of Management, 31(2): 301­318.
Hershbein, Brad, and Lisa B. Kahn. 2018. "Do Recessions Accelerate
 Routine-Biased Technological Change? Evidence from Vacancy Postings."
 American Economic Review, 108(7): 1737­1772.
Ilut, Cosmin, Matthias Kehrig, and Martin Schneider. 2018. "Slow to
  Hire, Quick to Fire: Employment Dynamics with Asymmetric Responses to
  News." Journal of Political Economy, 126(5): 2011­2071.
Kizza, Joseph Migga. 2017. Ethical and social issues in the information age.
 Texts in computer science, Cham, Switzerland : Springer, 2017.
Leonardi, Paul M, and Diane E Bailey. 2008. "Transformational Technolo-
  gies and the Creation of New Work Practices: Making Implicit Knowledge
  Explicit in Task-Based Offshoring." MIS Quarterly, 32(2): 411­436.
Lins, Karl V, Henri Servaes, and Ane Tamayo. 2017. "Social Capital, Trust,
  and Firm Performance: The Value of Corporate Social Responsibility during
  the Financial Crisis." The Journal of Finance, 72(4): 1785­1824.
Madden, Mary, and Sydney Jones. 2008. "Networked Workers (PEW Re-
 port)."
Martin, Brittany Harker, and Rhiannon MacDonnell. 2012. "Is telework
 effective for organizations? A meta-analysis of empirical research on percep-
 tions of telework and organizational outcomes." Management Research Review,
 35(7): 602­616.
Mart´
    inez-S´anchez, Angel, Manuela P´    erez-P´ erez, Mar´ ia Jos´e Vela-
 Jim´enez, and Pilar De-Luis-Carnicer. 2008. "Telework adoption, change
 management, and firm performance." Journal of Organizational Change Man-
 agement, 21(1): 7­31.
Meyer, Christine Siegwarth, Swati Mukerjee, and Ann Sestero. 2001.
 "Work-Family Benefits: Which Ones Maximize Profits?" Journal of Manage-
 rial Issues, 13(1): 28­44.
Moen, Phyllis, Erin L Kelly, and Rachelle Hill. 2011. "Does Enhancing
 Work-Time Control and Flexibility Reduce Turnover? A Naturally Occurring
 Experiment." Social Problems, 58(1): 69­98.
Oettinger, Gerald S. 2011. "The Incidence and Wage Consequences of Home-
 Based Work in the United States, 1980-2000." Journal of Human Resources,
 46(2): 237­260.
Olson, Mancur. 1982. The Rise and Decline of Nations. Yale University Press.
18


Papanikolaou, Dimitris, and Lawrence D W Schmidt. 2020. "Working Re-
 motely and the Supply-side Impact of Covid-19." National Bureau of Economic
 Research Working Paper Series, No. 27330.
Ramelli, Stefano, and Alexander F Wagner. 2020. "Feverish Stock Price
 Reactions to Covid-19." CEPR Working Paper No. DP14511.
S´
 anchez, Angel Mart´   inez, Manuela P´  erez P´
                                               erez, Pilar de Luis Carnicer,
  and Maria Jos´ e Vela Jim´ enez. 2007. "Teleworking and workplace flexibility:
  a study of impact on firm performance." Personnel Review, 36(1): 42­64.
Stavrou, Eleni T. 2005. "Flexible work bundles and organizational compet-
  itiveness: a cross-national study of the European work context." Journal of
  Organizational Behavior, 26(8): 923­947.
                            DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                                       19


                                    V.    Figures and Tables




     Figure 1. : Quarterly WFH Index by Firms with High vs. Low
                     Pre-Covid-19 WFH Feasibility

Notes: This figure plots the average quarterly WFH index for firms with high vs. low pre-Covid-19
WFH feasibility index from 2019 Q2 to 2020 Q3. The values in 2019Q1 are used as the baseline group.
Reported results are based on the specifications using average quarterly WFH index controlling for time-
invariant firm unobservable and other firm controls. The WFH index is calculated based on our analysis
sample. The source data comes from the Burning Glass Technologies (BGT) job vacancies data and the
occupation level WFH feasibility indicator by Dingel and Neiman (2020).
20




        Figure 2. : Sector Average WFH indices (2019 and 2020)

Notes: This figure plots the average WFH index by sector in both 2019 Q1-Q4 and 2020 Q1-Q3. The
average WFH index is calculated based on our analysis sample. The source data comes from the Burning
Glass Technologies (BGT) job vacancies data and the occupation level WFH feasibility indicator by
Dingel and Neiman (2020).
                            DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                                           21


          Table 1--: Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics

                                         (A) Full Sample
 Variables              Definition                                                                 Mean
                                                                                                    (SD)
 WFH index              Average pre-Covid-19 WFH feasibility index (based on BGT job post-          0.575
                        ings).                                                                     (0.286)
 HighWFH                = 1 if firm's 2010-2019 WFH index is in top quartile of sample distribu-    0.250
                        tion (zero otherwise).                                                     (-)
 Net Income             Firms' net income.                                                          220.5
                                                                                                   (912.0)
 Sales                  Firms' total sales.                                                          2114
                                                                                                   (7062)
 Normalized     Cap.    Firms' capital expenditure divided by total assets.                         0.018
 Exp.                                                                                              (0.036)
 Normalized Software    Firms' capital expenditure on software divided by total assets              0.002
 Exp.                                                                                              (0.013)
 Return                 Sum of monthly returns per quarter.                                         0.045
                                                                                                   (0.238)
 Abn. Return            Sum of monthly abnormal returns per quarter. Monthly is the difference     -0.018
                        between excess return and the CAPM beta times market excess return.        (0.181)
                        CAPM beta is estimated using past 36 monthly returns.                
 Return Volatility      Standard deviation of daily returns per quarter multiplied by 2 [i.e. 4     0.057
                        quarters] to convert to annual basis.                                      (0.045)
 Idio. Volatility       Standard deviation of the residuals obtained from fitting daily CAPM        0.044
                        for every month for each firm and converted to annual basis.               (0.030)
 Total Asset            Logarithm of total assets.
                                                                                                   29,230
                                                                                                   (3,285)

    (B) Key variables in subsamples by pre-Covid-19 WFH Index and Time
 pre-Covid-19 WFH                                  High                                  Low
 Feasibility                                  (HighWFH = 1)                         (HighWFH = 0)
 Variables                               Before           After                Before           After
                                        Covid-19        Covid-19              Covid-19       Covid-19
 WFH index                                0.887            0.874                 0.503          0.504
                                         (0.114)         (0.143)               (0.268)        (0.259)
 Net Income                               281.7            316.8                 199.3          212.5
                                         (943.2)         (972.9)               (847.0)         (1001)
 Sales                                    1,913            2,305                 2,083          2,217
                                         (5,958)         (7,465)               (6,970)        (7,571)
 Normalized Cap. Exp.                     0.014            0.009                 0.021          0.013
                                         (0.024)         (0.014)               (0.046)        (0.019)
 Normalized Software Exp.                 0.006            0.005                 0.001          0.001
                                         (0.025)         (0.020)               (0.008)        (0.009)
 Return                                   0.070            0.043                 0.069         -0.015
                                         (0.189)         (0.331)               (0.166)        (0.326)
 Abn. Return                             -0.0004          -0.001                -0.005         -0.054
                                         (0.173)         (0.231)               (0.152)        (0.215)
 Return Volatility                        0.045            0.082                 0.043          0.084
                                         (0.037)         (0.044)               (0.037)        (0.047)
 Idio. Volatility                         0.037            0.058                 0.036          0.060
                                         (0.027)         (0.033)               (0.026)        (0.030)
 Total Asset                              42,327          58,784                22,953         28,810
                                        (235,800)       (294,900)             (136,000)      (175,700)

Notes: Panel A reports variable definitions, data sources, and sample means. The sample period is
2019Q1-2020Q3. Panel B contrasts the means of key variables in pre- and post- Covid-19 subsamples
(i.e., 2019 Q1-Q4 and 2020 Q1-Q3, respectively) and in the high and low pre-Covid-19 WFH subsamples.
All continuous variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles.
22




            Table 2--: WFH Feasibility and Financial Performance
 Models                         (1)                 (2)             (3)                    (4)
 Dependent Variable       Log Net Income        Log Sales     Norm. Cap. Exp.      Norm. Software Exp.
 HighWFH × COVID               0.155               0.038           0.004                 -0.001
                              (3.32)              (3.50)          (2.36)                 (-2.14)
 Size                          0.310               0.532          -0.026                 -0.003
                              (2.56)             (15.53)          (-1.19)                (-1.98)
 Cash                         -0.659              -0.379          -0.001                 -0.002
                              (-2.23)            (-4.92)          (-0.08)                (-0.99)
 Leverage                      0.590              -0.312           0.042                  0.001
                              (2.29)             (-4.74)          (1.52)                 (0.49)
 R&D                           0.449               0.059          -0.011                 -0.001
                              (1.76)              (1.43)          (-1.08)                (-0.45)
 Dividend                     -6.209              -2.318           0.111                  0.010
                              (-1.99)            (-2.42)          (1.29)                 (1.13)
 Tobin's q                     0.184               0.040           0.003                 -0.001
                              (5.91)              (5.24)          (2.55)                 (-0.76)
 ROE                           0.038               0.013           0.007                 -0.000
                              (0.45)              (0.63)          (1.65)                 (-0.36)
 Firm FE                         Y                   Y               Y                      Y
 Quarter FE                      Y                   Y               Y                      Y
 Observations                  9568                9568            9568                   9568
 Adj. R2                       0.886               0.996           0.521                  0.844

Notes: This table implements a difference-in-differences (DID) research design to examine the differential
impact of Covid-19 on various performance metrics between firms with high and low WFH feasibility.
The dependent variables across columns 1 to 4 are the logarithm of net income, logarithm of sales,
total capital expenditure over total asset, and software expenditure over total asset, respectively. The
regression model is specified in Equation 1, and all variables are defined in Table 1 Panel A. Omitting
Tobin's q and ROE in the specification provide similar results (available upon request). Firm and time
fixed effects are also included in the estimation. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
                             DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                                              23




         Table 3--: WFH Feasibility and Stock Market Reactions
  Models                          (1)                (2)                  (3)                    (4)
  Dependent Variable           Return            Abn Return            Volatility         Idio. Volatility
  HighWFH × COVID                0.051              0.043               -0.006                 -0.004
                                (4.02)             (3.46)               (-3.47)               (-2.88)
  Size                          -0.120             -0.074               -0.003                 -0.005
                                (-3.87)            (-2.46)              (-0.76)               (-1.97)
  Cash                           0.180              0.112               -0.005                 -0.002
                                (2.27)             (1.58)               (-0.52)               (-0.27)
  Leverage                       0.105              0.031                0.022                  0.018
                                (1.54)             (0.46)               (3.03)                 (3.72)
  R&D                            0.013             -0.058                0.058                  0.014
                                (0.08)             (-0.61)              (4.19)                 (1.26)
  Dividend                       0.048             -0.948                0.341                  0.351
                                (0.05)             (-1.04)              (2.66)                 (4.22)
  Tobin's q                     -0.110             -0.091                0.002                  0.001
                               (-10.14)            (-9.04)              (1.76)                 (1.06)
  ROE                            0.037              0.033               -0.004                 -0.005
                                (1.26)             (1.25)               (-1.24)               (-2.32)
  Firm FE                          Y                  Y                    Y                      Y
  Quarter FE                       Y                  Y                    Y                      Y
  Observations                   9550               9550                 9550                   9507
  Adj. R2                        0.449              0.147                0.713                  0.750

Notes: This table implements a difference-in-differences (DID) research design to examine the differential
impact of Covid-19 on stock market reactions between firms with high and low WFH feasibility. The
dependent variables are total return and abnormal return in Columns (1) and (2); and return volatility
and idiosyncratic volatility in Columns (3) and (4), respectively. The regression specification is specified
in Equation 1, and all variables are defined in Table 1 Panel A. We further include Tobin's Q and
return on equity (ROE) in the regression analysis. Firm and time fixed effects are also included in the
estimation. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
24


                                             Appendix A



  Table A1--: WFH Feasibility and Firm Performance: Essential vs.
                          Non-Essential

                    (A) Essential Industries (Financial performance)
  Models                        (1)                (2)               (3)                    (4)
  Dependent Variable      Log Net Income        Log Sales      Norm. Cap. Exp.      Norm. Software Exp.
  HighWFH × COVID              0.158              0.022             0.002                 -0.000
                              (2.27)             (1.24)            (1.72)                 (-0.66)
  Observations                 4336               4336              4336                   4336
  Adj. R2                      0.924              0.997             0.750                  0.970

                 (B) Non-Essential Industries (Financial performance)
  Models                        (5)                (6)               (7)                    (8)
  Dependent Variable      Log Net Income        Log Sales      Norm. Cap. Exp.      Norm. Software Exp.
  HighWFH × COVID              0.183              0.059             0.007                 -0.001
                              (2.87)             (4.19)            (1.91)                 (-1.70)
  Observations                 5232               5232              5232                   5232
  Adj. R2                      0.853              0.995             0.451                  0.812

                  (C) Essential Industries (Stock market performance)
  Models                         (1)                 (2)                  (3)                   (4)
  Dependent Variable           Return            Abn Return            Volatility        Idio. Volatility
  HighWFH × COVID               0.028              0.028                0.001                 -0.001
                               (1.52)              (1.54)               (0.44)               (-0.51)
  Observations                  4330                4330                 4330                  4323
  Adj. R2                       0.444              0.175                0.682                 0.703

              (D) Non-Essential Industries (Stock market performance)
  Models                         (5)                 (6)                  (7)                   (8)
  Dependent Variable           Return            Abn Return            Volatility      Idio. Volatility
  HighWFH × COVID               0.062              0.043                -0.010                -0.004
                               (3.63)              (2.65)               (-4.65)              (-2.74)
  Observations                  5220                5220                 5220                  5184
  Adj. R2                       0.459              0.131                 0.727                 0.775

Notes: This table re-assesses the results reported in Tables 2 and 3 in two subsamples: essential vs. non-
essential industries. The definitions of essential and non-essential industries are based on (Papanikolaou
and Schmidt, 2020) and can be found in Appendix Table H3. Panels A and B report the results using
financial performance proxies as the dependent variables. Panels C and D repeat the exercise with
return and volatility as the dependent variables. The specifications in these panels are identical to those
in Tables 2 and 3. Firm and time fixed effects are also included in the estimation. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level.
                             DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                                              25




 Table A2--: WFH Feasibility and Firm Performance: High-tech vs.
                       Other Industries

                    (A) High-tech Industries (Financial performance)
  Models                         (1)                (2)              (3)                    (4)
  Dependent Variable       Log Net Income        Log Sales     Norm. Cap. Exp.      Norm. Software Exp.
  HighWFH × COVID               0.095              0.030            0.000                 -0.002
                               (1.04)             (1.81)           (0.26)                 (-1.34)
  Observations                  1395               1395             1395                   1395
  Adj. R2                       0.917              0.997            0.717                  0.801

                       (B) Other Industries (Financial performance)
  Models                         (5)                (6)              (7)                    (8)
  Dependent Variable       Log Net Income        Log Sales     Norm. Cap. Exp.      Norm. Software Exp.
  HighWFH × COVID               0.155              0.036            0.004                 -0.000
                               (2.70)             (2.61)           (2.15)                 (-1.30)
  Observations                  8173               8173             8173                   8173
  Adj. R2                       0.878              0.996            0.517                  0.892

                 (C) High-tech Industries (Stock market performance)
  Models                         (1)                 (2)                  (3)                    (4)
  Dependent Variable           Return            Abn Return            Volatility         Idio. Volatility
  HighWFH × COVID               0.041              0.019                0.001                  0.001
                               (1.63)              (0.78)               (0.23)                 (0.34)
  Observations                  1395                1395                 1395                   1395
  Adj. R2                       0.380              0.156                0.695                  0.776

                    (D) Other Industries (Stock market performance)
  Models                         (5)                 (6)                  (7)                    (8)
  Dependent Variable           Return            Abn Return            Volatility       Idio. Volatility
  HighWFH × COVID               0.041              0.031                -0.004                 -0.002
                               (2.59)              (2.04)               (-1.90)               (-1.23)
  Observations                  8155                8155                 8155                   8112
  Adj. R2                       0.469              0.151                 0.722                  0.750

Notes: This table re-assesses the results reported in Tables 2 and 3 in two subsamples: high tech vs.
other industries. The specifications in these panels are identical to those in Tables 2 and 3. The high-tech
industries are defined as in Decker et al. (2017) and can be reviewed in Appendix Table H2. Panels A
and B report the results with financial performance proxies as the dependent variables. Panels C and D
repeat the exercise with return and volatility as the dependent variables. Firm and time fixed effects are
also included in the estimation. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
26


                                           Appendix B



     Figure B1. : Dynamics of the treatment effect in the DID setting




(A) Dynamics of the treatment effects in the DID setting on stock returns and
                                 volatility




       (B) Dynamics of the treatment effects in the DID setting on financial
                                 performance

Notes: Panels A and B plot the impact of HighWFH on firm outcome variables (A: financial perfor-
mance; B: stock returns and volatility) in the period of 2019Q2-2020Q3 with the 90% confidence interval
attached. Results are based on specifications similar to the baseline models: we regress each outcome
variable on the interaction of HighWFH and the quarter dummy alone with other firm controls. The
values in 2019Q1 are used as the baseline for comparison.
                            DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                                          27


                                            Appendix C



 Table C1--: WFH and firm performance: matched sample analyses

  (A) Financial performance: matched sample analysis using PSM procedure
 Models                        (1)               (2)              (3)                    (4)
 Dependent Variable      Log Net Income       Log Sales     Norm. Cap. Exp.      Norm. Software Exp.
 HighWFH × COVID              0.150             0.030            0.001                 -0.002
                             (2.70)            (2.29)           (0.61)                 (-1.46)
 Observations                 4215              3979             3439                   3907
 Adj. R2                      0.896             0.996            0.763                  0.849

  (B) Financial performance: matched sample analysis using CEM procedure
 Models                        (1)               (2)              (3)                    (4)
 Dependent Variable      Log Net Income       Log Sales     Norm. Cap. Exp.      Norm. Software Exp.
 HighWFH × COVID              0.199             0.029            0.001                 -0.001
                             (3.91)            (2.60)           (1.32)                 (-1.72)
 Observations                 6872              6872             6872                   6872
 Adj. R2                      0.888             0.996            0.766                  0.823

(C) Stock market performance: matched sample analysis using PSM procedure
 Models                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)
 Dependent Variable          Return            Abn Return           Volatility       Idio. Volatility
 HighWFH × COVID              0.063              0.051               -0.006               -0.004
                             (4.59)              (3.73)              (-2.68)             (-2.47)
 Observations                 5197                5197                5279                 5172
 Adj. R2                      0.447              0.132                0.702                0.739

(D) Stock market performance: matched sample analysis using CEM procedure
 Models                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)
 Dependent Variable          Return            Abn Return           Volatility       Idio. Volatility
 HighWFH × COVID              0.075              0.065               -0.005               -0.003
                             (5.51)              (4.87)              (-2.61)             (-2.29)
 Observations                 6863                6863                6862                 6837
 Adj. R2                      0.475              0.155                0.708                0.717

Notes: Panels A and B report the matched sample results for financial performance proxies where
the matching procedure is the propensity score matching (PSM) and coarsened exact matching (CEM),
respectively. For results in Panel A, we estimate a probit model where the dependent variable is HighWFH
and the controls include pre-Covid-19 return on asset (operating income / total asset), employment, and
industry (2-digit NAICS) fixed effects using the pre-Covid-19 sample. We further implement a K2K
nearest neighbor matching with no replacement and common support for each of the outcome variables.
The results in Panel B are based on the coarsened exact matching approach using the same set of pre­19
variables. Panels C and D conduct the same matched sample analysis for stock performance. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level.
28


                                           Appendix D



     Table D1--: WFH Feasibility and firm performance: Continuous
                            WFH proxy

                                  (A) Financial performance
 Models                        (1)               (2)              (3)                   (4)
 Dependent Variable      Log Net Income       Log Sales     Norm. Cap. Exp.     Norm. Software Exp.
 HighWFH × COVID              0.165             0.064            0.013                -0.001
                             (1.83)            (3.02)           (3.59)                (-1.77)
 Other Controls                 Y                 Y                Y                     Y
 Firm FE                        Y                 Y                Y                     Y
 Quarter FE                     Y                 Y                Y                     Y
 Observations                 9568              9568             9568                  9568
 Adj. R2                      0.886             0.996            0.522                 0.844

                               (B) Stock Market performance
 Models                        (1)                (2)                 (3)                   (4)
 Dependent Variable          Return           Abn Return           Volatility        Idio. Volatility
 HighWFH × COVID              0.042             0.051               -0.008                -0.009
                             (1.66)             (2.06)              (-2.48)              (-3.55)
 Other Controls                 Y                  Y                   Y                     Y
 Firm FE                        Y                  Y                   Y                     Y
 Quarter FE                     Y                  Y                   Y                     Y
 Observations                 9550               9550                9550                  9507
 Adj. R2                      0.448             0.145                0.713                 0.750

Notes: Our baseline analysis is based on HighWFH, which takes the value of one if a firm's average
WFH index calculated based on its annual job posting data during the pre-Covid-19 period (2010-2019)
falls into the top quartile of the sample distribution and zero otherwise. In Panels A and B, we repeat
the analysis using the raw, continuous WFH index. Firm and time fixed effects are also included in the
estimation. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
                            DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                                           29


                                            Appendix E



 Table E1--: WFH Feasibility and Firm Performance: State-Quarter
                          Fixed Effects

                                  (A) Financial performance
 Models                        (1)                (2)              (3)                   (4)
 Dependent Variable      Log Net Income        Log Sales     Norm. Cap. Exp.     Norm. Software Exp.
 HighWFH × COVID              0.151              0.033            0.002                -0.001
                             (3.13)             (3.06)           (1.95)                (-1.91)
 Other Controls                 Y                  Y                Y                     Y
 Firm FE                        Y                  Y                Y                     Y
 State-Quarter FE               Y                  Y                Y                     Y
 Observations                 9550               9550             9550                  9550
 Adj. R2                      0.886              0.996            0.538                 0.837

                                (B) Stock Market performance
 Models                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)                   (4)
 Dependent Variable          Return            Abn Return           Volatility        Idio. Volatility
 HighWFH × COVID              0.046              0.038               -0.005                -0.003
                             (3.51)              (2.98)              (-2.66)              (-2.28)
 Other Controls                 Y                   Y                   Y                     Y
 Firm FE                        Y                   Y                   Y                     Y
 State-Quarter FE               Y                   Y                   Y                     Y
 Observations                 9538                9538                9538                  9495
 Adj. R2                      0.451              0.147                0.716                 0.751

Notes: In Panels A and B, we repeat the analysis in Tables 2 and 3 using similar specifications but
control for state-quarter fixed effects instead of quarter fixed effects to address the potential concern
of geographic differences. Firm fixed effects are also included in the estimation. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level.
30


                                            Appendix F




 Figure F1. : WFH Feasibility and Firm Performance across Sectors

Notes: This figure plots the impact of HighWFH on firm outcome variables including financial perfor-
mance and stock returns by sector with the 90% confidence interval attached. Reported results are based
on the specifications similar to the baseline models: we regress each outcome variable on the interaction
of HighWFH and the COVID dummy alone with other firm controls controlling for firm and quarter
fixed-effects. We aggregate industry sectors following (David Autor, David Dorn, Lawrence F Katz,
Christina Patterson and John Van Reenen, 2020), which can also be found in Appendix H4. Please see
the U.S. Census for the definition of 2-digit NAICS industries in Appendix H1.
                            DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                                           31


                                            Appendix G



      Table G1--: Falsification Test (by Position of Firm Name by
                           Alphabetic Order)

                                  (A) Financial performance
 Models                        (1)                (2)              (3)                   (4)
 Dependent Variable      Log Net Income        Log Sales     Norm. Cap. Exp.     Norm. Software Exp.
 HighWFH × COVID              0.005              0.009           -0.001                   -0
                             (0.13)             (0.94)           (-0.68)               (-1.35)
 Other Controls                 Y                  Y                Y                     Y
 Firm FE                        Y                  Y                Y                     Y
 Quarter FE                     Y                  Y                Y                     Y
 Observations                 9568               9568             9568                  9568
 Adj. R2                      0.886              0.996            0.521                 0.844

                                (B) Stock Market performance
 Models                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)                   (4)
 Dependent Variable          Return            Abn Return           Volatility        Idio. Volatility
 HighWFH × COVID              0.016              0.010               0.002                 0.002
                             (1.43)              (0.95)              (0.99)                (2.01)
 Other Controls                 Y                   Y                   Y                     Y
 Firm FE                        Y                   Y                   Y                     Y
 Quarter FE                     Y                   Y                   Y                     Y
 Observations                 9550                9550                9550                  9507
 Adj. R2                      0.447              0.145               0.712                 0.750

Notes: In Panels A and B, we repeat the analyses from Tables 2 and 3 to run a placebo test, in which
instead of using the WFH index, we construct a firm index based on the firm names in the alphabetical
order prior to Covid-19 pandemic. All specifications here are identical to the baseline specifications in
Tables 2 and 3. Robust standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
32


                                 Appendix H



      Table H1--: Industry definition at 2-digit NAICS Level.
 Sector            Description
 (2-Digit NAICS)
 11                Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting
 21                Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction
 22                Utilities
 23                Construction
 31-33             Manufacturing
 42                Wholesale Trade
 44-45             Retail Trade
 48-49             Transportation and Warehousing
 51                Information
 52                Finance and Insurance
 53                Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
 54                Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services
 55                Management of Companies and Enterprises
 56                Administrative and Support and Waste Management and
                   Remediation Services
 61                Educational Services
 62                Health Care and Social Assistance
 71                Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation
 72                Accommodation and Food Services
 81                Other Services (except Public Administration)
 92                Public Administration
                DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                     33




Table H2--: High-Tech Industry definition at 4-digit NAICS Level
               according to Decker et al. (2017).
4-Digit NAICS   Description
3341            Computer and peripheral equipment manufacturing
3342            Communications equipment manufacturing
3344            Semiconductor and other electronic component manufac-
                turing
3345            Navigational, measuring, electromedical, and control in-
                struments manufacturing
3254            Pharmaceutical and medicine manufacturing
3364            Aerospace product and parts manufacturing
5112            Software publishers; 5161 Internet publishing and broad-
                casting
5179            Other telecommunications
5181            Internet service providers and Web search portals
5182            Data processing, hosting, and related services
5413            Architectural, engineering, and related services
5415            Computer systems design and related services
5417            Scientific research-and-development services
34


     Table H3--: Essential Industry definition at 4-digit NAICS Level
             according to Papanikolaou and Schmidt (2020).
 4-Digit NAICS       Description
 1111                Oilseed and Grain Farming
 1112                Vegetable and Melon Farming
 1113                Fruit and Tree Nut Farming
 1119                Other Crop Farming
 1121                Cattle Ranching and Farming
 1122                Hog and Pig Farming
 1123                Poultry and Egg Production
 1124                Sheep and Goat Farming
 1129                Other Animal Production
 1141                Fishing
 1142                Hunting and Trapping
 1151                Support Activities for Crop Production
 1152                Support Activities for Animal Production
 2121                Coal Mining
 2122                Metal Ore Mining
 2123                Nonmetallic Mineral Mining and Quarrying
 2131                Support Activities for Mining
 2211                Electric Power Generation, Transmission and Distribution
 2212                Natural Gas Distribution
 2213                Water, Sewage and Other Systems
 2373                Highway, Street, and Bridge Construction
 3111                Animal Food Manufacturing
 3112                Grain and Oilseed Milling
 3113                Sugar and Confectionery Product Manufacturing
 3114                Fruit and Vegetable Preserving and Specialty Food Man-
                     ufacturing
 3115                Dairy Product Manufacturing
 3116                Animal Slaughtering and Processing
 3117                Seafood Product Preparation and Packaging
 3118                Bakeries and Tortilla Manufacturing
 3119                Other Food Manufacturing
 3121                Beverage Manufacturing
 3254                Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing
 3256                Soap, Cleaning Compound, and Toilet Preparation Man-
                     ufacturing
 3261                Plastics Product Manufacturing
 3312                Steel Product Manufacturing from Purchased Steel
 3313                Alumina and Aluminum Production and Processing
 3331                Agriculture, Construction, and Mining Machinery Manu-
                     facturing
                 DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                  35


 Table H3--: Essential Industry definition at 4-digit NAICS Level
                          (Continued).
4-Digit NAICS    Description
3391             Medical Equipment and Supplies Manufacturing
4242             Drugs and Druggists' Sundries Merchant Wholesalers
4245             Farm Product Raw Material Wholesalers
4413             Automotive Parts, Accessories, and Tire Stores
4441             Building Material and Supplies Dealers
4451             Grocery Stores
4452             Specialty Food Stores
4453             Beer, Wine, and Liquor Stores
4461             Health and Personal Care Stores
4471             Gasoline Stations
4523             General Merchandise Stores, including Warehouse Clubs
                 and Supercenters
4539             Other Miscellaneous Store Retailers
4541             Electronic Shopping and Mail-Order Houses
4812             Nonscheduled Air Transportation
4841             General Freight Trucking
4842             Specialized Freight Trucking
4851             Urban Transit Systems
4852             Interurban and Rural Bus Transportation
4853             Taxi and Limousine Service
4859             Other Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation
4861             Pipeline Transportation of Crude Oil
4862             Pipeline Transportation of Natural Gas
4885             Freight Transportation Arrangement
4911             Postal Service
4921             Couriers and Express Delivery Services
4922             Local Messengers and Local Delivery
4931             Warehousing and Storage
5173             Telecommunications Resellers
5179             Other Telecommunications
5211             Monetary Authorities-Central Bank
5221             Depository Credit Intermediation
5222             Nondepository Credit Intermediation
5223             Activities Related to Credit Intermediation
5231             Securities and Commodity Contracts Intermediation and
                 Brokerage
5232             Securities and Commodity Exchanges
5239             Other Financial Investment Activities
5241             Insurance Carriers
5242             Agencies, Brokerages, and Other Insurance Related Ac-
                 tivities
5251             Insurance and Employee Benefit Funds
36




     Table H3--: Essential Industry definition at 4-digit NAICS Level
                              (Continued).
 4-Digit NAICS       Description
 5259                Other Investment Pools and Funds
 5411                Legal Services
 5412                Accounting, Tax Preparation, Bookkeeping, and Payroll
                     Services
 5621                Waste Collection
 5622                Waste Treatment and Disposal
 5629                Remediation and Other Waste Management Services
 6111                Elementary and Secondary Schools
 6211                Offices of Physicians
 6214                Outpatient Care Centers
 6215                Medical and Diagnostic Laboratories
 6216                Home Health Care Services
 6219                Other Ambulatory Health Care Services
 6221                General Medical and Surgical Hospitals
 6223                Specialty (except Psychiatric and Substance Abuse) Hos-
                     pitals
 6231                Nursing Care Facilities (Skilled Nursing Facilities)
 6233                Continuing Care Retirement Communities and Assisted
                     Living Facilities for the Elderly
 9211                Executive, Legislative, and Other General Government
                     Support
 9221                Justice, Public Order, and Safety Activities
 9231                Administration of Human Resource Programs
 9241                Administration of Environmental Quality Programs
 9251                Administration of Housing Programs, Urban Planning,
                     and Community Development
 9261                Administration of Economic Programs
 9271                Space Research and Technology
 9281                National Security and International Affairs
                    DIGITAL RESILIENCE: FIRM ESTIMATES                       37




Table H4--: Aggregated Industry definition following Autor et al.
                           (2020).
Aggregated Industry Sector              2-Digit NAICS Code
Manufacturing                           31, 32, 33
Finance, Insurance, & Real Estate       52, 53
Utilities, Transportation, and Others   11, 21, 22, 23, 48, 49, 99
Wholesale and Retail trade              42, 44, 45
Services                                51, 54, 55, 56, 61, 62, 71, 72, 81
