                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         INFORMATION SPILLOVERS IN EXPERIENCE GOODS COMPETITION

                                   Zhuoqiong Charlie Chen
                                    Christopher T. Stanton
                                     Catherine Thomas

                                      Working Paper 28584
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28584


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 71903046) and
the "Shenzhen Peacock Program" start-up research grant. We would like to thank Ricardo
Alonso, Yongmin Chen, David de Meza, Hong Feng, Xiangting Hu, Yangguang Huang, Xinyu
Hua, Kohei Kawaguchi, Jianpei Li, Jin Li, Albert Ma, Jusso Valimaki, Jie Zheng, and participants
at the HKUST Economics Webinar, HKUST IO workshop, and Tsinghua BEAT conference for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Zhuoqiong Charlie Chen, Christopher T. Stanton, and Catherine Thomas. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Information Spillovers in Experience Goods Competition
Zhuoqiong Charlie Chen, Christopher T. Stanton, and Catherine Thomas
NBER Working Paper No. 28584
March 2021
JEL No. D11,L1,L13,L15,L26,M21

                                          ABSTRACT

When experience goods compete, consuming one product can be informative about value for
similar untried products. We study a two-period model of duopoly competition in markets that
have this feature and where firms can price discriminate between consumers based on purchasing
history. Price dynamics, firm profits, and consumer surplus depend on how information spillovers
shape demand from the consumers who have trialed the rival product--the potential switchers. In
the first period, rather than competing intensely for all future profits, firms compete only for the
difference in future profits between repeat and switching consumers. Demand-side information
spillovers offer an explanation of how competing firms in new product markets can be profitable
in all periods even when selling products that are indistinguishable ex ante.


Zhuoqiong Charlie Chen                                      Catherine Thomas
B301A, School of Economics and Management                   Management Department
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen                    London School of Economics
Shenzhen 518000                                             Houghton Street
China                                                       London.
chenzq926@gmail.com                                         WC2A 2AE
                                                            United Kingdom
Christopher T. Stanton                                      and CEPR
210 Rock Center                                             c.m.thomas@lse.ac.uk
Harvard University
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
christopher.t.stanton@gmail.com
1    Introduction

In markets where experience goods compete, consumers become informed about their individual
values for the goods that they trial. Klemperer (1987b), Klemperer (1995), and Villas-Boas
(2006) describe this informational advantage as a switching cost. In this paper, we study
markets where an individual consumer's values for competing non-durable experience goods are
correlated, so that any trial allows her to learn her value for the trialled good (Nelson (1970))
and also update her perceived value for any rival goods.
    We characterize the nature of duopoly competition in a two-period model featuring infor-
mation spillovers that determine the extent of informational advantage for trialled products.
Consumers first choose between two unfamiliar products and an outside alternative of known
value. In the second period, consumers face the same choice, but are better--although not
fully--informed about their values for the new products. Firms are able to observe past pur-
chases, which permits behaviour-based price discrimination. There are two main findings:
    First, even when consumers' have ex-ante identical beliefs about the value of the two prod-
ucts, firms make profits from both repeat and switching consumers in the second period when-
ever the new products are sufficiently valuable. This ensures firms make positive profits in the
overall game whenever there are any switching consumers. Second, the extent of the information
spillovers from rival product consumption determines the size of firm profits. Whenever con-
sumer values for the two new products are imperfectly correlated, the trialled product retains
some informational advantage. However, for a range of information spillovers, firm profits are
decreasing in the informational advantage. Because information spillovers reflect the degree to
which consumer values are correlated, this result implies that firm profits can be greater when
new rival goods are closer substitutes. The same logic means that consumer surplus can be
lower when rival goods are closer substitutes.
    The main intuition for these findings is that when product evaluations are more highly
correlated, that is, when the products are closer substitutes, consumers become better-informed
about their value for each product after initial trial. Consumers therefore sort into subsequent
purchases more efficiently, and, for a range of parameter values, switching consumers have a
higher expected willingness to pay for the non-trialed product, making them relatively price
inelastic. These changes allow price-discriminating firms to extract more profit from the group
of switching consumers, which, over some range of information spillovers, outweighs the direct
effect of closer product substitutability on second-period profits. In some of the widely-known
models where switching costs lock consumers in to subsequent purchase, intense first-period
competition for market share means that firms earn zero profits overall. In contrast, here, firms


                                                 1
compete in the first period only for the differential profits between future repeat and switching
consumers rather than for all second-period profits. Hence, when an increase in informational
spillovers increases the second-period profitability of switching consumers, overall profits also
increase.
       Because the model features competing and similar experience goods sold by firms that
can price discriminate, we believe it characterizes competition in digital marketplaces where
buyers can easily browse varieties of a new product and where other types of switching cost
may be relatively low. For example, Klemperer (1987a) describes the high transactions cost of
closing an existing checking account and opening another with a competing bank. However,
in the growing online banking market in many countries, similar competing apps can be freely
and easily downloaded, and recent open banking regulation allows consumers to share data on
their past banking activity with multiple providers, reducing explicit switching costs.1 On the
supply side, new digital marketplaces typically allow sellers to collect more information about
consumers' browsing histories and infer their past purchases. Examples of firms that use such
consumer information to price discriminate can be found in the travel industry and in home
goods retail.2 In retail banking in the US, firms often offer tailored bonuses for opening new
checking accounts, effectively varying price between repeat and switching or new consumers.3
       In the model, consumer values for the two new products have a known bivariate normal
distribution. The correlation between each consumer's value for the new products is governed
by a parameter , varying between -1 and +1, that represents the degree of differentiation
between the two new products and is also a measure of information spillovers from product
trial. This framework nests Bertrand competition (when  = 1) and models of experience good
pricing when consumers' values are independent, as in Villas-Boas (2004), when  = 0, and
establishes a novel connection between these cases.4 For simplicity, there are no other switching
costs, network externalities, or fixed costs in the model.5
   1
     For example, details about the UK regulation that ensures consumers can share these data can be found
here: https://www.openbanking.org.uk/customers/what-is-open-banking/
   2
     Hannak et al. (2014) showed that certain consumers were likely to receive higher prices across a range of
online travel sites, although reverse engineering the consumer information the sites used to personalize these
prices proved difficult.
   3
     For example, Figure A.1, in the Appendix, shows a summary of different promotional offers available to
new Citizens Bank customers, downloaded from https://www.creditdonkey.com/promotions/citizens-bank/ on
2/24/2021. While existing customers of the bank are not offered a bonus, customers likely to be switching from
a competitor can earn $300 or $400 to open a new checking account online, and parents opening an account for
a child under 12 are offered $1000 when the child turns 18.
   4
     Villas-Boas (2004) assumes that products are horizontally and vertically differentiated and consumers learn
about the quality of products from experience.
   5
     While these additional features are often present in the digital marketplaces we have in mind, the mechanisms
and results laid out in this paper do not rely on their presence, and are mostly robust to extensions that include
them. In our setting, switching arises because consumption changes the information structure for consumers with
heterogeneous values for the new products.




                                                        2
       The value of the new product market is defined as the extent to which the expected value for
either of the new products less marginal cost exceeds the value of the outside alternative, and
is assumed to be exogenous. Firms compete in prices and the equilibrium outcomes of interest
are the intensity of first-period price competition and overall firm profits, as well as consumer
surplus in the new market. The analysis shows that these outcomes are all determined by the
extent of switching to the rival product after initial trial and the price elasticity of any switching
customers relative to the price elasticity of repeat customers. Switching behavior depends on
the interaction between the value of the new product market and the magnitude of information
spillovers from experience.
       Although the equilibrium price charged to repeat customers is always at least as large as
the price charged to switchers, information spillovers can increase the share of switchers even
to the extent that the mass of switching consumers is more profitable than the mass of repeat
consumers. In this case, firms have no incentive to compete intensively in the first period for
consumers who will become repeat buyers, and therefore set a first-period price that exceeds
marginal cost. In this case, firms not only earn positive profits overall, but also earn positive
profits in each period.
       In the large literature on experience good pricing building on Nelson (1970), the majority
of papers do not model competition between firms. Cremer (1984) studies a two-period setup
allowing price discrimination by a monopolist, and shows that the first-period price can exceed
the second-period price because consumers' willingness to pay in the first period includes the
option value of learning from consumption. Bergemann and V¨
                                                          alim¨
                                                              aki (2006) consider partial
learning from consuming an experience good in a continuous time model and show that price
dynamics are determined by whether the market is mass or niche, a distinction that also plays
a role in this paper.6 Jing (2011) extends their study to evaluate the welfare implications of
price discrimination and price commitment. Firm profit and social welfare are greater under
price commitment in a niche market and greater under price discrimination in a mass market.
       When competing products are considered and price discrimination is not possible, there
arises a well-known trade off in later periods between setting a uniform price that extracts
surplus from repeat loyal customers while also attracting customers of rival brands to switch.
Villas-Boas (2004) studies this trade off in a two-period Hotelling model with no learning about
rival products from consumption. In that model, second-period prices are related to first-period
market share. Villas-Boas (2006) studies experience good pricing in an infinite horizon model
   6
     Their definition of mass market coincides with the equilibrium that exists in this paper where the expected
value of the new product exceeds the marginal cost. We show that when this condition is not met, various
equilibria can exist, one of which coincides with their niche market definition.



                                                       3
with overlapping generations of consumers and shows how firms may compete intensively in
prices to gain future market share even if consumers anticipate that lower prices now means
higher prices later. Doganoglu (2010) shows that when firms are restricted to use uniform prices,
prices are lower when switching costs are sufficiently low than when they are absent. In our
model, price discrimination allows firms to avoid the trade off that arises with a uniform price
of reducing profits from repeat consumers in order to attract switching consumers.
       Our setting involves consumers having unknown and heterogeneous values for two products
competing with a known alternative. Bergemann and V¨
                                                   alim¨
                                                       aki (1997) study the related case
of a new entrant competing with a known incumbent. Their model features a different type
of information spillover, in that public beliefs about the common-value component of the new
good are updated after any consumer experience.7 Both firms want to speed up information
transmission, and, since only trials of the new product are informative, the incumbent's incentive
to compete with the entrant on price is softened. Consumer preferences are also horizontally
differentiated, with consumers being distributed uniformly on a line, and both firms prefer
maximum ex post differentiation in this setting. In our model, within-consumer information
spillovers inform each consumer's private values. Because these spillovers vary with the extent
of product differentiation, competing firms can prefer to be closer substitutes.
       In the broader literature on switching costs (Klemperer, 1987a,b; Farrell and Shapiro, 1988;
Beggs and Klemperer, 1992; Padilla, 1992, 1995; Klemperer, 1995; Farrell and Klemperer, 2007),
these costs are usually assumed to be high enough that no consumer switches in equilibrium,
and consumer values are assumed to be high enough that no consumer leaves the market after
trying one of the goods. Alternatively, in the model by Chen (1997), consumers do switch when
they have private switching costs and firms can make monetary transfers to switching customers.
Paying customers to switch serves as a form of behavior-based price discrimination, which, as in
our model, neutralizes any influence of first-period market-share on the second-period prices.8
       Fudenberg and Tirole (2000) consider customer poaching in a horizontally differentiated
market where consumers know their values and switching incurs no cost. Brand switching
only happens when there is behavior-based price discrimination. Consumers switch brands for
lower prices and hence inefficient switching arises in equilibrium as some consumers switch to
a less-preferred brand. In contrast, in our paper, switching is always welfare improving. This
is because unsatisfied consumers have the opportunity to switch and obtain positive surplus
rather than leave the new market.
   7
    Moretti (2011) also models market-level social learning about product quality through reviews.
   8
    Chen and Pearcy (2010) show that loyal customers may be rewarded by a lower price if firms can commit
to future prices. In this paper, we assume that the distribution of consumer values is ex ante equivalent across
brands and firms cannot commit to future prices.



                                                       4
   Our interest lies in characterizing how a demand-side information externality increases the
profits of competing new products when consumer valuations are unknown prior to trial. We
emphasize how information shapes whether consumers remain loyal, switch to a rival product,
or leave the new market. Hence, allowing consumers to opt out of the new market altogether
is an important feature of the model. The strength of information spillovers from an initial
consumption experience, together with the value of the new market, determine the extent of
market coverage in the second period, that is, the share of consumers who buy either of the
new products rather than exit and purchase the old technology.
   Firms can make higher profits when new products are closer substitutes because information
spillovers are increasing in the extent of perceived product similarity. Other papers have set
out alternative reasons why firms may prefer partial differentiation. For example, Bester (1998)
combines price as a signal of quality with the theory of spatial competition and finds that
imperfect information about goods' vertical quality characteristics reduces firms' incentives to
differentiate horizontally. Gehrig and Stenbacka (2004) study endogenous horizontal product
differentiation between goods without the experience good feature and allow switching costs to
be increasing in the extent of differentiation.
   The demand-side information spillovers that lead to new product profitability in this model
differ from both the technology and product market rivalry spillovers created when firms un-
dertake R&D as described in Bloom et al. (2013). Their market rivalry spillovers refer to the
business-stealing effect on firm performance of an innovation in a closely competing product. In
our case, with incomplete information about consumer values, a rival's new product generates
positive demand for other similar products.
   While early competition between close rivals is often modeled as a war of attrition where
one dominant firm eventually prevails, equilibria in our model feature two firms that can be
profitable in both periods. We show that information spillovers allow firms to remain profitable
even when the expected value of the new market is negative, that is, when the expected value of
each new product less its marginal cost is outweighed by the known value of the old technology.
This is because uninformed consumers purchase a new product for the option value of remaining
in the new market once informed, and price discriminating firms facilitate efficient sorting by
better-informed consumers into repeat purchase, switching to the rival good, and returning to
the old technology.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the primitives of the model. Section 3
presents the equilibria of the second-stage sub-game without information spillovers ( = 0) and
then the second-stage sub-game with information spillovers (  (0, 1)). Section 4 presents the



                                                  5
full equilibria and analyzes the range of market values for which firms make profits and the range
of market values for which profits are zero, both in the case when  = 0 and then when   (0, 1).
The proofs that are not in the main text are provided in Appendix B. Section 5 describes some
implications of the earlier analysis and presents a theorem relating firm profits to the ability to
attract switching consumers. It also provides a numerical example of profits, consumer surplus,
and social surplus as a function of market value at different levels of information spillovers.
The equilibria when consumers' preferences are negatively correlated ( < 0) are presented in
Appendix C. Appendix D gives the price elasticities of interest. Appendix E presents some
discussion of a benchmark case where consumers are fully informed of their values for the new
products. Consumer valuations are asymmetric in Appendix F, and firms are unable to price
discriminate based on purchasing behavior in Appendix G. Section 6 concludes.


2         Primitives of the Model

There are two firms that offer non-durable experience goods A and B, respectively. The marginal
cost for both firms is c  0. The firms compete by setting prices simultaneously in each of two
periods. There exists a unit mass of consumers, each of whom buys one unit of good A or
good B, or returns to the outside option, in each period. Firms and consumers have a common
discount factor   [0, 1].

Valuations: Each consumer's per period valuation for good i  {A, B } is denoted i , and is
normalized relative to the existing alternative option value of zero. For simplicity, i is constant
across the two periods, but more complicated models could allow consumers to update beliefs
about a dynamic process. In the first period, consumers do not know their valuations but know
that the joint distribution is bivariate normal N (µ, ), where
                                                                                   
                                              µA                   2
                                                                   A       A B
                                   µ=               , =                            .
                                              µB                  B A        2
                                                                             B

We assume that µA = µB = µ and A = B =  > 0, and that   [0, 1].9 F (·) denotes
each product's marginal value distribution, and, hence, F (·) is the c.d.f of a univariate normal
distribution with mean µ and variance  . The corresponding p.d.f. is denoted f (·)10 Note
    9
         We analyze the   [-1, 0) case in the Appendix B.
    10
         The probability density function of a bivariate normal distribution is given by

                              1                        1    (x - µX )2   (y - µY )2   2(x - µX )(y - µY )
            f (x, y ) =                    exp -                 2
                                                                       +      2
                                                                                    -                       ,
                          2X Y    1-   2           2(1 -  )
                                                         2     X            Y               X Y

and the marginal distribution for one variable is obtained by integrating over the other variable, e.g., the marginal



                                                              6
that i satisfies the monotone reverse hazard rate (MHR) condition, so that f (·)/[1 - F (·)] is
an increasing function, whereas f (·)/F (·) is a decreasing function. The joint distribution is
common knowledge to both firms and consumers.

Learning: After consuming in the first period, a consumer who bought good i learns her i ,
as in Nelson (1970), and also updates her expectation about -i , which is E (-i |i ):

                                                -i
                        E (-i |i ) = µ-i +         (i - µi ) = i + (1 - )µ.
                                                i

The parameter  therefore measures the information spillover from consumption between the
tried and untried new products.

Prices: Firms announce their prices at the beginning of each period simultaneously. The first-
period price of firm i is denoted pi , the second-period price charged to repeat consumers is Ri ,
and the second-period price charged to switching consumers is Si . Throughout the paper, we
assume that firms can price discriminate between consumers based on their purchasing history
and so Ri may differ from Si . Firms cannot distinguish between switching consumers and those
who did not purchase in the first period, so both are offered the same price. We do not allow
firms to offer two-period subscriptions in the first period, nor can they commit to future prices.11

Consumer payoffs: In each period, each consumer can buy only one unit of one good or she
can choose to take the outside option that she values at zero.12 A consumer who buys good i in
the first period obtains a second period payoff of u2 (i ) = max{i - Ri , i + (1 - )µ - S-i , 0}
if she chooses to continue buying good i, switch to good -i, or take the outside option in the
second period, respectively.

Cutoff consumer types: We define the following cutoff types for firm i's (i  {A, B }) first-
period consumer who is indifferent between her period-two options.

         RS : the marginal repeat consumer who is indifferent between buying good i again and
       · i
distribution of X is given by
                                       +
                                                          1       (x - µX )2
                            fX (x) =       f (x, y )dy =    exp -      2
                                                                                    .
                                       -                 2X          2X

  11
      Suppose both firms offer a two-period subscription at a lump sum price and the cost of return/refund is
prohibitively high, then they are effectively competing in a single-period Bertrand competition because goods are
ex ante homogeneous to consumers. Suppose instead that both firms can commit to second-period prices and
price discrimination is not allowed, then they charge the marginal cost in both periods and earn a zero overall
profit. The relevant analysis for price commitment is available upon request.
  12
     We interpret the outside option as an "old", tried-and-tested product that remains available to the consumer
in each period.



                                                       7
                                  RS - R = E ( | RS ) - S . Hence, with  = 1 we have
      switching to good -i, i.e., i     i     -i i       -i


                                             RS               Ri - S-i
                                             i  = µ+                   ;                                     (1)
                                                               1-

      RO : the consumer who is indifferent between buying good i again and the outside option,
    · i

                                                   RO
                                                   i  = Ri ;                                                 (2)


      SO : the consumer who is indifferent between switching to good -i and the outside option,
    · i
            SO + (1 - )µ = S . Hence, we have
      i.e., i               -i


                                            SO          S-i - (1 - )µ
                                            i  =                      .                                      (3)
                                                              

          RS = µ if R = S , suggesting exactly half of firm i's consumers would switch if
Note that i          i   -i

firm i's price to repeat consumers were equal to firm -i's price to switching consumers. Also,
                         SO = + if S
when  > 0, we have lim0+ i                            SO = - if S
                                     -i > µ and lim0+ i           -i < µ.


Monopoly: In some equilibria, firms have monopoly power in a share of the market. We define
price M as the monopoly price given the demand curve 1 - F (·). That is, M satisfies

                                                1 - F (M )
                                         M=                + c,                                              (4)
                                                  f (M )

and according to the MHR condition, M is uniquely determined.
                              
    Denote by  (M ) =         M (M   - c)dF (x) the profit made by a monopoly firm from charging
                                                                     
price M in a market with demand 1 - F (M ). SS (M ) =                M (x   - c)dF (x) is the corresponding
social surplus. In the duopoly environment we consider, the demand curve actually faced by
each of the firms depends on the nature of equilibrium.13

Major innovation and minor innovation:
    The value of the new products relative to the old technology is exogenously given. For
convenience, we divide new products into two groups:

    · A product is defined as a major innovation if and only if at least half of the consumers
      value it at above the marginal cost, so µ  c.
   13
      In the absence of a competitor, a monopolist selling two products would extract more total surplus from
all consumers' willingness to pay in both periods. This is because the monopolist does not face the duopolists'
challenge of competing in first-period price for the most profitable group of consumers in the second period. The
role that the competition channel plays in the main results is discussed later.




                                                       8
    · A product is a minor innovation if and only if less than half of the consumers value it at
      above the marginal cost, so µ < c.

In other words, a new market with a minor innovation is preferred to the old technology only by
those consumers with high valuations, but a new market with a major innovation is preferred
to the old technology for most consumers.

Benchmark case where  = 1
    If  = 1, consumers are fully informed about their valuations for both products after the
first period and the valuations are equal for both products. This becomes standard Bertrand
competition in each period. Because each firm has an incentive to reduce price in the second
period, the second-period equilibrium price is equal to the marginal cost, and firms make zero
profit. In the first period, since a repeat and a switching customer in the second period both
generate profits of zero, there is no incentive to reduce first-period price to fight for future
customers. Firms, hence, set first-period price equal to the marginal cost in competing for
first-period profit. The consumer surplus in such a setting is equal to the social surplus:

                                                                +
                                 CS=1 = (µ - c) +                   (x - c)dF (x).
                                                            c



3     Second-period equilibria when   0


To characterize the sub-game perfect equilibria of the two-stage pricing game, we start by
characterizing possible equilibria in the second-period sub-game. We focus on pure-strategy
symmetric sub-game perfect equilibria throughout, where firms choose their prices simultane-
ously in each period. Firms' second-period profit consists of two parts that can be written in
general form as:

                            +                                                        RS
                                                                                     - i
          (Ri - c) · i                    dF (i ) + max 0, (Si - c) · -i                   dF (-i ) ,         (5)
                              RS , RO )
                          max(i                                                  SO
                                                                                 -
                                  i                                                i

                profit from repeat customers                profit from switching customers


where i denotes firm i's market share in the first period and i + -i = 1. Because we allow
behavior-based price discrimination such that the price to repeat customers Ri can differ from
the price to switching customers Si , we will see that the optimal prices are independent of
the first period market share i .14 For the  > 0 case, we will show in Proposition 2 that
  14
     In an alternative setting with uniform pricing, as is generally the case in the literature on dynamic pricing
for experience goods (Doganoglu, 2010; Villas-Boas, 2006), first-period market share does affect second-period
prices because the firm with larger first-period market share would charge a higher second-period price. This


                                                        9
there are three types of second-period equilibria, illustrated in Figures 1, 2, and 3. In each of
the figures, the x-axis is the consumer valuation for the trialed product, i , and the y -axis is
consumer surplus. In each, the line with the steeper slope represents the consumer's surplus
from purchasing product i again in the second period, (i - Ri ). The consumer's surplus from
switching to the untried product, E (-i |i ) - S-i = i + (1 - )µ - S-i is the flatter--but still
positively-sloped--line in each figure.15

                              n                                     s
                         i - Ri                                i - Ri                                    m
                                                                                                    i - Ri


                                                                                             m
                                                                              i + (1 - )µ - S- i


    RS     RO
    i      i  =M
                    SO
                    i               i             RS
                                                  i    RO
                                                     = i    SO
                                                          = i             i      SO
                                                                                 i       RO
                                                                                         i         RS
                                                                                                   i               i
                        n
         i + (1 - )µ - S- i                               s
                                           i + (1 - )µ - S- i




   Figure 1: Niche market               Figure 2: Semi-niche market             Figure 3: Mass market
                     n =M
 equilibrium, where Ri                      equilibrium, where                equilibrium, where Ri m, Sm
                                                                                                        -i
              n
         and S-i  c.                          Ris  [m, M ] and                   are given by (8), (9).
                                           S-s = Rs + (1 - )µ
                                              i      i


    First, when µ is sufficiently small, there exists a "niche market" equilibrium (see Figure 1 for
an example with  > 0) in which the marginal repeat consumer strictly prefers the outside option
and the new market is not fully covered. The consumers that have a bad initial experience choose
                                                                         RS ,  RO ) =  RO , there
to leave the market rather than to switch to the untried product, so max(i    i       i
                                                                                   SO >  RS .16
are no switchers, and the second maximum in (5) takes on the value of zero because - i  -i

Since no consumers switch in equilibrium, each firm makes monopoly profit in the second period
in its respective share of the market by charging the monopoly price M . In order for such a price
to repeat consumers be part of an equilibrium, it must be true that µ is sufficiently small--i.e.
consumers expect to have sufficiently low valuations for the untried product--to guarantee that
firm's repeat customers are informed and hence are less price elastic, whereas the opposing firm's customers are
less informed and more price elastic. Therefore, the "average" price elasticity of the consumers is lower when
a greater share customers are informed and the firm therefore charges a higher price. We instead assume that
the firms can identify repeat consumers from switching consumers according to past purchasing history. Hence,
each firm chooses optimal prices for repeat and switching consumers separately according to each group's price
elasticity, and the initial market share has no effect on these prices.
   15
      The positive slope of switchers' demand contrasts with the  = 0 case, where the consumer's surplus from
switching is a constant, independent of i . When   (0, 1), consumer's surplus from switching is positively
correlated with i .
   16                                        SO      RS
      In particular, when  > 0, we have -     i > -i in the niche market equilibrium as is shown in Figure 1.
                          SO
As  approaches zero, -      i approaches  +   when   S-i > µ, which always holds in the niche market equilibrium
                                       SO     RS
according to Proposition 1. Hence, -    i > -i also holds for  = 0. In both cases, the second term in (5) equals
zero.



                                                      10
no firm can charge a price S-i  c to attract switching consumers.
    Second, when µ is sufficiently large, there exists a "mass market" equilibrium (see Figure
3 for an example of the  > 0 case) in which the marginal repeat consumer strictly prefers to
stay in the market rather than to leave the market and take the outside option. That is, at
least some of the consumers who have a bad initial experience switch to the untried product for
which they have a high conditional expectation, the second maximum in (5) takes on the value
                         RS >  SO  -, and the firm makes some profits from switchers.17
of the non-zero term, as - i  -i

Whether all or some customers switch to the untried product is determined by . When a mass
market equilibrium exists, we can derive the second-period equilibrium prices via the first order
approach.
    Third, when µ takes on intermediate values, there exists an equilibrium that is neither
the mass nor the niche market equilibrium where the marginal repeat consumer is indifferent
between consuming again in the market and the outside option. We refer to this equilibrium
as the "semi-niche market equilibrium" (see Figure 2 for an example with  > 0). In this
equilibrium, no consumer switches brand after a bad initial experience--similar to the niche
market equilibrium--but a marginal deviation of charging slightly lower prices to switching
consumers results in some switching.


3.1    No Information Spillovers, i.e.  = 0

When  = 0, there is no correlation between customers' valuations so customers who consumed
good i in the first period can make no inference about good -i in the second period. Proposition
1 provides the sufficient and necessary conditions for each of the three equilibria in this case.

Proposition 1. Suppose  = 0 and all consumers have purchased one of the goods. Then, in
the second period there exists a unique equilibrium, which is:

                                       n = M and S n  c if and only if µ  c;
   · a niche market equilibrium where Ri          i

                                            s = M and S s = µ if and only if c  µ  M ;18
   · a semi-niche market equilibrium where Ri          i

                                      m = Sm =               1
   · a mass market equilibrium where Ri    i               2f (µ)   + c < M if and only if µ > M .


    Proposition 1 states that the sufficient and necessary condition for a mass market equilibrium
to exist is µ > M , which is consistent with the standard definition of "mass market" in the
literature (Bergemann and V¨
                           alim¨
                               aki, 2006; Ivanov, 2009). We thus follow the literature in
  17                                SO
     Recall that when  > 0, lim0+ -   i = - if Si < µ, which holds in the mass market equilibrium according
to Proposition 1.
  18
     Note that when µ = c the semi-niche and the niche market equilibrium coincide.


                                                    11
naming the equilibrium as such. Note that the new product market is fully covered in this mass
market equilibrium--all consumers buy i or -i in the second period.
       Prior studies define a "niche market" as existing if and only if µ < M . Yet Proposition 1
shows that there are two different equilibria for this parameter range. We refer to the equilibrium
with no switchers as the niche market because it has the feature that only those consumers who
have a high valuation for the products remain in the new market.
       Firms' market power among repeat consumers is greater in the semi-niche than in the mass
                                                                                m < Rs = Rn .
market equilibrium, and greater still in the niche market equilibrium, because Ri    i    i

Firms' market power among switching consumers has the opposite ordering: it is greatest in the
mass market equilibrium, then the semi-niche and then absent in the niche market equilibrium.
                 m > S s and the niche market equilibrium has no switchers.
This is because Si    i

       We provide a sketch of the proof for the mass market equilibrium. According to the earlier
discussion, the mass market equilibrium with  = 0, given in Proposition 1, is characterized by
            RS >  RO and  SO = - in the second-period profit, equation (5).19 First order
restricting i    i       -i

conditions of equation (5) w.r.t Ri and Si , respectively, yield

                                       RS )                              RS )
                                                                      F (-
                        m      1 - F (i                         m          i
                       Ri =          RS )
                                            +c       and       Si =      RS
                                                                              + c.                           (6)
                                 f (i                                 f (-i )

                     RS given in equation (1), we have
By the definition of i

                                                        1 - 2F (iRS )
                                       RS
                                       i  = µ+                RS )
                                                                      .                                      (7)
                                                           f (i

                  RS that satisfies (7) is  RS = µ, as the LHS of (7) increases in  RS and the
In fact, the only i                        i                                       i
                        RS . Replacing  RS and  RS with µ in (6) gives Rm = S m =                    1        20
RHS of (7) decreases in i              i       -i                       i    i                     2f (µ) + c.

       Appendix D derives the own- and cross-price elasticities for each of the three equilibria. A
comparison of the own-price elasticities in the mass and niche market equilibria proves relevant
to the future discussion. In the mass market case, the own-price elasticities for repeat and
                                               DR          Rm           DS        Smm = Sm,
switching customers, respectively, are ERm
                                         i
                                           = - Rmi-c and ES m
                                                            i
                                                              = - S mi-c . Because Ri    i
                                                 i         i              i       i
                                                                                                  m -c
                                                                                                 Ri
the firm's market power in each segment--summarized by the Lerner index-- is                        c .   In the
                                                                                          DiR
                                                                                                    M
niche market equilibria, the own-price elasticity for repeat customers is E                n
                                                                                          Ri    = -M -c , and

there are no switching customers in equilibrium. The Lerner index for repeat consumers is,
          M -c            m < M , the market power of each firm in the niche market equilibrium
hence,     c .   Because Ri
  19
    The semi-niche market is characterized by construction.
  20
    Observing in the mass market equilibrium that the willingness to pay of all switching customers is equal to
µ, which is greater than M , shows that it is the competition between the two firms that leads to optimal prices
to repeat and switching customers being equal to each other at a level below M .



                                                      12
exceeds the market power in the mass market equilibrium.
   Figure 4 illustrates the niche market equilibrium, Figure 5 illustrates the semi-niche market
equilibrium, and Figure 6 the mass market equilibrium for the  = 0 case. The horizontal line
                                                                                    k ), where
in each figure is the expected value of switching to -i in the second period, (µ - S- i

k = n, s, m in the niche, semi-niche, and mass market equilibria, respectively.

                                                                         s                                     m
                              n
                         i - Ri                                     i - Ri                                i - Ri




                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                              µ - S- i
                                                                              s
   RS
   i                                                                    µ-   S- i
               RO
               i    =M                 i             RS
                                                     i    =   RO
                                                              i    =M               i                RS
                                                                                                  RO i
                                                                                                  i     =µ               i


                                       n
                                  µ - S- i




  Figure 4: Niche market                     Figure 5: Semi-niche market                  Figure 6: Mass market
                    n = M.
equilibrium, where Ri                            equilibrium, where                         equilibrium, where
                                                  Ris = M, S s = µ.                      m = S m = 1/ [2f (µ)] + c.
                                                                                        Ri
                                                            -i                                 -i


   Corollary 1 describes firm profits in each second-period equilibrium.

Corollary 1. Suppose  = 0 and all consumers have purchased one of the goods. In the second
period,

   · firm i's profit in the niche market equilibrium consists of i  (M ) from repeat consumers
      and zero profit from switching consumers (of which there are none).

   · firm i's profit in the semi-niche market equilibrium consists of i  (M ) from repeat con-
      sumers and -i (µ - c)F (M ) from switching consumers;

                                                                                      i
   · firm i's profit in the mass market equilibrium consists of                     4f (µ)   from repeat customers and
       -i
      4f (µ)   from switching consumers.


   In fact, the  = 0 setting is a special case of   0, which we analyze in Appendix C. All
equilibrium choices in the former can be obtained by setting  = 0 in the equilibrium choices
in the latter.


3.2    With Information Spillovers, i.e.   (0, 1)

In the presence of information spillovers,   (0, 1), the three equilibria are those shown earlier
in Figures 1 - 3. In none of these three equilibria is the new market fully covered. Because

                                                          13
consumer values for the products are positively correlated, a share of consumers always returns
to the outside option after trying one of the new products.21
       The earlier discussion showed that in the niche market equilibrium (Figure 1) we have
    RS ,  RO ) =  RO and the profit from switchers in (5) equals zero. The optimal second-
max(i    i       i

period price to repeat customers is exactly the monopoly price, M , as it was when  = 0. The
existence of such an equilibrium, then, requires that the competitor cannot poach customers
with a price at least as large as marginal cost c. The sufficient and necessary condition for the
equilibrium, as given below by Proposition 2, guarantees that the competing firm cannot do so.
                                                      RS ,  RO ) =  RS and the profit from
       In the mass market equilibrium (Figure 3), max(i    i       i
                                                                         RS >  SO . When
switchers expression in (5) takes the value of the non-zero term because - i  -i

a mass market equilibrium exists, we can derive the second-period equilibrium prices by the
first order approach:

                                                        RS )]
                                          (1 - )[1 - F (i
                                m
                               Ri =                RS )
                                                              + c,                                         (8)
                                               f (i
                                                    RS ) - F ( SO )
                                          (1 - ) F (-
                                m                     i       -i
                               Si    =           RS ) +    1-   SO
                                                                          + c.                             (9)
                                              f (- i         f (-i )


                                                                   m and S m .22 We show the
By switching between i and -i in (9), we can solve for the unique Ri      -i
               m and S m in the proof of Proposition 2, but the intuition is straightforward, as
uniqueness of Ri      i
                                                       m and S m , respectively.
the right hand sides of (8) and (9) are decreasing in Ri      i

       In the semi-niche market equilibrium (Figure 2), the probability of consumer switching
is zero. The marginal repeat consumer is indifferent between consuming in the new market
and taking the outside option and consumers with lower valuations strictly prefer the outside
option. We can obtain the price to repeat consumers in a semi-niche market equilibrium by
         m =  RS = m in (8). Hence, m satisfies
letting Ri   i


                                           (1 - )[1 - F (m)]
                                    m=                       + c.                                         (10)
                                                f (m)

                                                      RS is indifferent between repeat
The price m ensures the marginal repeat consumer with i
                                        RS - m = 0.23 On the other hand, we can construct
purchase and the outside option, due to i
                                                                      RS is indifferent
the price m + (1 - )µ which ensures that the marginal repeat customer i
  21
     In Appendix G, we provide analysis of second-period equilibrium under uniform pricing, i.e., when firms
cannot price discriminate, given that   0. We show that there only exist a mass and a niche market equilibrium.
  22              m            m
      Note that Ri   c and Si      c when   1. This is consistent with the case where  = 1, discussed at the
end of Section 2.
  23
      According to the MHR condition, m is uniquely determined. Also, m = M when  = 0 and m < M when
 > 0.




                                                      14
between switching and the outside option.24 There is, in fact, a continuum of semi-niche market
equilibria, and the equilibrium we just characterized is the one with the lowest price.
      The value of the new product market, µ, determines which equilibrium applies. The relevant
ranges for each equilibrium when   (0, 1) differ from the relevant ranges for when  = 0. All
equilibria are shown in Proposition 2.

Proposition 2. Suppose   (0, 1) and all consumers have purchased one of the goods. In the
second period there exists:

                                                                n = M (and any S n  c) if and
      · a unique niche market equilibrium where firm i charges Ri               i

        only if µ  -, c-
                       1-
                         ·M
                            ;

                                                                          s  [m, ] and S s =
      · a continuum of semi-niche market equilibria where firm i charges Ri             i
         s + (1 - )µ if and only if µ  -, c-· , given any   [m, M ];
        Ri                                 1-

                                                               m and S m satisfying (8)-(9) if
      · a unique mass market equilibrium where firm i charges Ri      i
                           c-·m
        and only if µ       1- ,     .

      The sufficient and necessary condition for the existence of the mass market equilibrium
requires that the value of the new product market, µ, is sufficiently high. We note that the
condition now differs from the standard definition of a mass market (Bergemann and V¨
                                                                                    alim¨
                                                                                        aki,
                                                                 c-·m
2006; Ivanov, 2009), which requires µ  c (note that c             1- ).   We continue refer to the
equilibrium as the "mass market equilibrium" as in Section 3, because it shares the feature that
the marginal repeat consumer strictly prefers to stay in the new market rather than return to
the outside option.
      According to the sufficient and necessary condition for the niche market equilibrium when
                               1-·M/c
  (0, 1), we have µ  c ·         1-      < c < M , suggesting that the majority of customers (i.e.,
                      1
more than F (µ) =     2   of consumers) leaves the market. Similarly, the sufficient and necessary
                                                                                     s /c
                                                                                 1-·Ri
condition for the semi-niche market equilibrium when   (0, 1) gives µ  c ·                         s,
                                                                                            < c < Ri
                                                                                   1-

again suggesting that the majority of customers leaves the market.
      As in the  = 0 case, when  > 0, second-period prices do not depend on first-period
market share and firms' market power among repeat consumers is also greater in the semi-niche
than in the mass market equilibrium, and greater still in the niche market equilibrium, because
 m < Rs = Rn . To see why, note that Rm  m  Rs  M = Rn , where the first inequality
Ri    i    i                          i      i       i

is verified by the proof of Proposition 2. Firms' market power among switching customers is
 24                                                             RS                RS
    Because switching yields the marginal repeat customer being i  where          i  + (1 - )µ     -
[m + (1 - )µ] = 0.




                                                   15
once more greatest in the mass market equilibrium. It is weakened in the semi-niche and niche
market equilibrium as there is no effective competition for switchers.
   Figure 7 illustrates the range of µ corresponding to each second period equilibrium for both
 = 0 (top half of figure) and  > 0 (lower half of figure).

                                                           c                   M
-                                                                                              



                             niche                             semi-niche           mass



                         c-·M                  c-·m
                          1-                    1-
-                                                                                              
             niche
                                                                        mass
                     semi-niche

  Figure 7: Relevant range of µ for each second-period equilibrium when  = 0 (above) and
                                     when  > 0 (below).


   Another important observation is that firms actively compete for switchers only in the mass
market equilibrium when  > 0, whereas they compete for switchers in both the mass and semi-
niche market equilibrium when  = 0. As illustrated by Figure 7, the mass market equilibrium
when  > 0 exists for a larger range of µ than the range for the mass and semi-niche market
equilibrium when  = 0. This suggests that firms compete more intensively for switchers in the
second period when consumer valuations are positively correlated because they cannot secure
                                                            -m
a monopoly position in the repeat consumer market for µ  ( c1 - , c) when  > 0, unlike when

 = 0. Corollary 2 below further illustrates that firms encounter more intensive second-period
competition in the market of their existing customers when  > 0 than when  = 0.

Corollary 2. Denote by R=0 and R>0 the prices to repeat consumers in the mass and semi-
niche market equilibria given by Proposition 1 and 2, respectively. Then, it holds for all µ  c
that R>0 < R=0 .

Proof. When µ > M , firms compete in the mass market equilibrium in both  = 0 and  > 0
                            1                                            RS > µ in the mass market
settings. Hence, R=0 =    2f (µ) + c,   while R>0 is given by (8). Since i
                   m > S m , we have
when  > 0, due to Ri    i

                                      RS )]
                        (1 - )[1 - F (i         1-             1
              R>0 =              RS
                                            +c<         +c<         + c = R=0 .
                             f (i )             f ( µ )     2 f (µ)

   When µ  [c, M ], firms compete in the semi-niche market equilibrium if  = 0 but mass
market equilibrium if  > 0. Since the proof of Proposition 2 has shown that R>0 < m, we
know that R>0 < M = R=0 due to m < M .

                                                      16
   Proposition 2 allows us to compare the second-period prices offered to repeat and switching
consumers.

                                                            m  S m ; in the semi-niche
Corollary 3. In the mass market equilibrium when   (0, 1), Ri   i
                     s > Ss.
market equilibrium, Ri    i


Proof of Corollary 3. The first part is shown in the proof of Proposition 2, step 1. The second
                                                                                            s
                                                                                        c-·Ri
                s  m > c  S s , where the last inequality is due to µ        c-·
part is due to Ri          i                                                  1-         1- ,    hence,
    s + (1 - )µ  c.
 · Ri

   Corollary 3 illustrates that firm i price discriminates against their repeat consumers in the
mass market equilibrium when   (0, 1), unlike when  = 0 where firms set the same price
for both groups. Repeat consumers have learned that their value for good i is high enough to
prevent switching to the untried product.
   Note also that both the prices in the mass market equilibrium with  > 0 converge to those
with  = 0.

                   m = lim   m                    1
Corollary 4. lim0 Ri      0 Si =                2f (µ)   + c.

                                                                                               F (-RS )
                           m < µ. Hence,  SO  - when   0, implying S m 
Proof. When  > 0, we have Si                                                                        i
                                                                                                        +
                                         -i                         i                              RS
                                                                                               f (-i )
                                    RS )
                               1-F (-                                                             m
                                                                                                R -S    m
                       m 
c. On the other hand, Ri              i
                                         + c.         RS = µ must hold because  RS =
                                                Then, i                                     µ + i 1- -i
                                   RS
                                f (-i )                                        i
                RS = µ. This implies that lim    m         m                  1
only holds when i                             0 Ri = lim0 Si =              2f (µ)   + c.

   Recall that the  = 0 setting is a special case of   0, which we analyze in Appendix C.
Corollary 4 therefore states that the mass market equilibrium prices in the   (0, 1) setting
converge to the mass market equilibrium prices in the  = 0 setting.
   Appendix D derives the own- and cross-price elasticities for repeat and switching consumer
demand in each of the three equilibria. When  = 0, a comparison between the mass and niche
market cases is insightful. In the mass market case, the own-price elasticities to repeat and
                                           DR              Rm   DS      Sm          m  Sm
switching customers, respectively, are ERm
                                         i
                                           = - Rmi-c and ES m
                                                            i
                                                              = - S mi-c . Because Ri   i
                                            i              i     i      i
                                                                                       m -c
                                                                                      Ri
when   (0, 1) (Corollary 3), the Lerner index measure of market power,                   c ,   is always
                                                                                                   m -c
                                                                                                  Si
greater in the repeat consumer market segment than in the switching consumer segment,                c .

Prices and market power in both consumer segments vary with  and converge in both the
lim0 (Corollary 4) and when  = 1. As in the  = 0 case, market power and markups are
always greater in the niche market equilibrium than in the mass market equilibrium.
   The relationships between  and market power in each consumer segment reflect the trade-off
arising from the fact that  determines the extent of competition between the two products and
also the information that consumers use to derive expected value for the rival product. In the

                                                     17
                                                                                  M         DR
niche market equilibria, the own-price elasticity for repeat consumers is ERn
                                                                            i
                                                                              = -M -c , which
                                                                                            i
                                M -c
gives a Lerner index of          c ,   and there are no switching customers in equilibrium. The firm
always has greater market power in the niche market than in the mass market, and markups in
the niche market equilibrium are independent of .
         Of particular interest is the mass market equilibrium second-period profit from repeat con-
sumers and switching consumers because their relative magnitude determines the intensity of
first-period price competition. The second-period profits each firm can make from repeat cus-
tomers and switching consumers are given, respectively, by:25

                                               (1 - )[1 - F (iRS )]2
                                   Rm
                                   i  =                  RS )
                                                                                                 (11)
                                                     f (i
                                                         RS ) - F ( SO )]2
                                               (1 - )[F (-
                                   Sm                      i       -i
                                   i  =             RS              SO )
                                                                           .                     (12)
                                               f (-i ) + (1 - )f (-  i

                        m = S m and the profits from repeat and switching customers are
Recall that when  = 0, Ri    i
                                         m  S m , the relative magnitudes of the profits
equal. When   (0, 1), however, although Ri   i

from repeat and switching customers in the mass market equilibrium cannot be ordered, and
depend on demand-related parameters, including . Note, however, that both profits converge
to zero as  converges to 1.

Corollary 5. In the second period with   (0, 1) and suppose all consumers have purchased
one of the goods,

         · firm i's profit in the niche market equilibrium is given by i  (M );

                                                                                 s ), where Rs 
         · firm i's profit in the semi-niche market equilibrium is given by i  (Ri           i

           [m, M ];

                                                                        Rm from repeat consumers
         · firm i's profit in the mass market equilibrium consists of i i
                  Sm from switching consumers.
           and -i i


4         Sub-game perfect equilibria of the two-stage pricing game
          with   0

Consumers make their first-period choice between the two goods and the outside option by
comparing the following consumer surplus for i = A, B and zero, given second-period equilibrium
    25
         Section 5 provides numerical examples for the mass market equilibrium with  > 0.




                                                        18
          {Rm , Rs , Rn } and S   {S m , S s , S n }:
prices Ri   i    i    i        -i   -i    -i    -i

                                                        
                                                                                 
 CS0 =                  (µ - pi )              +                           (x - Ri ) dF (x)
                                                       max(  RS , RO
                                                             i   i     )
              consumer surplus from trying i
                                                     consumer surplus from sticking with i
                                                                           RS
                                                                           i
                                                                                             
                                               +          max 0,                E (-i |x) - S- i dF (x) ,
                                                                           SO
                                                                           i

                                                     consumer surplus from switching to -i or to the outside option


and where pi  {pm    s n
                i , pi , pi } is the first-period price depending on whether the second-period

equilibrium is mass, niche, or semi-niche.
       If the consumer surplus from purchasing good i is greater than from good -i, then firm i's
first period market share i = 1. If the surplus from purchasing the goods is the same, then
i  [0, 1]. Otherwise, i = 0. Equation (5) shows how i affects firm i's second-period profit.
Note that the second-period prices in each of the three equilibria are independent of i , and the
threshold cutoff values for switching and exiting consumers given in Definitions (1) to (3) are
also independent of i .


4.1      No information spillovers, i.e.  = 0

The niche market equilibrium applies for all new product markets that are minor innovations,
i.e., whenever µ < c, according to Proposition 1. In these markets, first-period prices are such
that firms make no profits.

Proposition 3 (Zero profit equilibrium). Suppose µ - c < 0 and  = 0. If and only if µ 
[c -  · SS (M ), c), there exists an equilibrium in which firm i  {A, B } makes zero profit by
charging pn                                               n       n
          i = c -  (M ) in the first period and charging Ri = M, Si  c in the second-period

niche market equilibrium given by Proposition 1.

       When µ - c is sufficiently low, none of the consumers find it worthwhile to switch even though
each firm charges the monopoly price to its repeat purchasers. Firms therefore compete intensely
in the first period for market share. They discount the first-period price below marginal cost
to the point where they make a loss in the first period that exactly offsets second-period profits
and make zero profits overall.26 The lower bound of innovation value - · SS (M ) guarantees
that consumer surplus CS0 is non-negative. Note also that since buying only in the second
  26
     In such an equilibrium, consumers obtain all the social surplus. This is precisely why the existence of the
equilibrium requires µ  c -  · SS (M ). The condition is equivalent to (µ - c) +  · SS (M )  0, in which the
first term on the LHS is the social surplus from the first-period and the second term is discounted social surplus
from the second-period. Since firms make zero profit in the equilibrium, according to the proposition, consumer
surplus equals total social surplus, i.e., the LHS of the condition. The condition thus guarantees consumer surplus
is non-negative which is necessary for the equilibrium to exist.


                                                        19
                                         n < 0--assuming firms treat any new consumers
period yields a consumer surplus of µ - Si
as switchers regardless of whether they switch from the old technology or the rival good--all
consumers purchase in the first period.
   In contrast, firms make positive profits whenever the second-period equilibrium is either
the mass market or the semi-niche market equilibria. According to Proposition 1, one of these
equilibria apply when the new product market is sufficiently valuable, that is, it represents a
major innovation, with µ  c. We characterize the relevant first-period equilibrium and provide
sufficient and necessary conditions for its existence in Proposition 4.

Proposition 4 (Positive profit equilibria). When µ - c  0 and  = 0:

   · if and only if µ > M , there exists an equilibrium in which firm i  {A, B } makes a profit
                                                                                          1
      of   4f (µ)   > 0 by charging pm                                       m    m
                                     i = c in the first period and charging Ri = Si =   2f (µ)   + c in
      the second-period mass market equilibrium given by Proposition 1;

   · if and only if c  µ  M , there exists an equilibrium in which firm i  {A, B } makes
      a profit of  (µ - c)F (M ) > 0 by charging ps
                                                  i = c -  [ (M ) - (µ - c)F (M )] in the first
                           s = M, S s = µ in the second-period semi-niche market equilibrium
      period and charging Ri       i

      given by Proposition 1.


   In both these cases, the intensity of first-period price competition is determined by the
relative profits from selling to switching and repeat customers in the second period. When the
equilibrium features the semi-niche equilibrium in the second period, according to Corollary 1,
firms earn greater profit from repeat customers, and therefore set a first-period price lower than
the marginal cost c, but not low enough to offset all their future profits. When the equilibrium
features the mass market equilibrium in the second period, firms make exactly the same profit
from repeat and switching consumers in the second period, as shown in Corollary 1. Neither
firm is willing to discount the price below marginal cost in the first period to attract customers
to earn profit in the future. The first-period resembles Bertrand competition and firms set a
first-period price that equals the marginal cost c.


4.2   With Information Spillovers, i.e.   (0, 1)

When the relevant second-period equilibrium is either the niche or semi-niche equilibrium, which
apply when the new market value is low, as shown in Proposition 2, firms make zero profits in
the two-stage pricing game. Proposition 5 below shows this result.

Proposition 5 (Zero profit equilibria). When   (0, 1):

                                                  20
   · if and only if µ  c -  · SS (M ), c-
                                        1-
                                          ·M
                                             , there exists an equilibrium in which firm i =
      A, B makes a profit of zero by charging pn
                                               i = c -  (M ) in the first period and charging
       n = M, S n  c in the second-period niche market equilibrium given by Proposition 2;
      Ri       i

                                      -·
   · if and only if µ  c -  · SS (), c1 - , where   [m, M ], there exists a continuum of

      equilibria in which firm i = A, B makes a profit of zero by charging ps          s
                                                                            i = c -  (Ri ) in the
                                 s  [m, ], S s = Rs + (1 - )µ in the second-period semi-niche
      first period and charging Ri          i     i

      market equilibria given by Proposition 2.


   In Proposition 5, the lower bounds of the sufficient and necessary conditions for the equi-
libria, i.e. c -  · SS (M ) and c -  · SS (), ensure that the consumer surplus over the two
periods is non-negative. For the second equilibrium, observe that c -  · SS () is increasing
               c-·
in , whereas    1-   is decreasing in . When  = M , there exists a continuum of equilibria in
                               s takes any value in [m, M ] and S s = Rs + (1 - )µ, if and
which the second-period price Ri                                 i     i

only if µ  c -  · SS (M ), c- ·M
                            1- . This range of µ coincides with the sufficient and necessary

condition for the first equilibrium. Hence, both equilibria exist in such an interval and yield
profits of zero.
   We now turn to the mass market equilibrium when   (0, 1), which Proposition 2 shows
applies for a large range of new market values, for some minor innovations, as well as for all
major innovations. The following proposition shows that firms make positive profits in the two-
stage pricing game whenever the mass market equilibrium applies in the second period when
  (0, 1).

Proposition 6 (Positive profit equilibrium). Suppose   (0, 1). If and only if
                     Sm ) + max (0,  (µ - S m )) , c-·m , there exists an equilibrium in which
µ  max c -  (SS m - 2i                     i        1-
                                Sm > 0 by charging pm = c -   Rm -  Sm in the first period
firm i = A, B makes a profit of i                   i        i     i
              m , S m in the second-period mass market equilibrium, where Rm , S m ,  Rm , and
and charging Ri    i                                                       i    i    i
Sm are given by (8), (9), (11), and (12), respectively, and
i

                                                       RS
                                                       i
                   SS m =           (x - c) dF (x) +        [E (-i |x) - c] dF (x).         (13)
                               RS
                               i                       SO
                                                       i




   Proposition 6 shows that the value of the innovation must be sufficiently large to guarantee
the existence of a profitable equilibrium. However, when µ < c and SS m > 2i
                                                                           Sm hold, then


c -  (SS m - 2i
              Sm ) + max (0,  (µ - S m )) < c, which implies that firms make positive profits
                                    i

even in some new markets where the value for the average consumer is below marginal cost,

                                                21
that is, for some minor innovations. However, when  = 0, there are switching consumers and,
hence, positive profits only for major innovations.

Corollary 6. If   (, 1), a mass market equilibrium exists for minor innovations µ 
                     Sm ), c-·m , c , where   sup{|SS m = 2 Sm } and  = 0 if SS m >
 max c -  · (SS m - 2i      1-                             i
 Sm for all   (0, 1].
2i

                                                m )) = 0. When SS m  2 Sm , the sufficient
Proof. Given that µ < c, we have max (0,  (µ - Si                     i

and necessary condition in Proposition 6 reduces to µ  c -  (SS m - 2i
                                                                     Sm ). However, our

                                                                    Sm converges to zero as
discussion for the  = 1 case in Section 2, as well as the fact that i
 approaching 1, imply that for  sufficiently close to 1, it must be true that SS m > 2i
                                                                                      Sm .


Therefore, as long as the correlation  is no less than the highest  such that SS m = 2i
                                                                                      Sm ,

                     Sm }, we must have max c -  · (SS m - 2 Sm ), c-·m
i.e.,   sup{|SS m = 2i                                                                   < c, which
                                                            i       1-

suggests some minor innovations enable firms to make positive profits.

    Proposition 6 reinforces the general finding that the intensity of first-period price competition
depends on the relative profitability of repeat and switching consumers in the second period.
When the mass market equilibrium applies in the second period and   (0, 1), these profits are
given in equations (11) and (12), respectively. First period prices can be below, above, or equal
to marginal cost.
    Figure 8 presents a numerical simulation for a set of model parameters that produces a
mass market second-period equilibrium when there are information spillovers, i.e.   (0, 1).
The left hand side panel plots second-period profits from repeat and switching consumers and
shows that the latter exceed the former at lower values of , given chosen values of c,  , and µ.
The right hand side panel plots the first-period price relative to the marginal cost of zero. For
values of  where the profits from switching consumers exceed those from repeat consumers,
first-period price exceeds marginal cost. Therefore in this numerical simulation, for lower values
of  in   (0, 1), firms make positive profits in both the first and second periods.


5     Discussion of the role of information spillovers

5.1    Information spillovers result in duopoly profits in less-valuable new prod-
       uct markets.

Our equilibrium analysis shows that the presence of positive information spillovers,   (0, 1),
increases the range of new market values over which firms make profits compared to when  = 0.
The comparative statics w.r.t. innovation value, based on our analysis given in Propositions 3 -


                                                 22
                                                                                                            .03
               .3




                                                                                                            .02
 Period 2 Profits by Segment
                       .2




                                                                                                     Period 1 Price
                                                                                                           .01
      .1




                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                            -.01
               0




                               0         .2          .4               .6              .8    1                         0     .2             .4               .6                 .8   1
                                                  Correlation Coefficient,                                                              Correlation Coefficient, 

                                                         Rm               Sm                                                                    pRm                 0



                                                                               Rm <  Sm and hence, pm > c, where
                                   Figure 8: For lower values of  > 0, we have i     i                 i
                                                                                  m > S m still holds.
                                                 µ =  = 0.5 and c = 0. Note that Ri    i



6, are summarized in Figure 9, which extends Figure 7 to reflect the cutoffs for the two-period
game.
                        The figure has two parts, and in each case the axis varies µ holding c constant. The top
half of the figure considers the case of  = 0, and provides the intervals of µ that are sufficient
and necessary for the existence of equilibria, showing also the second-period equilibria for the
relevant range. The lower half of the figure does the same for when  > 0. Note that we focus
on the situation illustrated by Corollary 6, i.e.,   (, 1). Our discussion following Figure 9
applies to all  > 0.

                                      c -  · SS (M )                                                                  c                          M
                                                                                                                                                                                    



                                                                              niche                                       semi-niche                                    mass


                                                                        c -  (SS m - 2i
                                                                                      Sm
                                                                                         )
                                                              c-·M                         c-·m
c -  · SS (m)                                                  1-                           1-
                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                   niche
                                                                                                                                 mass
                                                       semi-niche

 Figure 9: Equilibrium and innovation: on top is the range of innovation µ corresponding to
                    different equilibria for  = 0 and below for   (, 1).


                        Two aspects of Figure 9 merit particular focus. First, relating to the far left hand side of
both halves of the figure, when µ  [c -  · SS (m), c -  · SS (M )] if  > 0, there exist some semi-
niche market equilibria only if  > 0. No equilibrium exists for this range of µ in which firms
enter the market in the first period if  = 0. Hence, positive spillovers ensure an equilibrium
exists for these minor innovations.
                                                                                         Sm ), c-·m ), 0). Recall
                        Second, we turn to minor innovations where µ  (max(c -  (SS m - 2i      1-



                                                                                                23
from Corollary 6 that the lower bound of the condition is below zero when   (, 1). These
innovations yield positive profits for the firms only when there are positive information spillovers.
This can be seen by noting that firms earn positive profits in mass market equilibria, but zero
profits in niche market equilibria. Comparing the top and bottom part of the figure reveals how
mass market equilibria result over an interval of innovation values with a smaller lower bound
when   (, 1). This result implies that when the extent of exogenous industry innovation is
sufficiently low, firms will prefer to produce similar products to ensure positive profits.
   Figure 10 plots firms' profit as a function of µ, when the marginal cost is fixed at c = 0.5.
The blue line is each firm's profit when  > 0 (in this case  is fixed at 0.5) and the red line is
                                                                         Sm ), c-·m ), c)
the profit when  = 0. Here, minor innovations with µ  (max(c -  (SS m - 2i      1-

correspond to µ  [0.2, 0.5]. When µ is sufficiently high, firms strictly prefer  = 0. When µ lies
below c = 0.5, firms make positive profits only if  > 0, illustrating that firms strictly prefer
 > 0 when the extent of innovation is sufficiently low.
                                     .08       .06
                       Total Profits Per Firm, Sm
                      .02          .04
                                     0




                                                     .1   .2         .3             .4         .5   .6
                                                               Average New Product Quality, 

                                                                        >0              =0



Figure 10: An example with c =  =  = 0.5. Each firm's profit given  > 0 (blue) is positive
   when µ is less than c = 0.5, whereas the profit given  = 0 (red) is zero when µ - c  0.



5.2   Switching consumers guarantee firm profits.

Our analysis so far illustrates that each firm's total discounted profit in the game can never be
more than the profit the firm would make if it had zero market share in the first period and its
competitor had a market share of one. To see why, recall from Propositions 3 to 6 that firms
make zero profit over the two periods if no consumers switch in the second-period equilibrium.
In all equilibria where firms make profits, the equilibrium first-period price is low enough that
the cost of gaining market share in the first period is equal to the relative profitability of a
repeat consumer in the second period compared to a switching consumer.

                                                                        24
   Theorem 1 below shows that this intuition applies in general to any symmetric equilibrium
in the game for all   [-1, 1], regardless of the form of equilibrium in the second period.
   Let i  R be firm i's second-period profit from repeat consumers and -i  S  be firm i's
second-period profit from switching consumers in any symmetric equilibrium.

Theorem 1. For any   [-1, 1], firm i's first period price in any symmetric equilibrium with
any market share i  [0, 1] is given by p = c -  ( R -  S  ) and its profit in the two-stage
pricing game is given by  S  .

Proof. Since the goods are ex ante homogeneous from the consumers' perspective and we focus
on symmetric equilibria, consumers purchase the cheaper product in the first period. Suppose
 R >  S  , that is, firm i benefits from increasing first-period market share. Then, both firms
compete for first period market share by lowering the first period price.
   If firm i deviates by charging a slightly lower price than p , it then gains all the rival
firm's market share -i and incurs a cost of -i (c - p + ) in the first period, where           > 0.
Since the share -i of consumers are now firm i's repeat consumers in the second period, it
makes an additional profit from repeat consumers, -i  R , but forgoes the profit that it would
have made from switching consumers, -i  S  . In other words, the net benefit in the second
period is given by -i ( R -  S  ). Since p = c -  ( R -  S  ), and hence, -i (c - p + ) =
-i ( R -  S  ) + -i > -i ( R -  S  ), the cost is greater than the discounted benefit. The
deviation is thus not profitable.
   If firm i deviates by charging a higher price than p , it gives up i market share to the
rival firm. Hence, its first-period profit increases by i (c - p ), as it avoids this loss. In the
second period, it makes an additional profit from switching consumers, i  S  , but forgoes any
profit from repeat consumers, i  R . Hence, the net loss in the second period is given by
i ( R -  S  ). Since p = c -  ( R -  S  ), we know that the first-period benefit is equal to
the second-period loss. The deviation is thus not profitable.
   In fact, the above proof for the case when  R >  S  also applies to  R   S  . In this case,
firms compete for a smaller first-period market share by increasing the first-period price up to
a point where the additional profit earned in the first period is balanced by the additional loss
in the second period. Note that in this case, p  c.
   The proof so far applies to any i  [0, 1] such that i + -i = 1. This means that it is not
profitable for a firm to deviate by selling only in the second period while the rival firm sells in
both periods. In such a situation, the firm makes a profit of  S  which equals the equilibrium
profit. Alternatively, when the rival firm sells only in the second period, firm i makes zero profit
by selling only in the second period. Therefore, selling only in the second period is weakly

                                                25
dominated by selling in both periods.
       To calculate firm i's profit, substituting for p in the profit function gives:

                           
                           i = i (p - c) +  (i  R + -i  S  ) =  S  .                                          (14)


Hence, each firm's profit in the two-stage pricing game in any symmetric equilibrium is equal
to the discounted second-period profit it would earn had it had zero market share in the first
period.

       The proof of Theorem 1 relies on the following simple derivations. If firm i deviated to a
lower price, it would capture the rival firm's share -i . It then makes an additional profit from
this share of (repeat) consumers, but has to give up profit from switching consumers whose
share is exactly -i . The price p given in the theorem balances the first-period incremental
profit and the discounted second-period incremental profit. In any symmetric equilibrium with
any i , firm i's profit in the whole game is given by i (p - c) +  i  R + -i  S  =  S  .
Note that the first-period price depends on the relative magnitude of profits from repeat and
switching consumers.
       Further intuition for Theorem 1 comes from a comparison to the monopoly case, where the
theorem does not apply. In the mass market equilibrium and over a large range of parameter
values in the niche and semi-niche equilibria, the monopolist earns profits by setting all prices
at least as high as in the duopoly case. In duopoly, the second-period differential profits from
repeat rather than switching consumers are competed away via low first-period price, and this
mechanism is missing in the monopoly case. First-period prices need to be low enough only to
ensure all consumers purchase in the first period. The monopolists' total profits are not therefore
limited to an amount equivalent to the surplus it could extract from switching consumers.27
       Theorem 1 does, however, generalize to other demand structures such as the binary consumer
type duopoly case, where consumers have either a high or low value for both products.28 In
Appendix C, we show that firms can always make a positive profit in the continuous consumer
type case studied here in any market equilibrium when  < 0. This is due to the fact there are
always some consumers who switch brand in the second period in this setting and Theorem 1
applies.29
  27
      In Appendix E, we show that firms can make greater profits when there is no informational switching cost,
that is, when consumers know their valuations for all goods perfectly, than when there is such a cost. The
intuition is that in the former setting, goods are more differentiated, softening competition, in the first period.
Hence, as long as the firms are not too patient (small  ) such that the first-period profit dominates firms' profit
from the whole game, profits with no informational switching costs are greater.
   28
      An analysis of this case is available on request from the authors.
   29
      In Appendix F, we study the impact of asymmetric willingness to pay in a setting where the marginal distri-



                                                        26
5.3    Profits increase in  for some range of   (0, 1).

Comparative statics regarding profits, consumer surplus, and social surplus w.r.t.  are shown
here in a numerical example with c =  = µ = 0.5. The focus is on the mass market equilibrium
when  > 0, where profit is calculated in equation (12) and social surplus is calculated in
equation (13). The consumer surplus is the difference between the social surplus and twice the
profits (since there are two firms). The top left panel of Figure 11 shows that the profit firms
            .002 .004 .006 .008




                                                                                        .02 .04 .06 .08 .1
         Total Profits Per Firm, Sm




                                                                                       Lerner Index (Markups)
                       0




                                                                                                   0
                                      0   .2          .4       .6        .8   1                                 0   .2          .4       .6        .8   1
                                               Correlation Coefficient,                                                  Correlation Coefficient, 
                       .43




                                                                                                   .432
         Consumer Surplus




                                                                                       .426 .428 .43
                   .425




                                                                                          Social Surplus
           .42         .415




                                                                                                   .424




                                      0   .2          .4       .6        .8   1                                 0   .2          .4       .6        .8   1
                                               Correlation Coefficient,                                                  Correlation Coefficient, 



   Figure 11: An example of profit, lerner index, consumer surplus, and social surplus as a
             function of  in a mass market equilibrium, where c =  = µ = 0.5.


make in the mass market equilibrium can be a non-monotonic function of . With the chosen
values of c, , and µ, profit is maximized at around  = 0.6.
    Theorem 1 tells us that any differential profit earned from repeat consumers over profit
from switching consumers is offset by first-period losses. Therefore, if total profits increase
over a range of , it must be that profits from switching consumers are increasing over that
range. Because  measures information spillovers as well as the degree of substitutability be-
tween products, it has two opposing effects on each firm's profits from switching consumers.
Products become closer substitutes, and so prices and profits decrease in . However, because
consumers are now better informed about their value for competing products, the mass of
butions of consumer valuations are different but similar. We show that the main result that firms' profitability
depends on switchers extends to such a setting.



                                                                                  27
                                           m  Rm can be increasing in . When the sec-
switching consumers at equilibrium prices Si   i

ond effect dominates, total firm profits are increasing in , and closer competition allows both
firms to make greater profits. The trade off of these two effects is summarized in the top right
hand side panel of the figure, presenting the Lerner Index for switchers, that is, the percentage
                                                      Si -c
markup over marginal cost that is charged to them,      c .   Because the markup to repeat con-
sumers, which is monotonically decreasing in  is always offset by lower first-period prices, the
non-monotonic markup to switchers delivers the non-monotonic overall profit function shown
in the top left panel.
    A comparison to the binary consumer type mass market equilibrium case helps illustrate
how the non-monotonicity in profits arises in the continuous-type case. In the binary mass
market case, a consumer's conditional expectation of i after a bad experience with i is always
decreasing in  meaning that switching demand becomes less elastic in . In the continuous
type mass market case, because some consumers leave the market after a bad experience, the
conditional expectation of i amongst potential switchers is always increasing in , leading to
increasing markups over some range.
    The bottom left panel of Figure 11 shows that the consumer surplus over the two periods
is U-shaped. Social surplus, given in the bottom right panel of Figure 11, has an inverse U
shape, similar to firms' profits. Although the profit, consumer surplus, and social surplus are
not necessarily U-shaped or inverse U-shaped, in general, it is true that profits increase and
consumer surplus decrease in  over some range of .


6    Conclusion

This paper analyzes competition in duopoly new goods markets where demand has a novel
feature: consumption is informative about a consumer's value for other similar goods as well
as for the trialled good. This extends the definition of experience goods in Nelson (1970) to
include within-consumer information spillovers from consumption. Information spills over when
the new products are partial substitutes, that is, when a consumer's values for the two goods
are positively correlated. Because consumers partially learn about non-trialled products, the
informational switching cost (Klemperer, 1987a, 1995; Villas-Boas, 2006) locking consumers into
the product they sampled is reduced.
    One surprising result from the model is that such information spillovers allow firms to make
positive profits in markets where the overall expected value of the new goods relative to pre-
existing alternatives is low. If consumer values were uncorrelated, each firm would be unable
to make positive duopoly profits in these situations, but correlated learning across products

                                               28
expands the market for new goods to enable non-degenerate or non-monopoly structures.
   The mechanism is that informative consumption experiences allow each firm to segment
experienced consumer demand into their own repeat consumers and the consumers who switch
to them after trialling the rival product. Firms are able to price discriminate between segments.
Because firms compete in first-period prices for repeat consumers, anticipating the presence of
profitable switchers softens dynamic price competition between the two firms. In some cases,
switching consumers are more profitable than repeat consumers, and the equilibrium first-period
price exceeds marginal cost. In these cases, firms have positive profits in both periods.
   A second surprising result is that consumer surplus can be increasing, and firm profit de-
creasing, in the degree of product differentiation over some range. This paper, hence, shows
that understanding how consumer choices respond to new products being imperfect substitutes
is important for welfare analysis of different market structures. For the innovative experience
goods studied here, our analysis shows consumers are not necessarily better off, and can be
worse off, when products are closer substitutes. This arises due to the impact of learning
through consumption on willingness to pay, together with firms' ability to price discriminate
based on purchasing history.
   If the game were extended to more periods, the set of possible purchasing histories would
expand to include consumers who have trialled both products, in different orders, and consumers
who have experienced only one product in prior periods. Firms' would find it optimal to price
discriminate between all past purchasing histories. Although we have not found the equilibria
of this longer game, we think it likely that price discrimination would continue to allow firms
to gain some of the surplus from efficient consumer sorting and soften initial price competition,
as firms would compete only for the differential profits between consumer groups.




                                               29
Appendix

A     An example of price discrimination based on past purchasing
      history in retail banking.




  Figure A.1: Promotional offers to new Citizens Bank customers, available when opening a
                checking account, and varying with likely purchasing history.


    The rest of the appendix contains: B. Proofs; C. Negative information spillovers; D. Price
elasticities; E. Competitive pricing of normal goods: a benchmark; F. Asymmetric distribution;
G. Second period equilibrium under uniform pricing.


B     Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1. We consider each equilibrium in turn:

    Step 1: Niche market equilibrium
    In the niche market equilibrium, there are no switching customers. Each firm finds it optimal
to charge the monopoly price M to its repeat customers. Suppose firm -i charges a price S-i  c
to the customers of firm i. Then, the type i = M has a surplus of µ - S-i  µ - c if she


                                               30
switches to -i. Then, a sufficient condition for the existence of the niche market equilibrium
is that µ  c, as type i = M and all types with higher valuations must find it unprofitable to
switch. Firm -i makes zero profit from i's market in such an equilibrium, and deviating to any
price below c is not profitable.
   Now we turn to necessity. Suppose the niche market equilibrium exists, then the customer
with i = M must find it unprofitable to switch to good -i, i.e., µ - S-i  i - M = 0 for any
S-i  c, which implies that µ  c.
   Regarding uniqueness, note that in the niche market equilibrium firms do not face any
competition in their own territory. Hence, each firm behaves as a monopoly. Therefore, there
does not exist any other niche market equilibrium given that µ < c. No mass or semi-niche
market equilibria exist either when µ  c, according to step 2 and 3 of this proof.

   Step 2: Semi-niche market equilibrium
   Firm i makes monopoly profit in its own market and firm -i makes a profit of (µ - c)F (M )
in firm i's market. Since firm -i charges price µ, any customers of firm i have a surplus of zero
­ equal to the value of the outside option ­ should they switch to firm -i. Hence, charging
the monopoly price M must be optimal for firm i because its consumers are in effect choosing
between purchasing from i or the outside option.
   According to the sufficient condition µ  c, firm -i makes non-negative profits. Firm -i
cannot make greater profits from increasing the price as then no customers from firm i would
switch. Suppose firm -i decreases the price to S < µ, then its profit from customers from firm
i is given by

                        µ+M -S
                                 (S - c)dF (x) = (S - c)F (µ + M - S ) .
                       -


By the first order derivative w.r.t S :

                                                                           f (µ + M - S )
 F (µ + M - S ) - (S - c)f (µ + M - S ) = F (µ + M - S ) 1 - (S - c)                      ,
                                                                           F (µ + M - S )

we can find the optimal deviation price S  given by

                                          F (µ + M - S  )
                                   S =                    + c.                                (15)
                                          f (µ + M - S  )

The monotone hazard rate property of the normal distribution guarantees that the above solu-




                                                  31
tion is indeed the profit maximizer. Suppose S  < µ, then

                                       F (M )      1
                                 S >          +c        + c  µ,
                                       f (M )    2f (µ)

where the second and last inequalities are due to the sufficient condition M  µ. This con-
tradicts S  < µ. Thus, any deviation S < µ must be not more profitable for firm -i than
          s = µ. Alternatively, any deviation S > µ will not attract any switchers and hence,
charging Si
is dominated by charging µ.
   Now we turn to necessity. Given that the semi-niche equilibrium exists, it must be true that
µ  c as otherwise firm -i prefers to deviate to a higher price to avoid a loss. To prove that
                                                                   s = µ in equilibrium
µ  M is also a necessary condition, suppose µ > M . The fact that Si
implies that S   µ, where S  is given by (15). Otherwise, firm i would prefer a price lower
than µ. But then S   µ implies that

                                   F (M )       1
                              S           +c<        + c < µ,
                                   f (M )     2f (µ)

which is a contradiction. Thus, S  < µ when µ > M , which implies that charging µ is not
optimal for firm -i. This then contradicts the existence of the equilibrium.
   Now we turn to uniqueness. Suppose there exists an alternative semi-niche market equilib-
                          ~ sn = M . Since both switching to firm -i and choosing the outside
rium where firm i charges P
option yield zero to consumers, firm i's price decision replicates that of a monopoly. Hence, it
               ~ sn = M . Neither does there exist any mass or niche market equilibrium when
must hold that P
c  µ  M , according to steps 1 and 3 of this proof.

   Step 3: Mass market equilibrium
   For the mass market equilibrium, firm i's profit function is given by:

                                  +                                RS
                                                                   - i
                  (Ri - c) · i         dF (i ) + (Si - c) · -i           dF (-i ).
                                 RS
                                 i                                -


Hence, the prices in the second period must satisfy the following by the first order approach:

                                   RS )                             RS )
                                                                 F (-
                     m     1 - F (i                     m             i
                    Ri =         RS
                                        +c      and    Si =         RS )
                                                                         + c.              (16)
                             f (i )                              f (- i

                                                m and S m because the RHS of the two equations
Note that there must exist unique solutions of Ri      i
                           m and S m , respectively.
in (16) are decreasing in Ri      i




                                                 32
   We can find the cutoff types for any i :

                                                         1 - 2F (iRS )
                             RS        m    m
                             i  - µ = Ri - S- i =              RS
                                                            f (i )

hence,

                                                      1 - 2F (iRS )
                                       RS
                                       i  = µ+              RS )
                                                                                               (17)
                                                         f (i

                         1-2F (iRS )
        RS < µ, then
Suppose i                              > 0 and hence the RHS of (17) must be greater than µ, which
                              RS )
                           f (i
                                                   1-2F (iRS )
is a contradiction.   Suppose i  RS    > µ, then                 < 0 and hence the RHS of (17) must
                                                        RS )
                                                     f (i
                                                     RS = µ, where i  {A, B }. Plugging
be less than µ. This means that it must be true that i
RS = µ back into the two equations for Ri
                                        m and S m , respectively, we obtain the mass market
                                               i

equilibrium prices.
   The above analysis is valid if and only if the prices indeed form a mass market equilibrium,
            m = µ - 1 - c > 0 is true. Hence, the sufficient and necessary condition for the
i.e., RS - Ri      2f (µ)

existence of the above mass market equilibrium is

                                                1
                                         µ-          - c > 0.
                                              2f (µ)

Given that the function x - [1 - F (x)]/f (x) - c is monotonically increasing and that M - [1 -
F (M )]/f (M ) - c = 0 holds, we have µ > M .
                           m and S m are unique, and according to the first two parts of the
   Since the solutions to Ri      i

proposition, there do not exist any niche or semi-niche market equilibria when µ > M , the mass
market equilibrium is the unique equilibrium.



Proof of Proposition 2. Note that M > m. This is true because 1 -   (0, 1) and hence, the
RHS of (10) lies strictly below the RHS of (4).

   Step 1. A unique niche market equilibrium where firm i charges M to repeat customers
                            c-M
exists if and only if µ <    1- .

   In such an equilibrium, the firm charges the monopoly price to repeat customers. Hence,
there is no profitable deviation in terms of the price to repeat customers.
   For there to be no profitable deviation of prices to switchers, it has to be true that no
firm finds it profitable to charge a price no less than marginal cost to attract customers of the
competitor who charges monopoly price. Thus, it has to be true that given firm -i charges M



                                                    33
to its repeat customers, firm i does not find it profitable to charge Si  c to attract some of
firm -i's consumers to switch to product i. This means that the equilibrium exists if and only
                                                                            c-M
if the following condition is satisfied M + (1 - )µ < c, i.e., µ <           1- .

   Regarding uniqueness, suppose there exists an alternative niche market equilibrium in which
                          ~ = M . According to the definition of niche market equilibrium, there
both firms charge a price P
are no switching consumers and firms do not face any competition in their own territory in the
second period. This suggests that the optimal second-period price must be M . A contradiction.
Thus, there does not exist an alternative niche market equilibrium and the proposition gives
the unique niche market equilibrium.

                                                                 s to repeat customers and
   Step 2. A semi-niche market equilibrium where firm i charges Ri
 s +(1 - )µ to switching ones, where Rs  [m, ] and   [m, M ], exists if and only if µ        c-
Ri                                    i                                                      1- .

   The equilibrium is a knife-edge case as the surplus curve of repeat customers and switching
customers cross at the horizontal axis. To see why, note that

                                s - Ss
                    RS         Ri    -i    Rs - [Ri
                                                  s + (1 - )µ]
                                                                  s
                    i  =µ+              =µ+ i                  = Ri
                                1-                1-

          RS - Rs =  RS +(1 - )µ - [Rs +(1 - )µ] = 0. This means that  RS =  RO =  SO .
and thus, i     i   i                i                                i     i     i
                                                     s  [m, ], first suppose firm i deviates to
   To prove that the equilibrium exists for a given Ri
     s , then its profit, given firm -i's price S s = Rs + (1 - )µ, is given by
Ri  Ri                                           -i    i

                                                             
                      i (Ri - c)        dF () = i (Ri - c)        Ri -S s
                                                                            dF ().
                                   RS                                  -i
                                   i                         µ+     1-



   Taking the first order derivative w.r.t Ri , we have:

                                            Ri - c f (i RS )
                                 RS
                       i [1 - F (i  )] 1 -                RS )
                                             1 -  1 - F (i
                                                                      s
                                                                 Ri -Ri
                                                                          
                                           s
                                     Ri - Ri                   f
                   = i 1 - F                    1 - Ri - c         1-
                                                                        s
                                                                          .                      (18)
                                      1-             1 -  1 - F Ri -Ri
                                                                              1-

                                 s
                            Ri -Ri
           s , then  RS =
Since Ri  Ri                           s and thus, we have:
                                      Ri
                    i         1-

                               s
                          Ri -Ri
             Ri - c f       1-              s-c
                                           Ri     f (Ris)    m - c f (m)
                                 s                        s                  1,
             1- 1-F         Ri -Ri         1 -  1 - F (Ri )  1 -  1 - F (m)
                              1-


                                       s  m. This implies that the first order derivative (18)
where the second inequality is due to Ri
                     s and firm i does not find it profitable to deviate to a price above Rs .
is negative if Ri > Ri                                                                     i



                                                34
                                              s , then the corresponding profit function is given
     Suppose instead firm i deviates to Ri < Ri
by
                                                          
                                        i (Ri - c)           dF (),
                                                      Ri

                               s . Hence, the first order derivative w.r.t R is positive for
which takes its maximum at M  Ri                                            i
      s  M and it is not a profitable deviation.
Ri < Ri
     Firm -i's profit from switching customers in this equilibrium is zero, as there is effectively
zero measure of customers who switch. Firm -i does not find it profitable to deviate to a price
                                                                                       s
                                                                                    c-Ri
                              RS + (1 - )µ = Rs + (1 - )µ  c, i.e., µ                               c-
greater than c if and only if i               i                                      1- .   If µ    1- ,
            c-Ris
then µ                             s  [m, ], hence, firm -i does not wish to deviate. On the other
                    holds for any Ri
             1-
                                                          s  [m, ], then it must be true that
hand, if a semi-niche market equilibrium exists for each Ri
                                         c-Ris
      c-                                                        s  [m, ].
µ     1-    because it implies that µ     1-     holds for any Ri

     Step 3. A unique equilibrium, which is a mass market equilibrium, exists if and only if
      c-m
µ>     1-
                                                               c-m
     We now start with proving sufficiency, i.e., if µ >        1-    then the mass market equilibrium
exists.
                          m > S m > c, assuming that the prices given by (8) and (9) are indeed
     First, we show that Ri    i
                                                             m > S m is equivalent to proving
an equilibrium. Since the equilibrium is symmetric, proving Ri    i
      m > S m . Suppose Rm  S m instead, then it must be true that  SO <  RS  µ and,
that Ri    -i            i   -i                                    i     i
            m must satisfy the following inequalities:
thus, that S- i


             (1 - )[F (i RS ) - F ( SO )]   (1 - )[F (i RS ) - F ( SO )]   (1 - )[1 - F (iRS )]
 m                                  i                             i                                m
S- i-c=            RS ) + 1- f ( SO )
                                          <               RS )
                                                                         <           RS )
                                                                                                = Ri - c.
                f (i              i
                                                     f (  i                     f (  i


                                     RS )        1        RS ) - F ( SO ) because of  SO <  RS  µ.
The last inequality is due to 1 - F (i           2   > F (i         i                i     i
                                             m > S m , we have  RS > µ.
Hence, there is a contradiction. Given that Ri    -i           i
                                                                                                c-m
     Second, we prove that (8) and (9) are indeed an equilibrium strategy, given that µ          1- .

The following first order derivative of (5) with RS > RO > SO > - w.r.t Ri equals zero
when replacing Ri with (8):

                                                 Ri - c f (iRS )
                                     RS
                           i [1 - F (i  )] 1 -                RS )
                                                                   =0                               (19)
                                                 1 -  1 - F (i

To show that (8) is the maximizer and not a minimizer, recall our assumption on the monotone
                                        RS increases in R due to (1) and  > 0. Then, the
hazard rate condition and the fact that i                i
                                       m and negative when R > Rm . Finally, note that fixing
derivative (19) is positive when Ri < Ri                    i   i
 m , the RHS of (8) is a decreasing function of Rm , and the LHS is increasing in Rm . Hence,
S- i                                             i                                 i



                                                     35
                       m for each S m .
there exists a unique Ri           -i

    Similarly, the first order derivative of (5) with RS > RO > SO > - w.r.t Si equals zero
when replacing Si with (9):

                                                       m - c f ( RS ) + (1 - )f ( SO )
                                                      Si
                            RS         SO                        -i                -i
                     -i [F (- i ) - F (-i )] 1 -                    RS ) - F ( SO )
                                                      (1 - )    F (-  i       -i
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                    
                                                            f (-RS )                    f (-SO )
                                                                                                    
                                                 S m - c          i
                                                                   SO   +   (1 -    )         i
                                                                                               SO   
                          RS           SO         i       1 - F ( -i
                                                                      )               1 - F ( -i  )
                 = -i [F (- i ) - F ( -i
                                          )] 1
                                               -                                                    
                                                 (1 - )             F (-RS )-F ( SO )
                                                                          i       -i                
                                                                        1-F (- SO )                 
                                                                                i                   
                                                                                 m)
                                                                              h(Si
                 = 0.


              m given by (8) to be the profit maximizer, h(·) has to be an increasing function.
In order for S- i
                                                                      SO > µ, then h(·) is an
We now show that the function h(·) is an increasing function. Suppose - i
                                 SO is increasing in S while  RS is decreasing in S , hence, the
increasing function because: (a) - i                  i      -i                    i
                                                                                                   RS )-F ( SO )
                                                                                                F (-
                                                       f (·)                                                -i
denominator of h(·) is decreasing in Si ; (b)         1-F (·)   is an increasing function; (c)       i
                                                                                                        SO )
                                                                                                   1-F (- i
                  m , which can be shown by taking first order derivative w.r.t
is decreasing in Si                                                                           m . Hence, h(·)
                                                                                             Si
is increasing in Si .
                    SO  µ, then f ( SO )  0. The first order derivative w.r.t S of h(S ) is:
    Suppose instead i              -i                                          i      i


                                                        d-RS                   SO
dh(Si )                   1                     RS         i            SO d-i                RS         SO
            =        RS ) - F ( SO )]2
                                             f (- i )        + (1 - )f (- i )              F (- i ) - F (-i )
 dSi             [F (- i       -i                        dSi                  dSi
                                                                d-RS             SO
                      RS               SO               RS         i      SO d-i
                 - f (- i ) + (1 - )f (-i )          f (- i )        - f (- i )
                                                                 dSi            dSi
                            1                   RS              SO 1 -                RS         SO
            =        RS )        SO )]2
                                            -f (- i )      + f (- i )              F (- i ) - F (-i )
                 [F (- i    - F (- i                    1-            
                      RS               SO               RS       1      SO 1
                 + f (- i ) + (1 - )f (-i )          f (- i )      + f (- i )         >0
                                                                1-            

          d-RS                  d-SO
                      1                  1                                               RS ) < 0, due
where        i
           dSi   = - 1-  and
                                   i
                                 dSi   =   . The above derivative is positive because f (- i
   RS > µ, and f ( SO )  0. Thus, again we know that h(·) is an increasing function and S m
to - i            -i                                                                     -i
                                           m.
is the unique maximizer of (5) given each Ri
                        RS - Rm > 0 when µ >                 c-M
    Last, we prove that i     i                               1- ,   that is, the marginal repeat consumer
strictly prefers to stay in the market rather than choosing the outside option. Suppose instead
RS - Rm  0, then it must be true that Rm  m. To see why, suppose m > Rm   RS . Then
i     i                                i                              i  i


                            (1 - )[1 - F (m)]                   RS )]
                                                  (1 - )[1 - F (i            m
                      m=                      +c<          RS )
                                                                      + c = Ri
                                 f (m)                 f (i


                                                        36
where the inequality is due to monotone hazard rate assumption. A contradiction. Thus,
 m  m. Since  RS - Rm  0 implies  RS + (1 - )µ  S m , which in turn implies  SO   RS
Ri           i      i            i               -i                         i    i
              m   SO + (1 - )µ, thus S m  c due to (9).
according to S- i i                   -i
                       RS - Rm  0, then Rm +(1 - )µ  c. Suppose the reverse is true, then
   Now we show that if i     i           i
 m +(1 - )µ > c  S m , which implies [Rm +(1 - )µ] - [ SO +(1 - )µ] = ( RO -  SO ) > 0
Ri                -i                   i              i                i     i
          RO >  SO . Thus, we have  RO >  SO   RS . When  RS =  SO , we have
and hence i    i                   i     i    i          i     i
RS + (1 - )µ - S m = 0, which then implies  RS -  RO =  RS - Rm = 0, which contradicts
i               i                          i     i     i      i
                                                                                    RS - RO
                                                                                    i
RS <  RO . When  RS <  SO and hence  RS <  SO <  RO , then we have  =
i                                                                                       i
                                                                                               > 1,
     i          i     i             i     i     i                                   RS - SO
                                                                                    i    i
                                    m + (1 - )µ  c.
which contradicts   (0, 1). Hence, Ri
              RS - Rm  0 is true, then Rm + (1 - )µ  c which implies m + (1 - )µ  c,
   In sum, if i                         i
           c-m                                                      RS - Rm > 0.
i.e., µ     1- .   A contradiction. Therefore, it must be true that i     i
                                                                                              c-m
   Now we prove necessity, i.e., if there exists a mass market equilibrium, then µ >           1- .
            m , then according to  RS > Rm in the mass market equilibrium, we have
Suppose m  Ri                     i      i


                         (1 - )[1 - F (m)]                   RS )]
                                               (1 - )[1 - F (i            m
                    m=                     +c>          RS
                                                                   + c = Ri .
                              f (m)                 f (i )

                             m . Suppose µ        c-m           m +(1 - )µ < m +(1 - )µ  c.
A contradiction. Hence, m > Ri                     1- ,   then Ri
                                                                                 RS >  RO >
This, and the fact that in the mass market equilibrium with positive correlation i    i
SO holds, imply that S m   SO + (1 - )µ <  RO + (1 - )µ  Rm + (1 - )µ < c < S m .
i                     i   i               i               i                  i
                                                      c-m
A contradiction. Hence, it must be true that µ >       1- .
                                                 m and S m given by (8) and (9) are unique,
   Regarding uniqueness, since the solutions to Ri      i

we know that the mass market equilibrium must be the unique mass market equilibrium. No
                                                                 c-m
niche and semi-niche market equilibria exist either due to µ >    1- ,   according to step 1 and 2
of this proof.



Proof of Proposition 3. According to Proposition 1, each firm makes monopoly profit from their
repeat customers but no profit from switching customers as no one switches in the second period
if and only if µ  c. This suggests firms would compete for first-period market share by lowering
the first-period price until the gain in the second period from additional market share balances
the loss from capturing firm -i's market share in the first period, i.e.,


                                      -i (c - pn        M
                                               i ) = -i  .
                                          loss         gain


   Neither firm prefers to deviate from such an equilibrium. If firm i deviates to any price higher


                                                 37
than pn                                                                   n
      i in the first period, its first period profit increases by i (c - pi ) to 0 and its second period

profit decreases by i  (M ), thus the total change of its profit is 0 since i (c - pn
                                                                                    i ) - i  (M ) = 0.

If, instead, firm i deviates to a lower price pn
                                               i - where      is arbitrarily small in the first period,
then its first period profit decreases by -i (c - pn
                                                   i ) and its second period profit increases by

-i  (M ), and the total change of profit is also 0. Any price even lower than pn
                                                                               i - is strictly

dominated. Hence, there is no profitable deviation for firms.
   Note that the above proof applies to any i  [0, 1]. This implies that when firm i sells
only in the second period while firm -i sells in both periods such that i = 0, both firms'
profit stays unchanged. When firm i sells only in the second period given that firm -i does
the same, demand is zero because no consumer would purchase as µ - c < 0. Hence, they also
make zero profit. This means that there exists a variety of zero-profit equilibria in which either
i + -i = 1 when max(i , -i ) > 0 or max(i , -i ) = 0.
   Consumers' surplus is given by

                                              
                     (µ - c) +  (M ) +           (x - M ) dF (x)
                                             M
                                                                      
                = (µ - c) +  (M ) +              (x - c) dF (x) -        (M - c) dF (x)
                                             M                       M
                                    
                = (µ - c) +            (x - c) dF (x).
                                  M


Hence, the consumer surplus is only non-negative if and only if the total discounted social
surplus over the two periods is non-negative. Since purchasing only in the second period yields
                 n < c - S n  0, all consumers wish to buy in the first period.
a payoff of µ - Si        i




Proof of Proposition 4. Note that according to Proposition 1, all the second period equilibrium
prices are invariant to i . Hence, consumers' expected surplus from the second period is invari-
ant to their purchasing decision in the first period, which implies that they would purchase the
good with the lower price in the first period.
   We now prove the proposition in two steps.

   Step 1. The equilibrium in the second-period sub-game is the mass market equilibrium
   In the mass market, each firm makes exactly the same profit from the repeat and the
switching customers and thus, its second period profit does not vary with the first period
market share. Hence, firms compete in the first period as in Bertrand competition by lowering
their first period prices to the marginal cost.




                                                  38
   Consumers' discounted surplus over the two periods is given by
                                                                                         
                                                            RS
                                                            i                              
                                             m                                m            
                    (µ - c) +          (x - Ri ) dF (x) +        E (-i |x) - S- i dF ( x )  > 0.
                                  RS
                                  i                         -                              
                                                            0


Consumers must have non-negative surplus in the second period since they are free to leave the
market otherwise, hence the terms in the brackets must be non-negative. The above consumer
surplus is positive since µ  M > c. It is also easy to verify that the above consumer surplus
                                                                                       m) =
is no less than the surplus from purchasing only in the second period, given by  (µ - Si
            1
 µ-       2f (µ)   - c . Thus, consumers are willing to purchase one of the products in the first
period.
   Firms do not wish to sell only in the second period for the following reasons. Given that
firm -i sells in both periods, selling only in the second period yields firm i the same profit as
given in the Proposition. If firm -i were selling only in the second period, firm i would find
it not profitable to sell only in the second period because Bertrand competition would follow
and both firms would make zero profit. Therefore, selling only in the second period is weakly
dominated for each firm.

   Step 2. The equilibrium in the second-period sub-game is the semi-niche market equilibrium
   Suppose  (M ) = (M - c)[1 - F (M )]  (µ - c)F (M ), then firms compete for higher market
share in the first period by lowering price. Then through a procedure similar to Step 1 we can
prove that the first period equilibrium price must satisfy ps
                                                            i = c -  [ (M ) - (µ - c)F (M )].

   For consumers, their surplus is given by

                                                                   
                        (µ - c) +  [ (M ) - (µ - c)F (M )] +          (x - M ) dF (x) > 0,
                                                                  M

                                                                        
which is positive since µ  c,  (M )  (µ - c)F (M ), and                 M (x   - M ) dF (x) > 0. Since
purchasing only in the second period also yields  (µ - µ) = 0, the fact that the above consumer
surplus is positive implies that no consumer wishes to purchase only in the first period. Hence,
all consumers are willing to purchase one of the products in the first period.
   Suppose instead,  (M ) < (µ - c)F (M ), i.e., (M - c)[1 - F (M )] < (µ - c)F (M ), then
firms may prefer less market share in the first period as they make greater profit from poaching
customers from the competitor. Then, they would increase price in the first period up to a
point
                                  i (ps
                                      i - c) = i [(µ - c)F (M ) -  (M )] ,



                                                     39
where the LHS is the profit of firm i by obtaining a market share in the first period and
the RHS is the opportunity cost of getting i of first-period market share. Suppose firm i
deviates to an even higher price, then it loses the profit i (ps
                                                               i - c) in the first period and

obtains a gain of i [(µ - c)F (M ) -  (M )] in the second period. The loss and the gain balance
each other, which implies that the deviation is not profitable. Alternatively, suppose firm i
deviates to a slightly lower price, then it obtains an additional profit of -i (ps
                                                                                 i - c) in the first

period and loses the profit of -i [(µ - c)F (M ) -  (M )] in the second period. Again, the two
balance each other and the deviation is not profitable. Any price lower than ps
                                                                              i - , where          is
sufficiently small, is dominated. Hence, the firm charges exactly the same first-period price as
when  (M )  (µ - c)F (M ).
   Note that, as in the proof of Proposition 3, firms' equilibrium profit is a constant for any
i  [0, 1] such that i + -i = 1. Furthermore, firms end up in Bertrand competition and make
zero profit if both of them sell only in the second period. Therefore, selling only in the second
period is weakly dominated.
   For consumers, the surplus is given by

                                                      
           (µ - c) -  ((µ - c)F (M ) -  (M )) +           (x - M ) dF (x)
                                                      M
                                                                              
       = (µ - c) -  ((µ - c)F (M ) -  (M )) +             (x - c) dF (x) -        (M - c) dF (x)
                                                      M                       M
                                           
       = (µ - c) -  (µ - c)F (M ) +           (x - c) dF (x)
                                          M
                                       
       = (µ - c) [1 - F (M )] +           (x - c) dF (x) > 0.
                                      M


The above consumer surplus is positive because µ  c and M > c. This implies that no consumer
wishes to purchase only in the second period. Hence, consumers are willing to purchase one of
the products in the first period.



Proof of Proposition 5. Recall from Proposition 2 in the paper that there are no switchers in
either the niche or the semi-niche market equilibrium. We can hence prove the first period
prices given in the proposition following the same procedure as for Proposition 3.
   Suppose firm i deviates to a price slightly lower than the pk
                                                               i where k  {n, s} given in the

proposition, then it obtains all the market in the first period, i.e., i = 1. Its second period
profit increases by -i k (where n =  (M ) and s =  (Ri
                                                     s )) while its first period profit


decreases by -i (c - pk         k
                      i ) = -i   , which is the same as the former profit increment. Hence,

any price lower than pk
                      i is not a profitable deviation. Alternatively, suppose firm i deviates to a



                                                 40
price higher than pk
                   i , then it loses all market share in the first period. Given the second period

equilibrium prices, no consumers would switch from the competitor to firm i, hence, firm i's
total profit is zero. Thus, raising first period price above pk
                                                              i is not a profitable deviation.

   Note again that the proof here applies to any i  [0, 1] such that i + -i = 1 and that
when both firms sell only in the second period they end up in Bertrand competition with zero
profits, which is no greater than their equilibrium profit of zero. Therefore, there is no profitable
deviation for either firm in terms of first period price and whether to sell only in the second
period.
   Regarding the consumers' choice, we start by the first period choice given that firms play
                                                                                       c-M
the niche market equilibrium in the second period, i.e., given µ                        1- .   Consumers' surplus
                c-M
given that µ     1-    is

                                          
                    (µ - pn
                          i)+                 (x - M ) dF (x)
                                         M
                                                                                
                = (µ - c) +  (M ) +                         (x - c) dF (x) -         (M - c) dF (x)
                                                   M                            M
                                     
                = (µ - c) +                  (x - c) dF (x)
                                    M
                                              SS (M )


Hence, the above consumer surplus is non-negative if and only if µ - c  - · SS (M ). Since
                                                             n <                    c-·M      n < c - S n  0, no
purchasing only in the second period yields a payoff of µ - Si                       1-    - Si        i

consumer prefers to do so.
   Next, we turn to the first period choice of consumers followed by a semi-niche market
equilibrium in the second period. Recall from Lemma 2 in the paper, a continuum of semi-niche
                                                        c-
market equilibria exists if and only if µ               1-    with   [m, M ]. There are no switchers in the
semi-niche market equilibrium given that  > 0.
                                                                      s  [m, ] and S s =
   Consumers' surplus given a specific semi-niche market with prices Ri             i
                            c-Ris
 s + (1 - )µ and µ 
Ri                                  is the following:
                             1-

                                         
                   (µ - ps
                         i) + 
                                                   s
                                             (x - Ri ) dF (x)
                                      s
                                     Ri
                                                                                    
                                 s                                                       s
               = (µ - c) +  ·  (Ri )+                       (x - c) dF (x) -           (Ri - c) dF (x)
                                                        s
                                                       Ri                        s
                                                                                Ri
                                    
               = (µ - c) +                (x - c) dF (x) .
                                     s
                                    Ri
                                                  s)
                                             SS (Ri


                                                                                   s ). Suppose
Hence, the above consumers' surplus is non-negative if and only if µ - c  - · SS (Ri



                                                             41
                                                                                  s = µ-
a consumer purchased only in the second period, then her surplus is given by µ - Si
 s - (1 - )µ = (µ - Rs ) < (c - m) < 0. Hence, all consumers purchase one of the products
Ri                   i

in the first period.



Proof of Proposition 6. According to Proposition 2, the second period equilibrium prices given
any i are invariant of i . Hence, consumers' expected surplus from the second period is
invariant to their purchasing decision in the first period. Thus, consumers purchase the good
with the lowest price in the first period.
   In the first period, firms compete by choosing a price such that:


                               -i (c - pm         Rm
                                        i ) =  -i i
                                                          Sm
                                                     - -i i  .                                              (20)


Suppose the profit from repeat consumers is greater than from switchers, then firms compete
by lowering their prices to the point satisfying (20). In this way, the first period loss equals the
second period gain. Neither firm prefers to deviate from such an equilibrium. If firm i deviates
to any price higher than pm                                                                   m
                          i in the first period, its first period profit increases by i (c - pi ) to
                                              Rm -   Sm , thus the total change of its profit is
0 and its second period profit decreases by i i    i i

0 since, according to (20), i (c - pm        Rm -   Sm = 0. If, instead, firm i deviates to a
                                    i ) -  i i    i i

slightly lower price pm
                      i - where            is arbitrarily small, then its first period profit decreases by
-i (c - pm                                                Rm -   Sm , and the total change
         i ) and its second period profit increases by -i i    -i i

of profit is also 0. Any price even lower than pm
                                                i -                 is strictly dominated. Hence, there is no
profitable deviation. Suppose instead that firms make a greater profit from switcher than from
repeat consumers, then they would increase their price in the first period up to a point where
(20) is satisfied. A similar argument that there is no profitable deviation follows.
                                                                                                      c-m
   For consumers, their surplus given the equilibrium prices under the condition µ                     1-    is:

                                                               RS
                                                               i
          (µ -   pm
                  i )   +         (x -    m
                                         Ri ) dF (x)      +                      m
                                                                    E (-i |x) - S- i dF (x)
                             RS
                             i                                 SO
                                                               i
                                                                             RS
                                                                             i
                                         m                Rm        Sm                         m
      = (µ - c) +                (x -   Ri ) dF (x)   +   i     -   i    +        E (-i |x) - S- i dF (x)
                            RS
                            i                                                SO
                                                                             i
                                                                                              
                                                          RS
                                                          i                                   
                                                                                           Sm 
      = (µ - c) +                (x - c) dF (x) +              [E (-i |x) - c] dF (x) -2 · i  .
                            RS
                            i                         SO
                                                      i                                       
                                                      SS m


In equilibrium, the above consumers' surplus must be no less than the maximum of zero and



                                                          42
                                                                             m ). Hence, the
the consumer surplus from purchasing only in the second period, i.e.,  (µ - Si
sufficient and necessary condition for the consumer to be willing to follow the equilibrium and
purchase one of the product is given by:


                       µ - c  - · SS m - 2 · i
                                             Sm                  m
                                                + max [0,  (µ - Si )]

                                        iRS
                
where SS m =    RS
                i    (x - c) dF (x) +   SO
                                        i
                                              [E (-i |x) - c] dF (x).


C     Negative information spillovers,   [-1, 0)

When  is negative, information spillovers between new goods allow consumers to learn from
a bad experience that they are likely to have a high valuation for the untried product. Since
our interest is in competition between similar products and an outside option, this case is less
relevant. Nonetheless, it is still useful to understand the equilibrium behavior in the negative
correlation setting because the case of no information spillover setting ( = 0) analyzed in
Section 3 is a special case of the equilibrium with   [-1, 0).
    Theorem 1 in the paper is shown to also apply over this range of , and some interesting
contrasts emerge in comparing equilibria. Whereas when   (0, 1), the mass market led to price
discrimination in the second period, and created the possibility of first-period profits, the mass
market equilibrium when   [-1, 0] generalizes the findings for  = 0 that the prices to repeat
and switching consumers are equal, the market is split equally between these consumer segments,
profits are equal for each segment, and first-period price is always equal to marginal cost. That
is, there is Bertrand competition in the first period, and no dynamic pricing interdependencies,
whenever there is a mass market equilibrium.
    It is in the niche and semi-niche equilibria when   [-1, 0] that firms price discriminate
and make profit from switching consumers. The relative profitability of repeat and switching
consumers determines the intensity of first-period price competition in ways that are similar to
the mass market equilibrium outcomes for   (0, 1).
    We use backward induction to characterize the sub-game perfect equilibrium of the game
for this case as well, and start by characterizing the second-period equilibria.


C.1    Second-period equilibria

In the second period, there are again three forms of equilibria: a niche market equilibrium,
illustrated in Figure C.2, where some customers leave the market; a mass market equilibrium,
illustrated in Figure C.4, where no customers leave the market; and a semi-niche equilibrium,


                                                    43
illustrated in Figure C.3, where the marginal repeat consumer is indifferent between repeat
buying, switching, or leaving the market. In each of these figures, observe that the expected
                                                                                                   m
                                                                                    i + (1 - )µ - S- i


                                                       s
                                        i + (1 - )µ - S- i
                                                                         s
                n                  n
                                                                    i - Ri
 i + (1 - )µ - S- i           i - Ri


                 RS                                                                          RO           SO
                 i                                                                           i            i
     SO               RO
                      i  =M        i              M            m              i                   RS              i
     i  = SO                                            RS
                                                        i            SO                           i  =µ
                                                      RO   SO
                                                    = i  = i
                                                                                          m
                                                                                     i - Ri




  Figure C.2: Niche market                 Figure C.3: Semi-niche                 Figure C.4: Mass market
 equilibrium, where Rin =M              market equilibrium, where                 equilibrium, where Ri m =
       n = S , given by (23).           s , S s satisfies (24) and (25)
                                       Ri                                          m
                                                                                  S-i = (1 - )/ [2f (µ)] + c.
 and S-  i                                   -i



value of consuming -i in the second period is negatively sloped. Note that the new market is
fully covered in the mass and semi-niche market equilibria when   [-1, 0] in contrast to these
equilibria when   (0, 1).
   Accordingly, firm i's second-period profit can be written as:

                            +                                             RS , SO )
                                                                      min(- i -i
            (Ri - c)i                       dF (i ) + (Si - c)-i                      dF (-i ) .           (21)
                             RS , RO )
                         max(i                                       -
                                 i

                profit from repeat customers               profit from switching customers


                                           RS ,  RO ) =  RO and min( RS ,  SO ) =  SO in (21).
In a niche market equilibrium, we have max(i    i       i           -i    -i      -i
                                    RO =  RS =  SO in (21). In a mass market equilibrium,
In a semi-niche market equilibrium, i    i     i
            RS ,  RO ) =  RS and min( RS ,  SO ) =  RS in (21).
we have max(i    i       i           -i    -i      -i

   The prices in the niche market equilibrium can be characterized by the first order approach:

                                     n                 1 - F (M )
                                    Ri = M                        + c,                                     (22)
                                                         f (M )
                                                        F SO
                                        n
                                       Si    = S-                      + c.                                (23)
                                                           f SO

               S -(1-)µ
where SO =              .   Note that we drop the subscript in (23) as the price and the cutoff
type are independent of i and that S > c as  < 0. The equilibrium prices in the mass market
equilibrium can also be characterized by first order conditions with respect to prices. The



                                                      44
semi-niche market equilibria are characterized by construction.

Lemma 1. Suppose   [-1, 0). Then in the second period:

   · if and only if M  SO , there exists a niche market equilibrium with prices given by (22)
     and (23).

   · if and only if m  µ and M  SO , there exists a continuum of semi-niche market
     equilibria with prices satisfying

                                           s      s
                                          S- i = Ri + (1 - )µ,                               (24)


     and

                                                 s
                                     max(M, µ)  Ri  min(m, SO );                             (25)


   · if and only if m  µ, there exists a mass market equilibrium with prices

                                           m    m       1-
                                          Ri = Si =            + c;                          (26)
                                                        2f (µ)


   In the niche market equilibrium characterized in Lemma 1, firms charge the monopoly price
M to their repeat customers and make the monopoly profit  (M ). This is the same as in the
 = 0 setting.

Corollary 7. Suppose   [-1, 0). In the second period,

                                                          n = M  S n = S , where the equality
   · in the niche market equilibrium, the prices satisfy Ri       i

     is true only when  = -1;

                                                               s  Ss.
   · in the semi-niche market equilibrium, the prices satisfy Ri   i



   Lemma 1 also shows that in the mass market equilibrium, as when  = 0, firms charge the
same price to repeat and switching customers despite having the option to price discriminate
                                                                      RS = µ. These ob-
based on purchasing history. By equation (1) in the paper, this gives i
servations are perfectly consistent with the mass market equilibrium with  = 0. In fact, the
equilibrium prices given in Lemma 1 and the second-period profit of a firm in the mass market
                1-
equilibrium,   4f (µ) ,   are equal to the corresponding terms in Lemma 1 in the paper by setting
 = 0.


                                                   45
C.2    Sub-game perfect equilibrium of the two-stage pricing game

Consumers purchase good i in the first period if and only if the relevant sum of the surplus
in the first period and the anticipated surplus in the second period is greater than the sum of
surpluses from choosing -i and zero. The consumer surplus from purchasing good i in the first
period is thus given by:

                                                
                                                                          
                (µ - pi )              +                            (x - Ri ) dF (x)
                                               max(   RO , RS
                                                      i   i     )
      consumer surplus from trying i
                                             consumer surplus from sticking with i
                                                           min(i   i )
                                                               SO , RS
                                                                                        
                                       +                                   E (-i |x) - S- i dF (x),           (27)
                                                           -
                                             consumer surplus from switching to -i or to the outside option


         {Rm , Rs , Rn }, and S   {S m , S s , S n }.
where Ri   i    i    i         i    i     i     i

   Since, according to Lemma 1, firms make the same second-period profit from repeat and
switching customers in the mass market equilibrium, they compete in the first period as in
Bertrand competition. Hence, their first-period prices are equal to the marginal cost. This
observation is similar to the positive correlation setting with the mass market equilibrium in
the second period.
   However, firms also make positive profits in the semi-niche and the niche market equilibra in
the second period when consumer values are negatively correlated, whereas they make zero profit
in these equilibria when values are positively correlated. This is again due to the observation
that firms' market power arises from the ability to poach the competitor's customers and the
fact that, according to Lemma 1, firms always make a positive profit from switching customers
in the second period when the correlation is negative.

Proposition 7. When  < 0:

   · if and only if M  SO and µ  [c -  (SS n - 2i
                                                Sn ) + max(0,  (µ - S )), ), there exists an

                                                 Sn > 0 by charging pn = c -  ( (M ) -  Sn )
      equilibrium where firm i makes a profit of i                   i                 i
                               n , S n as given by (22) and (23) in the second-period niche market
      in the first period and Ri    i

      equilibrium, where

                                                                     SO
                             n
                        SS       =         (x - c) dF (x) +               [E (-i |x) - c] dF (x),
                                       M                            -
                                                   2
                                       F SO
                        Sn
                        i  = -                         .
                                           f SO



                                                           46
   · if and only if M  SO and µ  [c -  (SS s - 2i
                                                Ss ) + max(0,  (µ - S s )), m], there
                                                                     i
                                                                      Ss > 0 by charging
      exists a continuum of equilibria where firm i makes a profit of i
      ps            s     Ss                           s    s
       i = c -  [ (Ri ) - i ] in the first period and Si , Ri satisfying (24) in the second-period

      semi-niche market equilibria, where

                                                              s
                                                             Ri
                              s
                            SS =           (x - c)dF (x) +        [E (-i |x) - c] dF (x),
                                       s
                                      Ri                     -
                            Ss     s                    s
                            i  = [Ri + (1 - )µ - c] F (Ri ),
                                         s
                            max (M, µ)  Ri  min m, SO ;


   · if and only if µ  [m, ), there exists an equilibrium where firm i makes a profit of
       (1-)
      4f (µ)   > 0 by charging pm                              m    m
                                i = c in the first period and Ri , Si as given by (26) in the

      second-period mass market equilibrium.


   According to Theorem 1 in the paper, firms make positive profits in the two-stage pricing
game whenever there are switchers in the second period. With negative information spillovers,
consumers do not leave the market after a bad experience as they expect to have high a valuation
for the untried product. Hence, they switch to that product. Those who choose to leave the
market in the second period, if any, are the consumers with intermediate valuations for the good
they have tried. Therefore, since a positive mass of consumers switch products in the second
period in all equilibria with   [-1, 0), firms always make positive profits in this case.
   As before, the relative profitability of switching consumers determines how intensely firms
compete for market share in the first period. In the mass market case here, as when  = 0,
switching and repeat customers are equally profitable. This breaks the link between first and
second period competition and firms compete `
                                            a la Bertrand in the first period, setting price
equal to marginal cost.


C.3    Proofs for the negative information spillovers setting

Proof of Lemma 1. We prove the lemma in three steps.

   Step 1: The niche market equilibrium
   We now prove that condition M  SO is sufficient and necessary for the existence of a
niche market equilibrium.
   We start from sufficiency. We first show that when M  SO holds, we have M  µ.
                               1
Suppose M < µ, then µ -      2f (µ)   - c > 0. Given that M  SO we also have SO < µ, which



                                                    47
                                        S -(1-)µ
implies that S > µ, because SO =                 ,   and that, according to (23),

                                            -           1
                                      S<          +c<        + c.
                                           2f (µ)     2f (µ)

                              1
But then this implies µ <   2f (µ)   + c. A contradiction to M < µ. Hence, we have M  µ.
   To show that the prices given in the lemma form an equilibrium, we need to rule out two
sorts of profitable deviations. First, we show that among all prices such that RO > SO holds,
i.e., repeat and switching consumers' surplus curves cross at a point below the horizontal axis ­
similar as in the niche market equilibrium, are no better than charging M to repeat consumers
and S to switching consumers. Holding the other firm charges the equilibrium price, a firm
makes the following profit from repeat consumers if it charges a price satisfies Ri > SO , i.e.,
the surplus curves cross below the horizontal axis:

                                                        
                                       i (Ri - c)          dF ().                                    (28)
                                                      Ri


By first order condition of profit function (28) w.r.t Ri , any local deviations by firm i such
that the two surplus curves still cross at a point below the horizontal axis must not be more
profitable than M , because otherwise the first order derivative w.r.t Ri is not equal to zero.
Hence, the optimal choice is that Ri = M because the firm behaves as a monopoly in its share of
the market. Alternatively, it makes the following profit from switching consumers if it charges
                                                           SO =           Si -(1-)µ         RO , i.e., S
a price satisfies Si > M + (1 - )µ, or put it differently, - i                        < M = - i         i

maintains a situation similar to the niche market equilibrium:

                                                     Si -(1-)µ
                                                          
                                 -i (Si - c)                     dF ().
                                                  -


The optimal price can be found by first order approach and is, in fact, given by S . Therefore,
M and S are the optimal prices to repeat and switching consumers among all prices that have
consumers' surplus curves cross below the horizontal axis.
   Second, we show that prices that let consumer surplus curves cross above the horizontal
axis are not profitable deviations. Suppose firm i deviates the price to repeat consumers to a
Ri < SO such that the two surplus curves cross above the horizontal axis, holding the rival
firm chooses the equilibrium prices. Then the profit from repeat customers is given by

                                                     
                                     i (Ri - c)                dF (),                                (29)
                                                       Ri -S
                                                  µ+    1-




                                                      48
then by the first order approach the optimal price must satisfy the following condition:

                                                                 Ri -S
                                       (1 - ) 1 - F      µ+       1-
                             
                            Ri =                                            + c.
                                                        Ri -S
                                             f   µ+      1-


Such an optimal is unique, as the right side of the above equation is a decreasing function of
  due to the MHR property. According to R <  SO , we have
Ri                                       i


                  (1 - )[1 - F (SO )]            (1 - )[1 - F (m)]
           Ri >                            +c>                     + c = m > M  SO ,
                        f (SO )                       f (m)

                    <  SO . Therefore, R   SO and any price R <  SO is not a profitable
which contradicts Ri                    i                    i

deviation, because the first order derivative of the profit function (29) must be positive for any
such price Ri . In other words, the firm would always prefer to increase the price whenever
Ri < SO holds.
   Now suppose firm i deviates to a price Si < M + (1 - )µ, again holding the rival firm
chooses the equilibrium prices, then the two surplus curves cross at a point above the horizontal
axis. The profit from doing so is given by

                                                         M -Si
                                                   µ+     1-
                                   -i (Si - c)                   dF (),
                                                  -


and hence, the optimal deviation price must satisfy

                                                               
                                                           M -Si
                                           (1 - )F µ +      1-
                                   
                                  Si   =                  
                                                      M -Si
                                                                         + c.
                                             f µ+      1-


        < M + (1 - )µ and M  µ, we have
Since Si

                (1 - )F (M )    (1 - )[1 - F (M )]     1 - F (M )
         Si >                +c                    +c>            + c = M  µ.
                    f (M )           f (M )              f (M )

         < M + (1 - )µ and M  µ, we have S   µ. A contradiction. Hence, S  
But by Si                                 i                              i
                                                     -(1-)µ
                                                   Si
                                   SO =
M + (1 - )µ, or put it differently -                                    RO , must hold. Therefore,
                                                                    M = -
                                     i                                    i

any price Si < M + (1 - )µ is not a profitable deviation, because it is less than the optimal
        . Hence, the firm would rather choose a price satisfies S  M + (1 - )µ. We have
price Si                                                         i

completed the proof of sufficiency.
   Now we turn to necessity. Suppose the prices (22) and (23) form an equilibrium. Then it
must be true that M  SO for otherwise the two surplus curves would cross at a point above


                                                   49
the horizontal axis.

   Step 2: The semi-niche market equilibria
   We start from proving sufficiency. Note that the conditions imply that

                                           S - (1 - )µ
                             SO                           s
                                                       > Ri > max(µ, M ).                               (30)
                                                

Holding the rival firm choosing the equilibrium prices, and suppose firm i charges a price Ri >
 s . Repeat customers' surplus curve moves to the right and crosses the switching customers'
Ri
surplus curve at a point below the horizontal axis. In this case, the profit from repeat customers
                                                                           s > µ and the profit
is again given by (28) which is maximized at M . Since (30) requires that Ri
function above is inversely U-shaped due to our monotone hazard rate assumption, the first
                                                                   s > M must be negative,
order derivative of firm i's profit from repeat customers at Ri > Ri
which implies that Ri is not a profitable deviation.
                                                     s . Then the two surplus curves cross at a
   Suppose instead, firm i deviates to a price Ri < Ri
point above the horizontal axis, and the profit from repeat customers is given by

                                                           
                                           i (Ri - c)          R -S s
                                                                        dF ().
                                                                i  -i
                                                          µ+     1-



By the first order condition w.r.t Ri , the implicit best response function of firm i is given by

                                                                            Ri -S-
                                                                                 s
                                                (1 - ) 1 - F µ +              1-
                                                                                   i

                                    Ri =                            Ri -S-
                                                                         s             .
                                                                           i
                                                        f µ+          1-


Note that the MHR assumption guarantees that the solution to the first order condition is
indeed the optimal. Suppose Ri < Ri
                                  s , then according to the above best response function,


                                  s -S s
                                 Ri
       (1 - )[1 - F µ +           1-
                                      i
                                            ]                         s )]
                                                       (1 - )[1 - F (Ri         (1 - )[1 - F (m)]
Ri >                    s -S s                  +c =             s         +c >                             s
                                                                                                  +c = m > Ri .
             f µ+
                       Ri   i                               f (Ri )                  f (m)
                        1-


A contradiction. Thus, Ri  Ri
                            s . Therefore, deviating to any price R < Rs is not profitable
                                                                   i   i

because Ri < Ri , which implies that the first order derivative of the profit w.r.t Ri is positive.
                                             s to attract firm -i's customers. Then these
   Now, suppose firm i charges a price Si > Si
switching customers' surplus curve moves left and the two surplus curves cross at a point below
the horizontal axis. Firm i's profit from switching customers is then given by

                                                                Si -(1-)µ
                                                                     
                                            -i (Si - c)                     dF ()
                                                               -


                                                               50
and the optimal price is in fact S . According to (30) and (24), which imply that

                                       s                s
                                  S < R- i + (1 - )µ = Si < µ,


              s < S , and hence, the first order derivative of firm i's profit w.r.t S must be
we have Si < Si                                                                       i
                          s is not profitable to deviate to.
positive. Thus, any Si < Si
                                                       s . The switching customers' surplus
   Suppose instead, firm -i deviates to a price q-i < S- i

curve must now cross the repeat customers' surplus curve at a point above the horizontal axis.
The profit from the switching customers are then given by

                                                        s -S
                                                       R- i i
                                                  µ+    1-
                                      (Si - c)                  dF ().
                                                 -


By the first order approach, firm -i's implicit best response function is given by

                                                            s -S 
                                                           R-
                                         (1 - )F µ +          i
                                                             1-
                                                                i

                                 Si  =                  s -S 
                                                       R-
                                                                         + c.
                                                          i i
                                             f µ+        1-


Suppose Si < S , then

                                   (1 - )F (R-  s )
                                                 i      1-
                           Si >            s        +c>        + c  µ.
                                       f (R-i )         2f (µ)

However, (30) and (24) imply that S < µ. A contradiction. Hence, Si  S and it is not
                               s since the first order derivative of firm i's profit from switching
profitable to deviate to Si < Si
customers w.r.t Si must be positive.

   Step 3: The mass market equilibrium
   We can solve for the equilibrium prices from taking first order conditions w.r.t Ri and Si of
the profit function of firm i in mass market equilibrium given below

                                  +                                 RS
                                                                    - i
                    i (Ri - c)           dF (i ) + -i (Si - c)            dF (-i ).           (31)
                                 RS
                                 i                                 -


                                                    RS ,  RO ) =  RS and min( RS ,  SO ) =  RS
The profit function (31) is obtained by letting max(i    i       i           -i    -i      -i

in (21). We then obtain the following necessary conditions for equilibrium prices:

                                  RS )]                             (1 - )F (-  RS )
              m     (1 - )[1 - F (i                           m                  i
             Ri =            RS )
                                        +c         and       Si =          RS )
                                                                                     + c.     (32)
                         f (i                                           f (- i




                                                   51
We can find the cutoff types for any i :

                                                                          RS )]
                                                           (1 - )[1 - 2F (i
                              RS         m    m
                       (1 - )(i  - µ) = Ri - S- i =                  RS
                                                                 f (i )

hence,

                                                        1 - 2F (iRS )
                                         RS
                                         i  = µ+              RS )
                                                                                                     (33)
                                                           f (i

                           1-2F (iRS )
        RS < µ, then
Suppose i                                > 0 and hence the RHS of (33) must be greater than µ, which
                                RS )
                             f (i
                                                     1-2F (iRS )
is a contradiction.     Suppose i  RS    > µ, then                 < 0 and hence the RHS of (33) must
                                                          RS )
                                                       f (i
                                                     RS = µ, where i  {A, B }. Plugging
be less than µ. This means that it must be true that i
RS = µ back into the two equations for Ri
                                        m and S m , respectively, we obtain the mass market
                                               i

equilibrium prices.
   The above analysis is valid if and only if the prices indeed form a mass market equilibrium,
i.e., RS - Ri
            m  0 is true. Hence, the sufficient and necessary condition for the existence of the


above mass market equilibrium is:

                                                1-
                                           µ-          - c  0,                                       (34)
                                                2f (µ)

or equivalently, m  µ.



Proof of Corollary 7. We prove the corollary in two steps.
   Step 1. The fact that the niche market equilibrium exists implies that M  SO and M  µ.

                                          Sn .
Claim 1: When  = -1, M = S  µ and  (M ) = i
   First, note that when  = -1, it is true that:

                                      n                1 - F (M )
                                     Ri = M=                      + c,                               (35)
                                                         f (M )
                                      n              F (2µ - S )
                                     Si = S=                        + c.                             (36)
                                                      f (2µ - S )

   We can rewrite S as

         F (2µ - S )         F (µ - (S - µ))           1 - F (µ + (S - µ))         1 - F (S )
  S=                   +c=                       +c=                         +c=                +c
         f (2µ - S )          f (µ - (S - µ))             f (µ + (S - µ))            f (S )

                   n = S = M  µ and  (M ) =  Sn when  = -1.
This implies that Ri                        i




                                                     52
Claim 2: When   [-1, 0), S  M .
   Take the first order derivative of (23)'s RHS w.r.t :

                                     F ( )     SO F ( )            SO

                     dS    F (SO ) d f (SO ) dS d f (SO ) µ - S
                        =-         -           -                ,
                     d     f (SO )   dSO     d    dSO       

and rearrange                           
                              F (SO )                    F ( )      SO
                        d                dS    F (SO ) d f (SO ) µ - S
                    1 +       f (SO )   
                          dSO            d = - f (SO ) - dSO       
                                                                       .

                               >0

Hence, S decreases in  as long as S  µ. Since S = M when  = -1 according to Claim 1,
there exists a  > -1 such that µ  S  M is true for any   [-1,  ].
                   dS
   For   ( , 0),   d    < 0 is not necessarily true, as S < µ may hold. Denote by   sup{|S 
µ,    } the smallest  such that S  µ. Then for any   ( , 0), we have S  µ, because
                                                           dS
whenever S increases to a level sufficiently close to µ,   d    < 0 holds and S starts to decrease.
Therefore, S  M holds for all   [-1, 0). See the following figure for this part of the proof.

                                   S

                              M




                               µ




                                   -1                                


                           Figure C.5: S  M holds for all   [-1, 0).


   Step 2. According to Lemma 1, the sufficient and necessary condition for the semi-niche
                s  µ. Since S s = Rs + (1 - )µ and  < 0, it is true that S s  µ and hence,
market implies Ri            i     i                                      i
 s  Rs .
Si   i




Proof of Proposition 7. This proof has three steps.
Step 1: The equilibrium when the second-period sub-game has the mass market equilibrium



                                                53
    Since the second-period prices and the profits are the same across repeat and switching
consumers, firms are indifferent across any market share in the second period. Hence, they
compete in the first period only for the first-period profit. This implies that they behave as
if they are in Bertrand competition by charging the marginal cost c. In that case, consumer
                                                  m - c = Rm - c =                    1-
surplus must be non-negative since µ - c  m - c  Si        i                         2f (µ)   > 0, i.e.,
consumers' first-period surplus is positive according to the condition for existence of the mass
market equilibrium, and their second-period surplus must be non-negative. Furthermore, their
first period surplus µ - c is greater than the surplus from only purchase in the second period,
              m = µ - 1- - c. Therefore, the sufficient and necessary condition is equivalent
given by µ - Si       2f (µ)

to the condition for existence of the mass market equilibrium in the second period.
    Note that for each firm selling only in the second period is weakly dominated by selling in
both periods. To see why, consider firm i sells only in the second period while firm -i sells in
                                                                             m - c) · F (µ) =
both periods. Then it must hold that i = 0 and firm i's profit is given by (Si
 (1-)
4f (µ) ,   which is equivalent to the equilibrium profit. On the other hand, consider firm i sells
only in the second period while firm -i does the same. Then both firms make zero profit as
they end up in Bertrand competition. Therefore, selling only in the second period is weakly
dominated.
    Step 2: The equilibrium when the second-period sub-game has the semi-niche market equi-
libria
    Given any equilibrium in a semi-niche market, we can find the profit firm i makes from
                    s - c)[1 - F (Rs )], and from switching customers, [Rs + (1 - )µ - c]F (Rs ),
repeat customers, (Ri              i                                     i                   i
                 s  min(m,  SO ).
with max(M, µ)  Ri
    In Theorem 1 in the paper we have shown that each firm's profit in the whole game is
         S  . The following derivation illustrates how this holds in the current context.
given by i
        s )   Ss firms make greater profit from repeat customers than from switchers.
When  (Ri    i

Firms then compete for market share in the first period by lowering price to the point where
c - ps        s     Ss
     i =  ( (Ri ) - i ). Suppose firm i deviates to a higher price in the first period, then it

avoids the loss i (c - ps
                        i ) in the first period, but its profit in the second period also decreases
         s ) -  Ss ). Suppose it deviates to a slightly lower price in the first period, then it
by i ( (Ri     i
                         s ) -  Ss ) but also incurs an additional loss of  (c - ps ) in the
obtains a gain of -i ( (Ri     i                                           -i     i

second period. Hence, neither deviating upwards or downwards is profitable.
                           s ) <  Ss firms make greater profit from switchers than from repeat
    Alternatively, when  (Ri     i

customers. Firms then compete for lower market share by increasing price up to ps
                                                                                i - c =
  Ss -  (Rs )) . Suppose firm i deviates to a higher price in the first period, then it loses profits
 (i       i




                                                 54
i (ps                                                                               Ss     s
    i - c) in the first period, but its profits in the second period increase by i (i -  (Ri )).

Suppose it deviates to a slightly lower price in the first period, then it makes an additional
profit of -i (ps                     Ss     s
               i - c), but loses -i (i -  (Ri )) in the second period. Hence, neither deviating

upwards or downwards is profitable. Firm i's total discounted profit over the two periods is
thus i (ps              s        Ss =  Ss .
         i - c) +  i  (Ri ) + -i i    i

   Following a similar procedure as in step 1, it can be shown that selling only in the second
period is weakly dominated for each firm.
   Consumers' surplus from purchasing good i in the first period is given by

                                                     s
                                                    Ri
      (µ - ps
            i) + 
                                 s
                           (x - Ri )dF (x) +                          s
                                                         E (-i |x) - S- i dF (x)
                      s
                     Ri                          -
                                                                                s
                                                                               Ri
                     s         Ss                                    s                                       Ss
  = (µ - c) +    ( (Ri )   -   i  )   +        (x - c)dF (x) -     (Ri )   +        [E (-i |x) - c] dF (x) - i
                                           s
                                          Ri                                   -
                                                                                    
                                                s
                                               Ri                            
                                                                          Ss 
  = (µ - c) +            (x - c)dF (x) +         [E (-i |x) - c] dF (x) -2i  
                     s
                    Ri                         -                             
                                           SS s


Hence, the above consumer surplus is non-negative if and only if µ  c -  · (SS s - 2i
                                                                                    Ss )


and is greater than the surplus from purchasing only in the second period if and only if µ 
c -  · (SS s - 2i
                Ss ) +  (µ - S s ). Combining the two inequalities yields the lower bound of the
                              i

sufficient and necessary condition given in the proposition.

   Step 3: The equilibrium when the second-period sub-game has the niche market equilibrium
   Suppose firm i deviates to a price higher than pn
                                                   i . Then profits in the first period increase by

i (c - pn                                                                             Sn   Sn
        i ) to 0. The discounted profits in the second period decrease by i  (M ) - i i to i .

Since the gain is the same as the loss, it is not a profitable deviation. Suppose firm i deviates
to a slightly lower price pn                                                               n
                           i - , then the profits in the first period decrease by -i (c - pi ) to

c - pn                                                                         Sn
     i . The discounted profits in the second period increase by -i  (M ) - -i i . Thus, the

gain is the same as the loss and it is not a profitable deviation.
   Following a similar procedure as in step 1, it can be shown that selling only in the second
period is weakly dominated for each firm.
   The last question left to answer is whether consumers are willing to buy one of the products in
the market in the first period given the equilibrium prices. Consumer surplus can be calculated




                                                         55
by accounting for the equilibrium prices:

                                                   SO
      (µ -   pn
              i)   +          (x - M )dF (x) +           E (-i |x) - S dF (x)
                       M                          -
                                                                                 SO
                        Sn                                                                                     Sn
  = (µ - c) +  ( (M ) - i  )+                    (x - c) dF (x) -  (M ) +             [E (-i |x) - c] dF (x) - i
                                           M                                    -
                                                                                       
                                                 SO                               
                                                                               Sn 
  = (µ - c) +              (x - c) dF (x) +           [E (-i |x) - c] dF (x) -2i  
                       M                       -                                  
                                               SS n


Hence, the above consumer surplus to is non-negative if and only if µ  c -  (SS n - 2i
                                                                                     Sn )


and is greater than the surplus from purchasing only in the second period if and only if µ 
c -  (SS n - 2i
              Sn ) +  · (µ - S ). Combining the two inequalities yields the lower bound of the


sufficient and necessary condition given in the proposition.




D     Price elasticities

D.1    When   (0, 1)
           R the demand from repeat consumers of firm i, and by D S the demand from
Denote by Di                                                     i

switching consumers of firm i. In general,

                                                  +
                                  R
                                 Di = i                          dF (i )
                                                 max(i
                                                     RS , RO
                                                         i   )
                                                             RS
                                                             - i
                                   S
                                  Di = max 0, -i                   dF (-i ) .
                                                            SO
                                                            - i


                                                                                      RS
                                                                                      -
                                   R =                +                 S =             i
    In a mass market equilibrium, Di  i               RS dF (i )
                                                      i            and Di   -i       SO dF (-i ). Note that
                                                                                     - i
 R is a function of Rm and S m as  RS is determined according to
Di                                                                                    m
                                                                                µ + (Ri - S-m )/(1 - ), and
                     i      -i    i                                                          i
      S is a function of Rm and S m as  RS is determined by µ + (Rm - S m )/(1 - ) and  SO
that Di                   -i     i     -i                         -i   i               -i
                   m - (1 - )µ)/.
is determined by (Si




                                                       56
   The relevant elasticities are then given by

                     R Rm
                   dDi         i f (iRS )         Rim            Rm
        DR               i
       ERm
         i
               =     m   R
                            =-            ·           RS
                                                           = - mi                                 (37)
         i         dRi Di         1-        i [1 - F (i )]     Ri - c
                     RS  m         RS )           m
                                                S-i          S m
        DR         dDi   -i   i f (i
       ES m
          i
               =     m    R
                            =           ·            RS
                                                         = m-i                                    (38)
         -i        dS-i Di     1-         i [1 - F (i )]    Ri - c
                     S Rm
                   dDi             RS )
                              i f (-              R-m                       RS )Rm
                                                                         f (-
        DS               -i          i                i                       i  -i
       ERm
         i
               =     m   S
                            =           ·       RS        SO
                                                                =           RS        SO )]
                                                                                            (39)
         -i        dR-i Di     1-         i [F (-i ) - F (-i )]   (1 - )[F (-i ) - F (- i
                      S Sm             RS )
                                    f (-         SO )
                                              f (-                 m                   m
        DiS        dDi   i               i         i              Si                  Si
       ES m    =     m    S
                            = - -
                                  i         +         ·        RS ) - F ( SO )]
                                                                                = -  m     . (40)
         i         dSi Di            1-                 -i [F (- i       -i         Si - c


                                   S = 0 and hence, the relevant elasticities are zero: E i =    DS
   In a niche market equilibrium, Di                                                     Rn      -i
 DiS
ES n   = 0. We also have        R
                               Di     = i [1 -      RO )]
                                                 F (i       and hence,
  i


                                              R Rn
                                            dDi        i f (Ri n )Rn       M
                              DR                 i                 i
                             ERn
                               i
                                       =      n  R
                                                   = -             n   =-                         (41)
                                  i         dRi Di     i [1 - F (Ri )]    M -c
                              DR
                             ES n
                                i
                                       = 0.                                                       (42)
                               -i




   In a semi-niche market equilibrium, the demand curves are kinked:
                                                  
                   i [1 - F (Ri )], if Ri  Rs      i [1 - F (RS )], if S-i  S s
              R                             i                   i            -i
             Di =                               =                                                 (43)
                    [1 - F (RS )], if R > Rs        [1 - F (RS )], if S < S s
                   i          i           i   i    i          i          -i    -i




                                          
       0, if R-i  Rs                       0, if Si  S s
  S                -i                                  i
 Di =                                   =                                                         (44)
        [F (RS ) - F (SO )], if R > Rs      [F (RS ) - F (SO )], if S < S s
        -i     -i     -i         -i  -i     -i      -i    -i         i   i


   Hence, the corresponding elasticities are given by
                                                   
                        R               R
                                      dDi  Ri       - f (Ri )Ri , if Ri  Rs
                      Di                             1-F (Ri )            i
                    E Ri      =                 =              RS )R                              (45)
                                      dRi DiR      - f (i             i                   s
                                                      (1-)[1-F (i      RS )] , if Ri > Ri
                                                  
                                      dDi S-i  0, if S-i  S-i
                                        R                               s
                        DR
                    ES-
                      i
                              =                 =          RS                                     (46)
                        i                   R
                                      dS-i Di          f (i )S-i                         s
                                                    (1-)[1-F (i    RS )] , if S-i < S-i
                                                   
                                      dDi R-i  0 if R-i  R-i
                                         S                              s
                     DS
                    ER-
                      i
                              =                  =          f (-RS )R                             (47)
                        i             dR-i Di S                  i      -i
                                                                RS )-F ( SO )] , if R-i > R-i
                                                                                             s
                                                     (1-)[F (-    i          -i
                                                  
                                                                     s
                                        S S
                                      dDi          0, if Si  Si
                        DS                  i              RS          SO )
                    ESii      =                 =      f (-i )
                                                               + 
                                                                  f (-  i
                                                                             Si
                                                                                                  (48)
                                      dSi DiS            1-
                                                   -                             if Si < Sis
                                                        F (RS )-F (SO )
                                                                 -i   -i




                                                            57
D.2        When   (-1, 0]

The demand function of firm i consists of two parts, the demand from repeat and from switching
consumers:

                                                  +
                                   R
                                  Di = i                        dF (i )                               (49)
                                                    RS , RO )
                                                max(i   i
                                                      RS , SO )
                                                  max(- i -i
                                   S
                                  Di = -i                         dF (-i ).                           (50)
                                                  


                                                                                             -RS
                                            R =                  +                 S =         i
   In the mass market equilibrium, we have Di    i               RS dF (i )
                                                                 i            and Di    -i   -     dF (i ).
Then, the price elasticities are:

                                   R Rm
                                 dDi             RS )
                                            i f (i       m
                                                        Ri             Rim
                    DR                i
                  ERm
                    i
                             =     m  R
                                        = -                 RS )]
                                                                  = -  m-c
                     i           dRi Di      1 -  i [1 - F (i         Ri
                                   R Sm
                                 dDi             RS )
                                            i f (i       m
                                                        S-          S-m
                    DR                 -i                  i           i
                  ES m
                     i
                             =     m   R
                                          =                  RS
                                                                 =  m
                     -i          dS-i Di     1 -  i [1 - F (i )]   Ri - c
                                    S Sm            RS )
                                              -i f (-     m             m
                    DS           dDi   i              i  Si            Si
                  ES m
                     i
                             =     m    S
                                          = -               RS )
                                                                 = -  m-c
                     i           dSi  Di       1 -  -i F (-  i       Si
                                   S Rm
                                 dDi               RS )
                                             -i f (-        R-m            R-m
                    DS                  -i           i          i             i
                  ERm
                    i
                             =     m     S
                                           =                      RS )
                                                                       =   m-c
                     -i          dR- i Di     1  -       -i F (  -i      S i


                                   m = Rm = S m = S m , thus, E i = E i = -E i =  DR    DS          DR
We have shown that in equilibrium Ri    -i   i     -i          Rm    Sm     Sm     i     i            -i
   DS
-ERm
   i
     .
      -i
                                                                                                -SO
                                                    R =              +                 S =        i
   Alternatively, in the niche market equilibrium, Di   i            RO dF (i )
                                                                     i            and Di   -i   -     dF (i ).
The elasticities are given by:

                                   R Rn
                                 dDi                           Rin          M
                     DR               i             RO
                   ERn
                     i
                             =     n  R
                                        = -  i f (  i  )           RO
                                                                        =-
                         i       dRi Di                  i [1 - F (i )]    M -c
                                   R Sn
                                 dDi
                    DR                  -i
                   ES n
                      i
                             =     n     R
                                           =0
                     -i          dS- i D i
                                   S Sn   i f (-SO )      n             n
                     DS          dDi  i          i      Si             Si
                   ES n
                      i
                             =     n  S
                                        =                   SO )
                                                                 = -  n-c
                      i          dSi Di              -i F (- i       Si
                                   S Rn
                                 dDi
                    DS                  -i
                   ERn
                     i
                             =     n     S
                                           = 0.
                     -i          dR- i D i


   In a semi-niche equilibrium, the demand curves are kinked:
                                                
                 i [1 - F (Ri )], if Ri  Rs      i [1 - F (Rs )], if S-i  S s
            R                             i                   i            -i
           Di =                               =                                                       (51)
                  [1 - F (RS )], if R < Rs        [1 - F (RS )], if S < S s
                 i          i           i   i    i          i          -i     -i




                                                     58
                       n -(1-)µ
                                                              
             -i F     Si                      s
                                   , if R-i  R-                -i F      Si -(1-)µ               s
                                                                                       , if Si  Si
      S                                         i                             
     Di =                                                 =                                          (52)
              F (RS ), if R < Rs                                F (RS ), if S < S s
             -i  -i        -i  -i                              -i  -i        i   i


    Hence, the corresponding elasticities are given by
                                                
                                   R
                                 dDi  Ri         - f (Ri )Ri , if Ri  Rs
                      DR                          1-F (Ri )            i
                    ERii    =              =                RS )R                                    (53)
                                 dRi DiR      - f (i                i                   s
                                                   (1-)[1-F (i      RS )] , if Ri < Ri
                                             
                                 dDi S-i  0, if S-i  S-i
                                   R                                  s
                      DR
                    ES-
                      i
                            =              =             RS )S                                       (54)
                        i              R
                                 dS-i Di            f (i       -i                      s
                                                (1-)[1-F (i       RS )] , if S-i < S-i
                                              
                                 dDiS R        0, if R-i  Rs
                     DS                -i                               -i
                    ER-
                      i
                            =               =     f (  RS )R                                         (55)
                        i        dR-i Di S             -i    -  i
                                                             RS ) , if R-i < R-i
                                                                                     s
                                                 (1-)F (-      i
                                                   S -(1-)µ
                                               f i                 Si
                                   S
                                 dDi Si               Si -(1-)µ , if Si  Si
                                                                                    s
                      DS                       F
                    ESii    =              =                                                         (56)
                                 dSi DiS                 SO
                                              - f (-i )S       i
                                                                     , if Si < Si s
                                                  (1-)F (RS )   -i




E     Competitive pricing of normal goods: A benchmark

In our main analysis, we provide comparative statics regarding how firm profits and consumer
surplus vary with the degree of information spillovers between experience goods. In this ap-
pendix, we provide a benchmark case of the analysis of a two-period price competition in a
normal goods market, of which the comparison with the main analysis can help to illustrate the
effect of the informational switching cost.
    Consumers know their WTP for both normal goods, whereas firms only know the joint
(bi-normal) distribution of the WTPs, denoted by f (A , B ; ). This model is equivalent to
our main model except that consumers do not have to learn about their WTPs--they are fully
aware of their WTPs from the start of the first period.
    Denote the single-period price of firms by pA , pB . Then, the probability that a consumer
purchases from firm A is


                                Pr (A - B  pA - pB , A - pA  0) .




                                                     59
Hence, the single-period profit of firm A is

                        +     A -pA +pB
           (pA - c)                       f (A , B ; )dB dA
                      pA     -
              +       +                                 +     pB
       =                          f (A , B ; )dA dB +              f (A , B ; )dB dA (pA - c)
             pB       B -pB +pA                         pA    -


By taking the first order derivative, we find that the price in a symmetric equilibrium must
satisfy:

                  + +                     + p
                  p B f (A , B ; )dA dB + p   - f (A , B ; )dA dB
           p =        +                    p                                     + c.           (57)
                                               
                      p f (B , B ; )dB + - f (p , B ; )dB


    Denote the firm's single-period profit in the symmetric equilibrium by   . Note that in
the sub-game perfect equilibrium of the two-period normal goods pricing game, firms play the
single-period Nash equilibrium in each period. Thus, each firm makes a profit equals (1 +  ) 
in the two-stage pricing game. So, for sufficiently small  , firms in the current setting make a
greater profit than in the main model, which is given by  S  . The intuition is as follows: In
the main model, firms compete in the first period for differential profits in the second period.
When firms are sufficiently impatient, they are less concerned about future differential profits,
and focus on the first period profit, which is, hence, competed down to close to zero. In the
normal goods benchmark, firms are already differentiated in the first period, which allows them
to earn a profit in that period.




F     Asymmetric distribution

While the assumption of a symmetric distribution of WTP in our model is common in the
literature, we discuss the implications of an asymmetric value distribution in this section. Rather
than providing a detailed characterization of second-period equilibria, we emphasize the first
period equilibrium and firm profits.
    We focus on the case where the marginal distributions of WTPs for both brands have either
a sufficiently large mean, such that both firms' second-period markets have the mass market
equilibrium, or a sufficiently small mean, such that both have the niche market equilibrium.
                                                                                        R and
Consider the former case. Denote firm i's second-period profit from repeat consumers by i
                                       S . Suppose  R -  S   R -  S > 0 and consumers'
the profit from switching consumers by i           A    A   B    B

second-period surpluses are the same across products. Then, firms compete for greater market
                                                                          R -  S ). This is the
share in the first period, and thus, the first period price must be c -  (B   B



                                                  60
case because firm 2 would stop reducing price at this point to avoid an overall loss in the game.
In such an equilibrium, firm 2 makes zero profit while firm 1 makes a positive profit of

                R   S              R     S        R   R         S     S
       A [c -  (B - B ) - c] +  (A A + B A ) = A (A - B ) +  (A B + B A ).


Note that when the marginal distributions are similar in that the difference between the means
                                                            R -  R ) is sufficiently close to zero,
and between the variances are sufficiently small, the term (A   B
                    S +   S ) is sufficiently close to  S , consistent with Theorem 1.
whereas the term (A B   B A                            A

      The case when both firms have the niche market equilibrium in the second period is similar.
Recall that firms make the monopoly profit in the niche market equilibrium. Denote firm i's
                   M .30 Suppose  M   M . Then, following a similar logic, the first period
monopoly profit by i             A   B
                      M . Firm 2 makes zero profit, whereas firm 1's profit is
price is given by c - B

                                 M          M      M   M
                          A (c - B - c) + A A = A (A - B ).


When the difference in the marginal distributions are sufficiently small, this profit is sufficiently
close to zero, consistent with Theorem 1.




G       Second-period equilibria under uniform pricing

Now we turn to uniform pricing, where firms cannot price discriminate consumers based on
their purchasing history. Denote by Uik with k  {m, n} the uniform price of firm i in a mass
(k = m) or a niche (k = n) market equilibrium. Note that under uniform pricing, we have
Ri = Si = Ui in the profit function (5).


G.1      Without information spillovers, i.e.,  = 0

When  = 0, we can derive the equilibrium second-period pricing using an approach similar to
the approach taken in the main analysis. The equilibrium is characterized below.

Proposition 8. Suppose  = 0 and behavior-based price discrimination is not allowed, in the
second period there exists:

      · a niche market equilibrium where Uin = M if and only if µ < M ;

                                                       1
      · a mass market equilibrium where Uim =        2f (µ)   + c  M if and only if µ  M .

 30   M
      i is equivalent to  (M ) when the distributions of WTP is symmetric.


                                                    61
   An interesting observation we can make from Proposition 8 is that the semi-niche market
equilibrium no longer exists. This suggests that it is behavior-based price discrimination that
enables the existence of the semi-niche market equilibrium.


G.2    With information spillovers, i.e.,  > 0

Proposition 9 illustrates that the second period equilibrium under uniform pricing is also dif-
ferent from when behavior-based price discrimination is allowed, given that  > 0. As in
Proposition 8, there no longer exists any semi-niche market equilibrium.

Proposition 9. Suppose   (0, 1). In the second period, there exists:

   · a niche market equilibrium where firm i charges Uin = M if and only if µ  M ;

   · a mass market equilibrium where firm i charges

                                          SO )]
                          (1 - )[1 - F (-  i                           Uim - (1 - )µ
                 Uim =                       SO )
                                                  + c,         SO
                                                         where - i =                 ,
                         2f (µ) + (1 - )f (-  i                              

      if and only if

                                          1- 
                                     µ-               - c  0.                              (58)
                                          2f (µ) 1 + 


   Note that µ > M implies that (58) holds, suggesting that the mass market equilibrium
exists whenever the niche market equilibrium does not exist. Correspondingly, violation of (58)
implies that µ  M , suggesting the existence of the niche market equilibrium whenever the
mass market equilibrium does not exist.
   Proposition 9 indicates that when µ satisfies (58) and µ  M , both the mass and the niche
market equilibrium exist. Again, semi-niche market equilibrium no longer exists when price
discrimination is not allowed.


G.3    Proofs of second-period equilibria under uniform pricing

Proof of Proposition 8. We consider each equilibrium in turn:

   Step 1: Niche market equilibrium
   In the niche market equilibrium, there are no switching customers. Each firm finds it optimal
to charge the monopoly price M to its repeat customers.
   When the type i = M switches to -i, she has a surplus of µ - M . Then, a sufficient
condition for the existence of the niche market equilibrium is that µ < M , as type i = M and

                                                62
all types with higher valuations must find it unprofitable to switch. Suppose firm i deviates to
a lower price U . If U  µ holds, then no consumers switch. If instead U < µ, then firm i's
profit function now becomes

                                             µ-U +M                    +
                             (U - c) -i               dF (-i ) + i         dF (i ) .
                                           -                          U


First order derivative w.r.t U yields

                             (U - c)f (µ - U + M )                          (U - c)f (U )
         -i F (µ - U + M ) 1 -                         + i [1 - F (U )] 1 -
                                  F (µ - U + M )                             1 - F (U )
     > {-i F (µ - U + M ) + i [1 - F (U )]}[1 - 2(U - c)f (µ)]

     > 0


which the first inequality is due to U < µ and U < M , and the second inequality is due to
            1
U <µ<     2f (µ)   + c.
   Now we turn to necessity. Suppose the niche market equilibrium exists, then switching must
yield negative surplus, i.e., µ - M < 0.

   Step 2: Mass market equilibrium
   For the mass market equilibrium, firm i's profit function from charging Ui is given by:

                                         +                   RS
                                                             - i
                      (Ui - c) · i           dF (i ) + -i          dF (-i )
                                     RS
                                     i                      -

                                                    Ui - U-i                       U-i - Ui
               = (Ui - c) · i [1 - F           µ+            ] + -i F         µ+               .
                                                     1-                             1-

Take the first order derivative w.r.t Ui , we have

                                          Ui - U-i                U-i - Ui
                      i · 1 - F     µ+               + -i · F µ +
                                           1-                      1-
                          Ui - c              Ui - U-i              U-i - Ui
                      -          i · f    µ+           + -i · f µ +                       =0       (59)
                          1-                    1-                    1-

We look for symmetric equilibrium where Ui = U-i , then the first order condition (59) implies
               1
that Uim =   2f (µ)   + c.
   Since the marginal consumer has a WTP of µ, the mass market equilibrium exists if and
only if µ - Uim  0, i.e.,
                                                    1
                                             µ-          - c  0,
                                                  2f (µ)

which is equivalent of µ  M .



                                                       63
Proof of Proposition 9. In a niche market equilibrium, it must be true that the marginal con-
                               RS -U n < 0. Since no consumer switches in the niche market equi-
sumer leaves the market, i.e., i    i

librium, each firm must charge the monopoly price M . No consumer wishes to switch, if and only
if the surplus of the consumer with i = M from switching is non-positive: M +(1-)µ-M  0,
i.e., µ  M .
   In a mass market equilibrium, it must hold that the marginal consumer switches instead
of leaving the market. To prove sufficiency, we show that when the condition given in the
                                        RS - U m  0. First, note that the equilibrium is
proposition holds, it must be true that i     i
                 RS = µ. Thus,
symmetric, hence i

                         RS
                         i  - Uim = µ - Uim
                                         (1 - )[1 - F (- SO )]
                                                          i
                                  = µ-                      SO )
                                                                 -c
                                        2f (µ) + (1 - )f (-  i
                                                            SO )
                                            (1 - ) 1 - F (-  i
                                    µ-                   SO )
                                                                 - c,                               (60)
                                            1+       f (- i


                                                                   1-F (-SO )
                                  SO )  f (µ). If  SO > µ, then                      1
where the inequality is due to f (- i             -i                   SO )
                                                                    f (-
                                                                           i
                                                                                   2f (µ) ,   which then
                                                                         i

implies that (60) satisfies

                                         SO )
                         (1 - ) 1 - F (-  i        1- 
                    µ-                SO )
                                              -cµ-              - c  0.
                         1+       f (- i           2 f (µ) 1 + 

This implies that µ  Uim . However, given that -
                                               SO > µ, we have U m   SO + (1 - )µ > µ.
                                                 i              i   -i
                           SO must hold, which implies that U m   SO + (1 - )µ  µ.
A contradiction. Hence, µ  - i                               i   -i

   Now we turn to necessity. Given that µ - Uim  0,

                           1                                      SO )]
          1-                 (1 - )               (1 - )[1 - F (-  i
     µ-               -cµ- 2             -c  µ-                      SO )
                                                                          -c
          2f (µ) 1 +         2f (µ) 1 -          2f (µ) + (1 - )f (-  i
                                             µ - Uim  0                      (61)


holds. Hence, we have proved the second part of the proposition.
   Note that whenever µ > M holds such that the niche market does not exist, we have

                          1               1      
                   µ-          -c>0  µ-             -c>0                                            (62)
                        2f (µ)          2f (µ) 1 + 
                                          1           2
                                     µ-             +    - c > 0,                                   (63)
                                        2f (µ) 1 +  1 + 

which implies (58) holds, i.e., a mass market equilibrium exists. Alternatively, when (58) is
violated, µ < M must be true.


                                              64
References

Beggs, A. and P. Klemperer (1992).         Multi-period competition with switching costs.
  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 651­666.

Bergemann, D. and J. V¨
                      alim¨
                          aki (1997). Market diffusion with two-sided learning. The RAND
  Journal of Economics, 773­795.

Bergemann, D. and J. V¨   aki (2006). Dynamic pricing of new experience goods. Journal of
                      alim¨
  Political Economy 114(4), 713­743.

Bester, H. (1998). Quality uncertainty mitigates product differentiation. The RAND Journal
  of Economics, 828­844.

Bloom, N., M. Schankerman, and J. Van Reenen (2013). Identifying technology spillovers and
  product market rivalry. Econometrica 81(4), 1347­1393.

Chen, Y. (1997).    Paying customers to switch.      Journal of Economics & Management
  Strategy 6(4), 877­897.

Chen, Y. and J. Pearcy (2010). Dynamic pricing: when to entice brand switching and when to
  reward consumer loyalty. The RAND Journal of Economics 41(4), 674­685.

Cremer, J. (1984). On the economics of repeat buying. The RAND Journal of Economics,
  396­403.

Doganoglu, T. (2010).   Switching costs, experience goods and dynamic price competition.
  QME 8(2), 167­205.

Farrell, J. and P. Klemperer (2007). Coordination and lock-in: Competition with switching
  costs and network effects. Handbook of industrial organization 3, 1967­2072.

Farrell, J. and C. Shapiro (1988). Dynamic competition with switching costs. The RAND
  Journal of Economics, 123­137.

Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole (2000). Customer poaching and brand switching. RAND Journal
  of Economics, 634­657.

Gehrig, T. and R. Stenbacka (2004). Differentiation-induced switching costs and poaching.
  Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 13(4), 635­655.




                                             65
Hannak, A., G. Soeller, D. Lazer, A. Mislove, and C. Wilson (2014). Measuring price dis-
  crimination and steering on e-commerce web sites. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on
  internet measurement conference, pp. 305­318.

Ivanov, M. (2009). Niche market or mass market? Economics letters 105(3), 217­220.

Jing, B. (2011). Pricing experience goods: The effects of customer recognition and commitment.
  Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 20(2), 451­473.

Klemperer, P. (1987a). The competitiveness of markets with switching costs. The RAND
  Journal of Economics, 138­150.

Klemperer, P. (1987b). Markets with consumer switching costs. The quarterly journal of
  economics 102(2), 375­394.

Klemperer, P. (1995). Competition when consumers have switching costs: An overview with
  applications to industrial organization, macroeconomics, and international trade. The review
  of economic studies 62(4), 515­539.

Moretti, E. (2011). Social learning and peer effects in consumption: Evidence from movie sales.
  The Review of Economic Studies 78(1), 356­393.

Nelson, P. (1970). Information and consumer behavior. Journal of political economy 78(2),
  311­329.

Padilla, A. J. (1992). Mixed pricing in oligopoly with consumer switching costs. International
  Journal of Industrial Organization 10(3), 393­411.

Padilla, A. J. (1995). Revisiting dynamic duopoly with consumer switching costs. Journal of
  Economic Theory 67(2), 520­530.

Villas-Boas, J. M. (2004). Consumer learning, brand loyalty, and competition. Marketing
  Science 23(1), 134­145.

Villas-Boas, J. M. (2006). Dynamic competition with experience goods. Journal of Economics
  & Management Strategy 15(1), 37­66.




                                              66
