                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          CENTRAL BANK SWAP ARRANGEMENTS IN THE COVID-19 CRISIS

                                       Joshua Aizenman
                                           Hiro Ito
                                     Gurnain Kaur Pasricha

                                       Working Paper 28585
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28585


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




We would like to thank Apoorv Bhargava, Ricardo Cervantes, and Chau Nguyen for excellent
research assistance. We appreciate the Latin American Reserve Fund (FLAR) for sharing with us
the data on the currency shares in FX reserves for Latin American countries. We also thank
Vassili Bazinas and participants at a seminar at the IMF for useful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors, and do not necessarily represent the
views of the International Monetary Fund, its Executive Board or its management or the NBER.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Joshua Aizenman, Hiro Ito, and Gurnain Kaur Pasricha. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Central Bank Swap Arrangements in the COVID-19 Crisis
Joshua Aizenman, Hiro Ito, and Gurnain Kaur Pasricha
NBER Working Paper No. 28585
March 2021
JEL No. F15,F21,F32,F36,G15

                                         ABSTRACT

Facing acute strains in the offshore dollar funding markets during the COVID-19 crisis, the
Federal Reserve (Fed) implemented measures to provide US dollar liquidity by reinforcing swap
arrangements with five major central banks, reactivating them with nine other central banks and
establishing a financial institutions and monetary authorities (FIMA) repo facility in March 2020.
This paper assesses motivations for the Fed liquidity lines, and the effects and spillovers of US
dollar auctions by central banks, for about 50 economies. We find that the access to the liquidity
arrangements is driven by the recipient economies' close trade ties with the US. Higher US bank
and trade exposure to an economy increases its access to dollar liquidity lines through the swap
arrangements and the new repo facility. Access to dollar liquidity also reflects global trade
exposure. We investigate the announcement effects of the liquidity arrangements on several key
financial variables, and find that announcements of expansion of Fed liquidity facilities led to
appreciation of partner currencies against the US dollar, improved CDS spreads, and lowered the
long-term interest rates of the recipient economies. Further, US dollar auctions by economies'
own central banks lead to temporary appreciation of their currencies, but dollar auctions by major
central banks (BoE, ECB, BoJ and SNB) have persistent spillovers ­ they led to appreciation of
other non-dollar currencies. These responses do not differ whether the economies have larger or
smaller financial or trade ties with the US.

Joshua Aizenman                                 Gurnain Kaur Pasricha
Economics and SIR                               Monetary and Capital Markets Department
University of Southern California               International Monetary Fund
University Park                                 700 19th Street NW
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043                      HQ1 6-110
and NBER                                        Washington, DC 20431
aizenman@usc.edu                                gpasricha@imf.org

Hiro Ito
Department of Economics,
Portland State University
1721 SW Broadway, Suite 241
Portland, OR 97201
ito@pdx.edu
1. Introduction

     Facing acute strains in the offshore dollar funding markets during the COVID-19 crisis
(Figure 1), the US Federal Reserve (Fed) took several actions to provide US dollar liquidity
through foreign central banks. It reduced the pricing of swap operations, extended the maturity,
and increased the frequency of swap operations with the major central banks with which it has
standing swap lines: the Bank of Canada (BOC), the Bank of England (BOE), the Bank of Japan
(BOJ), the European Central Bank (ECB), and the Swiss National Bank (SNB). On March 19,
2020, the Fed reactivated the swap lines it had established with nine central banks at the time of
the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008 and doubled their maximal lines (Table 1). 1
     Furthermore, for the first time, on March 31, 2020, the Fed announced the establishment of
a temporary repurchase agreement facility for foreign and international monetary authorities (aka
FIMA) repo facility. With this facility, the Fed could enter into repo agreements with foreign
central banks and international institutions, and supply US dollar liquidity in exchange for
existing US Treasuries held by these institutions. The FIMA facility was expected to reduce the
need for the sale of US Treasuries and mitigate pressure in this market.
     FIMA facility has ambivalent characteristics from the perspective of other economies. On
the one hand, it is egalitarian because the facility is accessible not only to economies with
standing swap lines or bilateral repo arrangements with the Fed, but also to economies which do
not have any such agreements, or whose banks do not have direct access to the Fed's lending
window through their US subsidiaries or branches. On the other hand, however, liquidity through
FIMA is not equally accessible. It is more easily available for those economies which already
hold a large volume of US Treasuries. The pricing of this line is also more expensive than that of
bilateral arrangements.
     US dollar liquidity was actively provided to local markets through US dollar auctions by
many central banks: first in mid- to late-March, 2020 by the four major central banks, ECB, BOJ,



1
 They are: the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA), the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB), the Bank
of Korea (BoK), the Banco de Mexico (BdM), the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS), the
Sveriges Riksbank (Sweden, SR) with the maximal lines of $60 billion; and the Danmarks
Nationalbank (DNB), the Norges Bank (Norway, NB), and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand
(RBNZ) with the maximal lines of $60 billion.
                                                 2
SNB, and BOE, then by 12 other central banks (Figure 2). The US dollar auctions by the major
central banks used US dollars obtained via swap lines with the Fed and were larger in magnitude
than the US dollar auctions by other central banks. The auctions by the other 12 central banks
that published data on these auctions, used either US dollars obtained via swap lines with the Fed
or their own foreign exchange reserves. In the case of Hong Kong, the US dollars were obtained
via the FIMA facility. 2 The US dollar shortage was mitigated by late June, so was the demand
for US dollar liquidity from major central banks (Figure 3).
     Research on the extension of swap lines during the GFC suggests that US bank exposure to
the swap partner economies and the extent of reliance on the US as their export destination are
important motivations for the Fed to extend these lines (Aizenman and Pasricha, 2010;
Aizenman, Jinjarak, and Park, 2011).
     Given that the economic environment in the COVID turmoil was different from that of the
GFC, which was a shock that originated in the US financial system, and that FIMA facility was
added as another liquidity provision scheme, one may ask whether the factors motivating the US
decision to provide dollar liquidity were different in this crisis. Did the Fed extend swap lines or
FIMA facility solely based on its self-interest as it did during the GFC? What factors determined
economies' access to dollar liquidity? One may also ask to what extent the size of US dollar
auctions conducted by central banks reflected stress in domestic financial or currency markets.
     Other questions are also worth investigating. Are the swap lines effective in mitigating
financial stress? The announcements of swap lines during the GFC had relatively large short-run
impacts on the exchange rates of the selected emerging market economics (EMs), but much
smaller effect on the credit default swap (CDS) spreads, relative to that of other EMs that were
not the recipients of swap-lines (Aizenman Pasricha, 2010). Baba and Packer (2009) found that
US dollar term funding auctions by the ECB, SNB, and BoE, as well as the Fed's commitment to
provide unlimited dollar swap lines ameliorated the FX swap market dislocations during the
GFC. Rose and Spiegel (2012) found that US dollar auctions by major central banks




2
  The Hong Kong Monetary Authority announced on April 22, 2020, the launch of a US dollar
liquidity facility based on US dollars obtained via FIMA. In addition, central banks of Colombia
and Chile announced on April 20, 2020 and June 24, 2020 respectively, that they had gained
access to FIMA.

                                                  3
disproportionately benefitted economies that had higher trade or asset exposure to the US, by
reducing their CDS spreads.
      We revisit these questions and investigate whether the announcement of the dollar liquidity
lines by the Fed as well as that of dollar auctions by central banks affect the performance of their
exchange rates, cross-currency basis (CIP deviations), CDS spreads, and government bond
yields. We distinguish between dollar auctions by an economy's own central bank and those by
the five major central banks, and ask whether the impacts were different, and whether the
auctions by the major central banks had spillovers on the financial conditions in other
economies. We use a local projection model and daily data from 1 January 2020 to 31 May 2020,
on a sample of 45 economies to investigate these questions about the impact of liquidity
facilities.
      Our results indicate that an economy's share in US trade and a military alliance with the
US are the positive factors that determined access to a Fed swap agreement. On the determinants
of the size of access to liquidity arrangements, we find that an economy with high levels of US
bank exposure and stronger trade ties with the US tended to have greater access to Fed liquidity,
via swap lines or FIMA. Economies with a large share of global trade, regardless of whether they
are major trading partners of the US, also had greater access to US dollar liquidity via the Fed.
      The access to US dollar liquidity lines was largely determined by pre-existing
characteristics of the economies. However, the demand for US dollars auctioned by central banks
should reflect the ongoing stressed in the domestic currency and financial markets. We find that
economies that faced appreciation pressures against the US dollar and whose local currency
exchange rate becomes more volatile were more likely to auction greater amounts of US dollars
in its domestic market. While this may sound paradoxical, the record of the GFC is that from
gold to the US dollar to the Japanese yen, `safe havens' were greatly sought ­ and greatly
affected ­ by investors reacting to the global financial crisis. Thereby, the appreciation and the
volatility of the yen are intertwined with the collapsing export/GDP of Japan during that time.
      As for the announcement effects of the swap lines and dollar auctions by central banks, we
find that the announcement of expansionary changes in the swap arrangements and the creation
of the FIMA facility led to appreciation of non-US dollar currencies against the US dollar, as
expected. While the swap or FIMA announcements had no impact on cross-currency basis, they
improved (i.e., reduced) CDS spreads and lowered the 10-year government bond yields. Dollar


                                                 4
auctions by central banks led to temporary appreciation of their currencies, but dollar auctions by
major central banks (BoE, ECB, BoJ and SNB) had persistent spillover effects ­ they led to
appreciation of other, non-major currencies against the US dollar.
     Putting our results in the proper context, the conceptual differences between international
reserves and emergency swap lines and emergency liquidity arrangements are noteworthy. The
demand for international reserves is shaped by precautionary motives, i.e., ex ante insurance
against future sudden stops and trade funding challenges; and possibly concerns about trade
competitiveness, dubbed sometimes as mercantilist motives (Aizenman, 2008). In contrast,
emergency liquidity arrangements and swap lines provided during the GFC and the COVID-19
crisis provide liquidity relief at the time of crisis. Hence, there is no presumption that the
demand for international reserves are explained by the same factors determining emergency
liquidity and swap lines. At times of financial crisis, trade credits supplied by local banks may
shrink even in economies experiencing currency appreciation, as banks may opt to reduce their
risk exposure, documented by Amiti and Weinstein (2011). 3 During a deep crisis with uncertain
duration, like the GFC, economies may use their international reserves as a first line of defense,
but may refrain from tapping too deeply to reserves out of the fear that depleting reserves may
cost them dearly if the crisis would deepen in the future (Aizenman and Sun, 2012). In these



3
  The appreciation the yen in 2008 coincided with collapsing trade credit in Japan, magnifying
the contraction of international trade at times that `flight to safety' induced yen appreciation.
Amiti and Weinstein (2011) identify the presence of a causal link from shocks in the financial
sector to exporters that result in exports declining much faster than output during banking crises.
They concluded that the health of financial institutions is an important determinant of firm-level
exports during crises. Since the evidence indicates that exporters in many countries are highly
dependent on trade finance, these results imply that financial shocks are likely to play important
roles in export declines in other countries as well. Thereby, financial and trade shocks are
intertwined in different ways across countries during crises. This pattern is in line with IMF-
BAFT Survey (2009), reported by Amiti and Weinstein (2009), of 88 banks in 44 countries
revealed that the average spreads on the letters of credit, export credit insurance, and short- to
medium-term trade-related lending rose by 70, 107, and 99 basis points, respectively, in the
second quarter of 2009 relative to the fourth quarter of 2007. See also Auboin (2009) review on
trade credits before and during the GFC, noting that `While a number of public-institutions
mobilized financial resources for trade finance in the fall of 2008, this has not been enough to
bridge the gap between supply and demand of trade finance worldwide. As the market situation
continued to deteriorate in the first quarter of 2009, G-20 leaders in London (April 2009) adopted
a wider package for injecting additional liquidity and bringing public guarantees in support of
$250 billion of trade transactions in 2009 and 2010.'

                                                  5
circumstances, swap lines and FIMA type of arrangements may mitigate the decline of trade
credit, the depletion rate of international reserves, and mitigate the rise of sovereign spreads of
exposed emerging markets. 4
     Boissay, Patel and Shin (2020) indicate that the forces of these factors have only increased
after the GFC due to the dominant role of dollar funding, and the growing depth of the global
supply chains. Specifically, they noted:
    "Trade finance, as proxied by the share of cross-border factoring in total factoring, has
    steadily increased over the past two decades. This long-term trend has gone hand in hand
    with the rise in international trade and, more specifically, the lengthening of global value
    chains (GVCs). While the lengths of domestic production chains estimated using world
    input-output tables at the country-sector level have remained constant, GVCs involving
    multiple border crossings have lengthened significantly between 2000 and 2017. Since
    financing needs increase with the length of supply chains (Bruno et al (2018), Bruno and
    Shin (2019)), trade finance has become more prominent in the context of GVCs." (page 5).
    "The sharp appreciation of the dollar in the early stages of the Covid-19 crisis may have
    had knock-on effects to trade finance from stress in the banking system. Given the
    prevalence of the US dollar in trade financing, mitigating the impact of dollar credit
    fluctuations will be an important component of shielding global value chains from the
    pandemic's economic fallout. In this respect, the recent expansion of central bank dollar
    swap lines and other measures to mitigate dollar liquidity conditions are likely to further
    cushion trade finance." (page 6).

     Baldwin and Freeman (2020) also highlight the magnification of the intermingling of trade
and finance associated with the of the GVC deepening. The COVID pandemic vividly illustrated
the dependence of the US and the EU on the GVC as the source of critical medical supplies.
These considerations imply that we should take the econometric significance of the `trade
factors' in our regressions with a grain of salt: one needs micro data to identify more sharply the
role of trade, finance and the interaction between the two.
     The results of our paper also are in line with Gourinchas and Rey (2007), Obstfeld et al.
(2009), and Gopinath et al. (2020), analyzing the "exorbitant privilege" position of the US dollar,
and the dominant currency paradigm. These considerations suggest that the FEDs swap lines
and emergency liquidity provisions of the FIMA type may impact most emerging and developing


4
 If the economy of concern is long in dollar assets (e.g., Japan, Germany, Switzerland), its
currency's appreciation would induce valuation losses in terms of its domestic currency (in
addition to adverse impacts on international trade), magnifying the losses on the US equities and
putting more pressure on the economy's balance sheet. Hence, even with its currency
appreciation, financial instability may arise.

                                                  6
economies, including nations with limited trade and financial dealings with the US. For
economies with greater trade and financial integration with the US, these effects tend to be more
direct, for others, in the form of spillovers.
      The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we first reexamine what factors led the Fed
to select nine countries as swap partner countries as it did during the GFC. We then investigate
the determinants of the size of liquidity lines ­ both swap and FIMA- in Section 3. In Section 4,
we examine the determinants of the size of dollar auctions by central banks. In Section 5, we
examine the impact of the liquidity lines and dollar auctions by central banks on important
financial variables. In Section 6, we present the results of numerous robustness checks. In
Section 7, we make concluding remarks.



2. Probability of gaining access to Fed swap lines

      The COVID-19 crisis saw a re-emergence of dollar liquidity shortages around the world, as
evidenced by the widening of the cross-currency basis between the US dollar and other
currencies (Figure 1). While the Fed reactivated swap lines with the same nine central banks with
which it had established them in 2008. However, considering the difference in the economic
conditions between the GFC and the COVID crisis as well as the difference in terms of the type
of shock that hit the world economy (i.e., financial crisis originating in the US vs. the pandemic),
the determinants for the selection of the nine central banks may differ between the two crisis
episodes.
      Hence, it is worthwhile to examine what factors led the nine central banks to be selected to
receive swap liquidity lines from the Fed again. Following Aizenman and Pasricha (2010), we
estimate the factors that affect the probability of economies included in the swap agreements.
The candidate factors are: exposure of US banks to individual economies (BankExp), measured
by the share of the individual market in the consolidated foreign claims of US banks; trade
exposure to the US (TradeShare), measured by the share of economy i in total US goods imports
and exports; financial openness (KAOPEN) measured by the Chinn-Ito index of capital account
openness (2006, 2008); and the existence of formal military relationship with the US
(ALLIANCE).




                                                 7
     By extending US dollar liquidity to economies where US banks have greater asset
exposure, the Fed could prevent costly deleveraging, possibly enhancing the welfare of both -
source and recipient - economies. The more trade economy i conducts with the US, the greater
the incentive of the Fed to secure trade flow by readily granting liquidity lines to the economy. A
more financially open economy might have more need of liquidity lines, as the size of financial
shock it faces may be larger due to its greater integration with global financial system. A non-
economic factor may matter: the US may prefer providing swap lines with economies it has
closer geopolitical relationship.
     We apply the probit estimation model to a sample of 63 economies. This sample does not
include Canada, the euro countries, Japan, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom because these
countries have standing swap lines with the Fed. The dependent variable is a dummy variable
that takes the value of unity when the economy of concern is selected as the recipient of swap
lines. All the explanatory variables are sampled as of the end of 2019.
     Columns of (1) through (4) of Table 2 show that all the candidate variables are significant
contributors to selection into Fed's swap agreements when they are included alone. Greater US
banks' exposure, greater US trade exposure, more open financial markets, and the existence of
military alliance increase the probability of receiving a Fed swap line. Among the three
variables, the dummy for a military relationship with the US alone explains the probability of
providing a swap line the most (pseudo R2 of 24%).
     Columns (5) through (7) include the dummy for military alliance and two of the remaining
three variables. Among the three models, the model in column (6), with US trade exposure and
de-jure financial openness of the economy, yields the highest pseudo R2, though the estimate on
financial openness becomes statistically insignificant. When we include all the candidate
variables in the estimation, the variables for the share in US trade and military alliance maintain
statistical significance. Financial exposure may contribute positively to the probability of
selection for the swap arrangement, but its contribution is not as significant as that of US trade
exposure.
     If we interpret a predicted probability of selection of 15% or more as a selection prediction,
models (5), (6), and (8) correctly predict 8 out of 9 swap arrangements and 42 or 43 out of 53




                                                  8
cases where such arrangements were not made. 5 The impacts of trade exposure and military
alliance are not only econometrically significant but also economically significant. If the level of
trade exposure rises by one standard deviation, the probability of getting selected for the swap
arrangement would go up by 5.3 percentage points. When all the explanatory variables take their
mean values, the predicted probability of swap selection would be 4.4%, and would become
9.8% if the level of trade exposure rises by one standard deviation. US military allies enjoy a
higher probability of selection for a swap arrangement than that of non-ally countries, and the
difference in the probability is as high as 26.9%.


     Our findings appear to be notably different from Aizenman and Pasricha (2010), who
found that US bank exposure is a significantly positive contributor to the selection of emerging
markets for swap agreements. One reason for this may be that the financial crisis originated in
the US and threatened the solvency of banking institutions. Therefore, the swap lines then were
aimed at providing liquidity lines to the economies where US bank exposure was high. During
the COVID-19 crisis, despite large-scale falls in the stock markets and widespread dollar
shortage, there was no acute systematic financial instability as during the GFC. However, the
differences between the two results may be less stark than appears, as during the COVID-19
crisis, global supply chains got severely disrupted. Several papers have highlighted the
increasing importance of global value chains in the past two decades and the associated
intermingling of trade and finance (Boissay, Patel and Shin, 2020; Baldwin and Freeman; 2020).
The COVID pandemic vividly illustrated the dependence of the US and the EU on the GVC as
the source of critical medical supplies, and the sharp appreciation of the dollar in the early stages
of the Covid-19 crisis may have had knock-on effects to trade finance from stress in the banking
system. These considerations imply that we should take the econometric significance of the
`trade factors' in our regressions with a grain of salt: one needs micro data to identify more
sharply the role of trade, finance and the interaction between the two.




5
 In the sample used for the estimation with 63 economies, nine are provided swap lines, which
means the crude probability of receiving swap lines is 14.5%. This gives us the cut-off for the
"successful predictions" of 15%.

                                                  9
3. Determinants of the size of liquidity lines via swap agreements and FIMA

     While the number of economies that have swap agreements with the US is limited (i.e., 14
in total with five central banks with long-standing arrangements and nine reactivated), the newly
created FIMA facility is available to economies which do not have any swap agreements as long
as they hold stocks of US Treasuries in their foreign exchange reserves which they can swap for
dollars in the repo transactions. Therefore, the sum of the maximal amount of swap agreement
with the Fed and the amount of US Treasuries in the foreign exchange reserves holding of an
economy can be regarded as the potential availability of liquidity lines from the Fed. We
estimate the determinants of the total size of liquidity lines available.
     The size of liquidity lines available to economy i,  , is composed of swap lines,  ,
and the FIMA line,  , namely,


              =  +  .                                                  (1)


     We investigate the determinants of the available amount of liquidity lines using the
estimation model below:


                           
              =  +   +                                                 (2)


where  is the available amount of dollar liquidity and X'i is a vector of candidate explanatory
variables.
     As for the size of the swap lines, SWAPi is straightforward because it is stipulated in the
agreements. The maximal amount of swap lines is $60 billion each for the RBA, BCB, BOK,
BdM, MAS, SR, and $30 billion each for the DNB, the NB, and RBNZ. We do not include the
economies of the following five central banks: the BOC, BOE, BOJ, ECB, and SNB, in the
estimation because there is no limit to the swap lines for these central banks.
     Measuring the size of liquidity lines through the FIMA facility is not straightforward
because there is no stipulation about the available amount of liquidity lines through the facility.
Instead, the FIMA repo facility allows foreign central banks and other international monetary
authorities to temporarily exchange US Treasuries held in their accounts at the Federal Reserve


                                                  10
Bank of New York for US dollars. Hence, the amount of dollar-denominated reserve assets is a
good proxy for the dollar liquidity available to economy i.
      To measure US dollar-denominated reserve assets, we need the data on the volume of
reserve assets held by central banks and their currency composition. However, such data is
notoriously limited. 6 Recently, Ito and McCauley (2020) compiled a panel dataset on the shares
of key currencies in foreign exchange reserves for about 60 economies in the 1999-2018 period. 7
In order to obtain the holdings of dollar-denominated reserve assets, as an approximate of the
availability of liquidity lines through FIMA, we multiply the dollar share in foreign exchange
reserves as of 2018 from the Ito-McCauley dataset, with total reserves (minus gold) as of 2019. 8
      The candidate factors that may affect the availability of liquidity lines include the variables
we tested in the previous exercise, namely, US bank exposure, the share of trade with the US,
military alliance, and de jure financial openness. From the perspective of the US, it is rational to
build a system that can provide liquidity lines for the economies that have more loans from US
banks or that have more trade with the US.
      In addition to these variables, we also test the variables for global financial exposure and
the share of the economy in world trade. The rationale to test these variables is that the US might
be willing to provide liquidity lines for the economies that do not necessarily have stronger
financial or trade ties with the US per se. In other words, the US could be "altruistic" and willing
to play the role of the guardian of the international economy by making dollar liquidity readily
available through swaps or FIMA facility for large players in international finance or trade. We
measure the level of global financial exposure (Global_Fini) with economy i's sum of external
assets and liabilities as a ratio to the world's external assets and liabilities over the period of
2005 through 2015, using the database compiled by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001, 2007, and
2017). While a significantly positive estimate on BankExp would imply that the US is more self-
interested to make dollar liquidity readily available for economies with more consolidated claims


6
  Heller and Knight (1978), Dooley et al (1989), and Eichengreen and Mathieson (2000) use the
International Monetary Fund's (IMF) currency composition of official foreign exchange reserves
(COFER). However, the data for individual countries are not publicly available.
7
  Ito and McCauley (2020) collected the data from central banks' annual reports, financial
statements, and other publicly available information sources.
8
  If the 2018 data is not available, the dollar share data as of 2017 is used. The data availability
for this exercise is determined by the Ito and McCauley dataset. Therefore, this regression
exercise covers 51 economies.

                                                   11
of US banks, a significantly positive estimate on Global_Fini would mean that the US is willing
to make dollar liquidity available for economies playing a larger role in global finance. Parallel
to Global_Fini, the variable of global trade exposure (Global_Tradei), measured by the share of
economy i's sum of exports and imports in global trade (i.e., the world's sum of exports and
imports), would show whether or not the US is altruistic to maintain global trade order by
providing liquidity to economies that have larger presence in international trade.
     We also test the dummy for China since the country's holding of dollar-denominated assets
is by far larger than the rest of the sample economies. As in the previous exercise, all the
explanatory variables are sampled as of the end of 2019. We run a cross-sectional OLS
regression for 51 economies.
     The results presented in Table 3 indicate that higher US bank exposure to an economy led
to a greater liquidity from the swap agreement. Interestingly, the variable for US bank exposure
alone explains almost 60% of the variation of the availability of dollar liquidity. Also, an
economy with more trade with the US tends to have more accessibility to dollar liquidity,
additionally explaining another 40% of the variation of dollar liquidity availability. Just the two
variables of US bank exposure and the share in US trade explain 98% of the variation of the
accessibility of dollar liquidity, perhaps because they determine the amount of dollar-
denominated assets held in FX reserves.
     Columns (3) through (6) also indicate that the US is altruistic in the sense that it makes
dollar liquidity available for global major trading centers regardless of whether those economies
are major trading economies with the US However, the share in global finance does not matter
for liquidity accessibility. These findings suggest that, as we found in the previous exercise, trade
plays an important role in terms of determining which economies have better access to dollar
liquidity. The estimates of the three variables, US bank exposure, the share in trade with the US,
and global presence of trade, are persistently statistically significant across the different models
and explain almost all of the variation in the availability of dollar liquidity. The extent of
financial openness does not matter for the size of dollar-liquidity available. China appears as an
outlier, but inclusion of the dummy does not materially change the estimates of the other
variables.




                                                  12
4. Determinants of the size of US dollar auctions by central banks

     The actual use of liquidity lines may differ from the availability of liquidity lines. Both the
availability and the use of US dollar liquidity may affect market perceptions and conditions,
which we will investigate in section 4. In this section, we investigate the factors that determine
the amount of US dollars auctioned by central banks in their domestic markets. Most of these
auctions used the Fed liquidity lines as the source of the US dollar auctioned by central banks.
The amount of dollars auctioned was largely determined by market conditions. 9
     We regress the amount of US dollars auctioned on a set of candidate variables. They
include: cumulative depreciation (Cuml_fx), which is the rate of change in the local currency
value per dollar with respect to the average local currency value during the first two weeks of
January 2020; exchange rate volatility (fx_vol), the standard deviations of the rate of depreciation
over rolling 14-day windows; stock market volatility (stk_vol), the standard deviations of the rate
of stock market total return over rolling 14-day windows; and the level of financial instability
measured by the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (VIX) in log. We also test the
variable for the number of new cases of COVID infection (COVID) measured by the moving
average coronavirus infection cases per million over 7 days, and the mobility index (MOBILITY)
to capture the possible impact of economic activities on daily basis. The estimation model also
includes the dummy that takes the value of unity for Germany, U.K., and Japan. This is because
the volumes of auctions central banks of these economies conduct are at times much larger than
the rest of the economies. For this estimation, we apply an OLS estimation model to the daily
panel data of 42 economies for the period of January 15, 2020 through May 29, 2020. 10




9
  Some central banks, including the major central banks, either did not notify a maximum limit
on the auctions, or notified an amount large enough that the amount auctioned was determined
by the bids received. There were only a few cases ­ in Colombia, India, Indonesia, and Mexico ­
where the amount bid was larger than the amounts notified, and therefore accepted, by the
central banks.
10
   One may suggest that we should use the Heckman two-step selection model (1976), in which
the first step is the probit estimation of the probability of auctioning and the second step is the
OLS to estimate the amount of the auctions. However, as Table 1 makes it clear, the timing of
auctions is pre-announced, i.e., it is not determined by economic and non-economic conditions. It
is rather determined mechanically. Hence, we think estimating the probit model prior to the OLS
estimation is inappropriate.

                                                 13
     The estimate on the cumulative depreciation rate is significantly negative, in the results
reported in columns (1) and (2) of Table 4. This suggests that central bankers facing their
currency appreciating cumulatively compared to the beginning of January 2020 auctioned more
US dollars in their domestic markets. The estimate on the variable for exchange rate volatility is
significantly positive, suggesting when their currency's value is unstable, central bankers auction
more US dollars. More global financial instability also increased the amount of US dollars
auctioned by the monetary authorities. In column (2), we add the variable for the number of new
COVID cases as well as the mobility index. These variables that are more directly related to the
pandemic are not found to be determinants for the volumes of auctions.
     In columns (3) and (4), we include only non-zero observations of auction volumes in the
sample. 11 Not surprisingly, the sample size becomes much smaller, and the sample is composed
only of 15 economies. In this more restricted estimation, the variables for the cumulative
depreciation rate and exchange rate volatility now become statistically insignificant. Only the
VIX variable and the dummy for Germany, U.K, and Japan remain statistically significant. These
findings suggest that among the economies that auction US dollars, the volume of auction is a
function of only the degree of global financial instability, or more precisely, the US stock market
volatility. The higher degree of global financial instability, or the more volatility the US stock
market is experiencing, the more volumes of dollar auctions central banks conducted.


5. The economic impacts of Federal Reserve liquidity lines and US dollar auctions
     While providing dollar liquidity through a swap agreement or the FIMA facility can have
economic impacts through alleviating dollar liquidity shortage, the mere announcement of these
liquidity facilities can also have economic impacts because such a policy announcement would
affect economic agents' expectations and consequently their behavior (confidence channel).
      In this section, we investigate whether and how the announcements of the swap
agreements or the creation of the FIMA facility affect economic variables, namely, credit default
swap (CDS) spread, cross currency basis (deviations from covered interest parity), government
bond yields, and the local currency exchange rate while controlling for other domestic and
international economic conditions and policies. We also examine the domestic and spillover


11
 That is, when there is no auction in a day for an economy, the cell for the day and the economy
would be recognized as a missing variable.

                                                 14
effects of US dollar auctions held by central banks, and whether these effects are greater for
economies that are more exposed to the US in terms of trade or financial transactions.


5.1 Baseline model
     To capture the size and the persistence of the impacts on economic variables, we employ
the local projection method (Jordà, 2005) to the sample of 43 economies and run a series of
regressions for different horizons, r = 0,1,2,..., p as follows (IMF, 2020): 12,13


                                                             
                                    ,                             ,
             ,-1+ =  1  ,+- +  2  ,+-
                            =0                              =0

                                ,                                  ,
                        + =0 3                           + =0 4   ,+-
                                                   ,+-

                    3                          3                           3
                                    
                +  1 ,- +  2  ,- +  3 
                                                                                              ,-
                   =1                         =1                          =1


                     + 3  
                       =1 4   ,- + - +  +  +  ,+


       (3)



,-1+ is the cumulative percentage point change from t-1 to t+p in economy i's currency
per US dollar; cross-currency basis for economy i's currency against US dollar; economy i's 10-
year sovereign bond yield; or the credit default swap (CDS) spread for economy i.
     Swapfima is a dummy variable that takes the value of one on the days of Fed swap
announcements for swap recipients, and on the day of the FIMA facility announcement for all
economies. That is, when the Fed makes an expansionary change in the swap policy, the dummy
takes the value of one for the counterpart economy in the swap agreement. For example, the Fed



12
   The sample includes Canada, the U.K., Japan, Switzerland, and the euro area. For the euro
area, Germany is included as the representative economy.
13
   The model framework also follow Teulings and Zubanov (2014) who include not just the
                                                                     ,
lagged variables of control variables but also their leads (i.e., =0  ,+- where X is an
explanatory variable). They argue that it would prevent the estimates from being biased.

                                                   15
reduced swap pricing and introduced 84-day operations with five major central banks on March
15, 2020. On March 19, the Fed reactivated swap lines with nine central banks. On March 20,
BoC, BoE, BoJ, ECB, and SNB took a coordinated action to enhance the effectiveness of the
standing dollar swap by increasing the frequency of 7-day maturity operations from weekly to
daily. Swapfima takes the value of one for relevant counterpart economies and swap
announcement dates. When the FIMA facility was created on March 31, 2020, in contrast, the
dummy variable takes the value of one for all the sample economies because this policy is
relevant all economies. All these policy actions are meant to provide more dollar liquidity and
therefore stimulative actions. 14
        In the baseline specifications, AuctionOwn is the dummy for the dates when economy i's
central bank auctions of US dollars whereas AuctionMajor is a dummy that takes the value of one
for the dates when major central banks (ECB, BOE, SNB, and BOJ) auctioned US dollars. This
variable aims to capture the spillover effects of auctions by the major central banks. In
robustness checks, we redefine, AuctionOwn and AuctionMajor to use the auction amounts (the
amounted accepted in the auctions) instead of dummies for auction days.
      The model controls for other stimulus policies that are supposed to affect liquidity and
include the following variables in the vector Other Controls: QE is the dummy for quantitative
easing (QE) implemented by the Fed on March 23. NPR is a decline in the monetary policy rates
of the sample economies (i.e. the negative of the change in the policy rate). We also control for
global financial market conditions using the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index
(VIX) in log. We control for changes in sovereign credit ratings by any of the big three credit
rating agencies, Standard and Poor's, Moody's, or Fitch. The variable for the change in
sovereign credit ratings takes the value +1 on the days when there is a ratings upgrade by any of
the agencies, -1 for the days with a downgrade, and 0 otherwise. As another factor that can affect
expectations, we control for the pandemic situation with the first lag of the 7-day moving
average of new corona cases per million (COVID).




14
   We decided not to assign a separate dummy for each of the Fed policy actions. Because these
policies were implemented on close dates to one another, the impact of individual policy actions
is difficult to identify ­ the lags and leads in the estimation model make it more difficult.

                                                 16
     The estimation includes economy fixed effects and weekly time fixed effects is conducted
for business days for the period of January 2 through May 31, 2020. 15 We employ the local
projection method that estimates a series of regressions for each horizon p for each variable.
Here, we assign p to be 5, that means we attempt to capture the full dynamics of each of the four
dependent variables in the aftermath of policy announcements or actions by central banks over
the course of five business days. Standard errors are robust. To focus on the dynamics of the
economic variables in response to a policy shock, we focus on reporting the cumulative impulse
response functions (IRFs) rather than discussing the estimated coefficients. 16
     We have two practical reasons to use the local projection model over the VAR model. First,
to economize the number of estimates, we employ two-way fixed effects, namely, economy-
fixed effects and weekly time fixed effects. Including these fixed effects in a VAR model would
complicate the estimation. Economy-fixed effects control for time-invariant, or slowing
changing, characteristics of each sample economy (e.g., the level of development of the medical
and insurance systems, economies' debt levels, the tendency for fiscal interventions). Weekly
fixed effects control for common, global waves of the virus infections or related news. Including
these fixed effects helps reduce the number of estimated parameters. These fixed effects also
allow us focus on the estimates of the variables of our interest, i.e., the dummies for the
announcements or the implementation of swap and other stimulus policies. These fixed effects
are easier to include in the estimation model and to interpret when the local projection model is
used, but not so much with a VAR model.
     Second, using the IRF based on the local projection model is more appropriate when the
estimation involves nonlinear estimates. As we discuss later, we test whether the impact of swap
and other stimulus policies varies with US trade or financial exposure with the recipient
economies. To test this, we include interaction terms between US trade or financial exposure and
the policy variable of our interest. While nonlinear VAR models exist, the estimation and




15
  The first policy action related to swap operations took place on Sunday, March 15. To capture
the impact of the policies, we assign the value of one in Swapfima on March 16.
16
  Auerbach and Gorodnichencko (2013), Ramey and Zubairy (2018), Sever and others (2020)
and many others have applied the local projection model to macroeconomic analyses.


                                                 17
interpretation of their estimates is highly complex. With the local projection model, this kind of
exercise can be done with ease.

5.2 Baseline results: Announcement effects of Federal Reserve liquidity lines

      The main purpose of Fed swap lines or the FIMA facility was to increase US dollar
liquidity globally and stabilize foreign dollar markets. Panel (a) of Figure 4 shows that the
currencies of recipient economies appreciate on the day of the policy announcement and days 4
and 5, which means that the US dollar depreciates against these currencies on those days,
consistent with the policy objective. The announcements of swap lines or FIMA do not seem to
affect the three-month cross-currency basis, which is a more direct measure of dollar shortage
(Figure 4(b)). However, it must be noted that the data for this variable is available for only 21
currencies. The finding that the US dollar depreciates against the currencies of swap/FIMA
recipients following the announcements of these policies does signify that the policies mitigated
the dollar shortage.
        The CDS spreads for swap/FIMA recipients improve when the Fed shows its willingness
to provide dollar liquidity (Figure 4(c)). The persistent decline in the CDS spreads starts
immediately on the day when the policy is announced, and the spread improvement lasts for the
following two business days. We can interpret this finding as evidence that the (expected)
mitigation of dollar constraint would reduce the default risk in general.
        Fed swap lines could have an expansionary impact on the long-term interest rates of
recipient economies, through a reduction in default risk. Figure 4(d) shows that the
announcements of swap lines put downward pressure on the ten-year government bond yields,
but the impact is not statistically significant.
        The estimated impacts of other variables are also consistent with theoretical predictions.
For example, a rise in VIX leads to a relatively large depreciation of the home currency, of about
2 percentage points, which lasts 3 days (Figure 5(a)). This reflects a tendency for investors to
rush into dollar-denominated assets when the financial markets are exposed to a negative global
shock, which leads to dollar appreciation. Quantitative easing (QE) by the Fed, on the other
hand, leads to a persistent and large appreciation of the other currencies and a US dollar
depreciation, as expected. The expected result can also be observed in the estimated impact of
QE on the non-US ten-year government bond yields (Figure 5(b)). Neither VIX nor QE seems to



                                                   18
have any impact on the CDS spread (Figure 5(c)). A fall in the domestic monetary policy rate
does not have a significant impact on any of the economic variables, consistent with the results
in Sever and others (2020).

5.3 Domestic and spillover effects of US dollar auctions

       This estimation model also allows us to examine the impact of central banks' swap
auctions to supply dollar liquidity to the markets, on financial variables. Most of the auctions are
pre-announced, and often, but not always, the source of dollars being auctioned is from the
Federal Reserve swap lines or FIMA. 17 We assess the impact of US dollar auctions by economy
i's own central bank/monetary authority on the economic variables of our interest. We also
examine the spillovers of US dollar auctions by the four major central banks (i.e., BOE, BOJ,
ECB, or SNB) on other economies' financial variables.
     On the days when the central banks of our sample economies conduct US dollar auctions,
their home currencies appreciate on days three and four, perhaps reflecting the first settlement of
the auctions, but the cumulative effect is not significant on day 5. (Figure 6 (a)). Own central
banks' dollar auctions therefore have a short-lived effect of alleviating pressure on the domestic
currency. When any of the major central banks conducts FX auctions, on the other hand, there is
an immediate appreciation of other economies' currencies against the US dollar, with its impact
persistently becoming larger through day 5. These findings suggest that foreign exchange swap
auctions by the major central banks are very effective and have implications beyond the home
economies.
     FX auctions do not appear to affect the dynamics of the ten-year government bonds yields
or the CDS spread, except for a small but short-lived ameliorative impact of major central bank
auctions on government bond yields of other economies (Figures 6 (b), (c)).




17
  For example, the Reserve Bank of India announced that it will conduct US dollar auctions on
March 12, 2020, without specifying the source of the US dollars, which likely were from its own
reserves, as FIMA had not yet been announced and the RBI does not have swap line with the
Fed. The Hong Kong Monetary Authority announced on April 22, 2020 that it will conduct US
dollar auctions using funds obtained from the FIMA.

                                                 19
5.4 Interactive analysis: Does US-exposure matter for impact of dollar auctions?

     How the US dollar swap or auction policies affect the dynamics of the economic variables
of our interest can depend on whether and to what extent the economies are exposed to the US in
terms of trade or financial transactions. Rose and Spiegel (2012) find that the impact of swap
auctions of dollar assets by foreign central banks is larger for economies that have more trade or
financial linkages with the US
     We now examine whether and to what extent the level of trade or financial linkage with the
US affects the impact of US dollar swap or auction policies by including in the estimation model
the interaction terms as:


                                                         
                           ,                                ,   
       ,-1+ =             ,+-                 +    ,+-  
                        =0                          =0

                       3                 
                                                
               +    ,-             +    ,-   + - +  + 
                  =0                  =0


                               + ,+                (4)



where EXP is either BankExp (exposure of US banks to individual economies) or TradeShare
(the share of economy i in total US goods imports and exports). 18 The estimates of our focus are
 ,
 . If the extent of trade or financial exposure matters, this estimate will be significant with a
sign that would enlarge the absolute magnitude of Swampfima or other policy shock variables
(i.e., FIMA announcement, and own or major central bank auctions).  are each of the
explanatory variables in the baseline model other than COVID, i.e. Swapfima, AuctionOwn,
AuctionMajor and Other Controls.
     Figure 7 (a) illustrates the interactive effects of swap-related policies and bank exposure.
           ,      ,
That is, 1 + 1  ,+-   ,+- when EXP is BankExp. To make the


18
  We do not include the level term of EXP, mainly because the preliminary test showed that
neither BankExp nor TradeShare enters the estimation significantly. Rose and Spiegel (2012) do
not include the level terms for the same reason.

                                                20
interpretation easier, we draw two lines, one for the case where BankExp takes the 75th percentile
value (blue line) and the other for the 25th percentile value (red line). From the two lines barely
apart from each other, we can see that the extent of bank exposure does not affect the impact of
Swampfima.  , is statistically insignificant. The impacts of swap auctions by either individual
           1

economies' central banks or the major central banks do not depend upon bank exposure. The
lack of statistical significance is not just the case for the impacts on the exchange rate, but also
                                                                                        ,
on the sovereign debt yield or the CDS spread (Figures 8 and 9). In fact, most of           turn out to
be statistically insignificant. 19
        When we include TradeShare for EXP, again, in most of the cases,  , is statistically
                                                                         

insignificant, indicating that the extent of trade exposure to the US does not affect the impact of
swap policies or auctions.
        These estimation results give us an answer to the question of whether the effects of
liquidity-providing policies differ depending on the extent of trade or financial exposure to the
US The answer is no. This finding is different from that of Rose and Spiegel (2012). We
conclude that US liquidity-providing policies are indiscriminatory, possibly benefiting
economies regardless of the existence of trade or financial ties with the US That is consistent
with the claim that the US Fed is the lender of the last resort.



6. Robustness checks

        The results presented in section 5 are robust to several changes in specification. 20 First, we
increased the number of lags and leads in the model to 11 leads and 6 lags. The results remain
robust, and the announcement effect of the swap lines and FIMA on exchange rates against the
US dollar persists on day 11, while the impact of the auctions by the major central banks persists
until day 10.
        Second, the estimation results are robust to using alternative control variables that measure
the severity of the pandemic. We used total number of COVID-19 cases instead of new cases per
million, controlled for lockdowns and for changes in the level of mobility with respect to the pre-



19
     Therefore, to avoid the figure cluttered with many lines, we do not show confidence intervals.
20
     The results are available on request.

                                                    21
pandemic period. These variables are not significant, and do not affect the results for the
variables of interest as described in the previous section.
     Third, we used the US dollar amounts auctioned by central banks (i.e. the US dollar value
of bids accepted) instead of the dummy to represent the days when auctions took place. When we
use the auction amounts rather than the auction dummies, we find that the auctions by the major
central banks have a small but statistically significant impact on cross-currency basis, indicating
a reduction in the extent of dollar shortage for the day of the auction and the following day.
Auctions by own central banks do not have any impact on the cross-currency basis. The results
for the other variables remain unchanged from those descried in section 5.



7. Concluding remarks

     The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic instigated a financial turmoil in March 2020. As
in the previous episodes of financial instability, the uncertainty made investors rush to hold US
dollar-denominated assets, creating a dollar shortage. To prevent this situation from morphing
into a global systematic financial crisis, the Fed made US dollar liquidity readily available
through reinforcing or reactivating central bank swap lines and creating the FIMA repo facility.
     This paper investigates the motivations for and effects of US dollar liquidity provision with
the following questions: First, what factors led the Fed to select nine economies as swap partners
as it did at the time of the GFC? Second, what factors determined the total availability of
liquidity lines (swaps and the FIMA facility) from the Fed? Third, what domestic conditions
determined the size of dollar auctions by central banks? Fourth, what were the announcement
effects of the Fed liquidity arrangements and the domestic and spillover effects of dollar auctions
by central banks? Fifth, did the economic impacts of the US dollar liquidity provision differ
depending on the degree of financial or trade exposure to the US?
     We find that the Fed chose to reactivate swap agreements with nine economics because of
these economies' large trade ties with the US. This result is in contrast with the previous episode
of dollar shortage in 2008 when the US signed swap agreements with emerging economies due
to their financial ties with the US. The existence of formal military alliances was also a
determinant for the Fed to reactivate the swaps for these economies. Economies with strong
financial and trade ties with the US tended to have more access to dollar liquidity lines. Global



                                                 22
major trading centers also had greater access to US dollar liquidity via the Fed, regardless of
whether they had more financial or trade ties with the US. The amounts auctioned by central
banks were larger for currencies that faced greater exchange rate volatility, and when global
financial conditions were more unstable, as captured by a higher VIX.
     The announcements of swap-related policies had meaningful impacts on economic
variables; they led to appreciation of the partner currencies against the US dollar, and a decline
in the economies' CDS spreads and ten-year government bond yields. US dollar auctions by
economies' own central banks led their home currencies to appreciate. Although this effect was
temporary. US dollar auctions by the major central banks (BoE, ECB, BoJ and SNB) had more
persistent appreciation effects on the home currencies of the non-major economies. That
indicates that liquidity policies taken by the major central banks have important spillover effects
on other economies.
     One may conjecture that the economic impacts of swap and other liquidity policies or
auctions can be greater for the economies that have financial or trade ties with the US. However,
our findings suggest that dollar liquidity policies have egalitarian impacts irrespective of the
extent of financial or trade ties with the US.




                                                 23
References

Aizenman, J., 2008. Large hoarding of international reserves and the emerging global economic
     architecture. The Manchester School, 76(5), pp.487-503.
Aizenman, J., Y. Jinjarak, and D. Park. 2011. "International Reserves and Swap Lines:
     Substitutes or Complements?" International Review of Economics and Finance, 2011,
     20:1, pp. 5-18.
Aizenman, J., and G. K. Pasricha. 2010. "Selective Swap Arrangements and the Global Financial
     Crisis," International Review of Economics and Finance, 19(3), 353-365.
Aizenman, J. and Y. Sun. 2012. "The financial crisis and sizable international reserves depletion:
     From 'fear of floating' to the 'fear of losing international reserves'?" International Review of
     Economics and Finance, 2012, 24, pp. 250-269.
Amiti, M., & Weinstein, D. E. 2011. Exports and financial shocks. The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 126(4), 1841-1877.
Amiti, M. and Weinstein, D.E., 2009. Exports and Financial Shocks. NBER Working Paper,
     (w15556).
Auboin, M., 2009. Restoring trade finance during a period of financial crisis: Stocktaking of
     recent initiatives (No. ERSD-2009-16). WTO Staff Working Paper.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2013. "Fiscal multipliers in recession and
     expansion." Fiscal policy after the financial crisis. University of Chicago Press. 63-98.
Baba, N., and F. Packer. 2009 "From Turmoil to Crisis: Dislocations in the FX Swap Market
  Before and After the Failure of Lehman Brothers," Journal of International Money and
  Finance, 28, 1350-1374.
Baldwin, R. and Freeman, R., 2020. Supply chain contagion waves: VoxEU, 01 April.
Boissay, F., Patel, N., and Shin, H.S., 2020. Trade credit, trade finance, and the Covid-19
     Crisis. BIS Bulletin No. 24, 19 June 2020.
Chinn, M. D., and H. Ito. 2006. What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,
     Institutions, and Interactions. Journal of Development Economics 81(1): 163­192.
Chinn, M. D., and H Ito. 2008. A new measure of financial openness. Journal of Comparative
     Policy Analysis, vol 10, no 3), pp 309­322.
Dooley, M., S. Lizondo and D. Mathieson. 1989. "The currency composition of foreign
     exchange reserves", IMF Staff Papers, vol 36, pp 385­434.
Eichengreen, B. and D. Mathieson. 2000. "The currency composition of foreign exchange
     reserves: retrospect and prospect", IMF Working Papers, no WP/00/131, July.
Frankel, J and S-J Wei. 1996. "Yen bloc or dollar bloc? Exchange rate policies in East Asian
     economies", in T Ito and A Krueger, eds, Macroeconomic linkage: savings, exchange rates,
     and capital flows, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp 295­329.
Gopinath, G., Boz, E., Casas, C., Díez, F.J., Gourinchas, P.O. and Plagborg-Møller, M., 2020.
     Dominant currency paradigm. American Economic Review, 110(3), pp.677-719.




                                                 24
Gourinchas, P. O., & Rey, H. 2007. From world banker to world venture capitalist: US external
      adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege. In G7 current account imbalances: sustainability
      and adjustment (pp. 11-66). University of Chicago Press.
Heckman, J. 1976. "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample
      Selection and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for Such Models".
      Annals of Economic and Social Measurement. 5 (4): 475­492.
Heller, H., and M. Knight. 1978. Reserve currency preferences of central banks, Princeton
      Essays in International Finance, no 131, December.
International Monetary Fund and the Bankers' Association for Finance & Trade 2009. "Trade
      Finance Services: Current Environment & Recommendations: Wave 2; A Survey Among
      Banks Assessing the Current Trade Finance Environment," August.
International Monetary Fund. 2020. Global Financial Stability Report, April 2020. Washington,
      D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Ito, H., and R.N. McCauley. 2020. "Currency composition of foreign exchange reserves,"
      Journal of International Money and Finance, Volume 102 (April 2020), Article 102104.
Jordà, Ò. 2005. "Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections."
      American Economic Review 95 (1): 161­82.
Lane, P. R., and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2017. "International Financial Integration in the
      Aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis," IMF Working Paper No. 17/115.
Lane, P. and G.M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2001. "The external wealth of nations: measures of foreign
      assets and liabilities for industrial and developing countries", Journal of International
      Economics, vol 55, pp 263­294.
Lane, P. and G.M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2007. "The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and
      extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970­2004", Journal of International
      Economics, vol 73, no 2. Pp 223-250.
Obstfeld, M., Shambaugh, J.C. and Taylor, A.M., 2009. Financial instability, reserves, and
      central bank swap lines in the panic of 2008. American Economic Review, 99(2), pp.480-
      86.
Ramey, Valerie A., and Sarah Zubairy. 2018. "Government spending multipliers in good times
      and in bad: evidence from US historical data." Journal of Political Economy 126.2: 850-
      901.
Rose, Andy, and Mark Spiegel. 2012. "Dollar illiquidity and central bank swap arrangements
      during the global financial crisis," Journal of International Economics, Elsevier, vol. 88(2),
      pages 326-340.
Sever, Can, Rohit Goel, Dimitris Drakopoulos and Evan Papageorgiou. 2020. "Effects of
      Emerging Market Asset Purchase Program Announcements on Financial Markets During
      the COVID-19 Pandemic" IMF Working Paper No. 2020/292.
Teulings, C.N., & N. Zubanov. 2014. "Is Economic Recovery a Myth? Robust Estimation of
      Impulse Responses." Journal of Applied Econometrics 29 (3): 497­514.




                                                 25
Tables and Figures

Table 1: Chronology of Fed swap lies and FIMA announcements
 Date                    Policy Actions                        Relevant Central Banks


 March 15                Reduced Swap Pricing                  Bank of Canada (BoC), Bank of England
                                                               (BoE), Bank of Japan (BoJ), European
                                                               Central Bank (ECB), Swiss National Bank
                                                               (SNB)
                         Introduced 84-day operations          BoE, BoJ, ECB, SNB

 March 19                Reactivate temporary swap lines       Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA), Banco
                         with nine other central banks         Central do Brasil (BCB), Bank of Korea
                                                               (BoK), Banco de Mexico (BdM), Monetary
                                                               Authority of Singapore (MAS), and Sveriges
                                                               Riksbank (SR) with the maximal lines of $60
                                                               billion. Danmarks Nationalbank (DNB),
                                                               Norges Bank (NB), and Reserve Bank of
                                                               New Zealand (RBNZ) with the maximal lines
                                                               of $30 billion.
 March 20                Increased frequency of one-week       BoC, BoE, BoJ, ECB, SNB
                         operations to daily

 March 31                Established FIMA repo facility        Foreign International Monetary Authority
                                                               (FIMA) account holders
Notes: Bank of Canada, Bank of England, Bank of Japan, European Central Bank, Swiss National Bank have
established permanent swap arrangements with the Fed since the Global Financial Crisis. There is no limit to
the swap amount for these central banks.




                                                          26
        Table 2: Probit regressions for explaining inclusion in Fed Swap arrangements
                                      (1)         (2)               (3)            (4)       (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)
   Financial exposure of US banks    49.00                                                  39.04                      53.97         36.26
                                    (21.65)**                                               (29.16)                   (25.62)**      (28.51)
          Share in US trade                      12.40                                      14.20       20.33                        15.91
                                                 (6.72)*                                    (7.68)*     (8.21)**                     (8.12)*
      De jure financial openness                                  1.81                                   1.28           0.90          1.27
                                                                 (0.71)**                                (0.94)         (0.84)       (0.97)
     Dummy for military alliance                                                  1.49       1.94        1.47           1.31          1.56
                                                                               (0.45)***   (0.60)***    (0.59)**       (0.55)**     (0.63)**
              Constant               -1.33       -1.21            -2.31          -1.71      -2.42        -2.90          -2.54        -3.12
                                    (0.24)***   (0.22)***       (0.58)***      (0.33)***   (0.56)***   (0.77)***      (0.65)***     (0.86)***
                  N                    63          63               62             63         63          62                62         62
           pseudo R2             0.09       0.07      0.16       0.24        0.40      0.41       0.35       0.44
      % correctly explained      85.7       85.7      72.6       81.0        79.4      82.3       75.8       80.7

Notes: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. The figures reported in the table are estimated coefficients, not the marginal
effects.



                          Table 3: Determinants of size of available liquidity lines
                                         (1)             (2)                    (3)             (4)                 (5)                 (6)
     Financial exposure of             29.14            6.77                   4.52            4.42                5.39                3.52
          US banks                   (3.50)***       (1.04)***              (1.32)***        (1.97)**          (1.83)***            (1.89)*
       Share in US trade                               12.45                   9.12            9.16                6.97                6.80
                                                     (0.40)***              (1.35)***       (1.49)***          (1.46)***          (1.39)***
    Share of trade in world                                                    4.43            4.36                3.10                4.06
                                                                             (1.72)**        (2.01)**           (1.82)*            (1.77)**
   Share in global finances                                                                    0.28                2.13                4.36
                                                                                              (4.10)             (3.80)              (3.71)
       De jure financial                                                                                          -0.02               -0.01
          openness                                                                                               (0.01)              (0.01)
       Dummy for China                                                                                             0.39                0.32
                                                                                                               (0.12)***           (0.12)**
    D. for military alliance                                                                                                          -0.03
                                                                                                                                   (0.01)**
             Constant                   -0.00               -0.01             -0.01            -0.01                0.01               0.00
                                       (0.03)              (0.01)           (0.01)**         (0.01)**              (0.01)            (0.01)
               N                          51                  51                51               51                  51                 51
             Adj. R2                     0.58                0.98              0.98             0.98                0.99               0.99
                                                        * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01




                                                                     27
              Table 4: Determinants of size of US dollar auctions by central banks
                                                   (1)                 (2)              (3)             (4)
       Cumulative depreciation rate              -0.029              -0.021           -0.280          -0.283
                                              (0.008)***          (0.006)***         (0.202)         (0.221)
           Exch. rate volatility                  0.378               0.322            2.945           2.678
                                               (0.150)**           (0.142)**         (3.888)         (3.946)
          Stock market volatility                -0.011              -0.033           -1.788          -1.591
                                                (0.044)             (0.050)          (1.317)         (1.364)
               VIX (in log)                       1.167               1.713          35.112          36.156
                                              (0.403)***          (0.662)***       (15.441)**      (16.395)**
         Dummy for DE, JP, UK                     2.391               2.934            7.125           7.143
                                              (0.556)***          (0.690)***       (2.074)***      (2.095)***
         New COVID cases, MA                                          0.000                           -0.025
                                                                    (0.001)                          (0.022)
           Mobility index, MA                                         0.000                            0.055
                                                                    (0.001)                          (0.046)
                     N                           4,158                3,103             185             182
                  Adj. R2                         0.06                0.07             0.17            0.18
              # of economies                       42                  41               15              15
Notes: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Columns (1) and (2) include observations when there is no auction
taking place (instead of zero auctions being identified as missing variables. Columns (3) and (4) include only
non-zero observations of auction volumes. That is, when there is no auction in a day for an economy, the cell
for the day and the economy would be recognized as a missing variable. DE, JP, and UK refer to Germany,
Japan, and United Kingdom respectively. MA refers to 7-day backward looking moving average.




                                                      28
Figure 1: Cross-currency basis (CIP deviations) widened during the COVID-19 crisis

                                       3-month swaps, basis points

                    100
                    50
     Basis points
                    0
                    -50
                    -100
                    -150




                    01jan2020   01feb2020     01mar2020     01apr2020    01may2020    01jun2020

                                            Japanese Yen             Euro
                                            British Pound            Brazilian Real
                                            Chilean Peso



                                     Source: Bloomberg, JP Morgan




                                                      29
Figure 2: Many advanced and emerging-market central banks auctioned US dollars during
                                 the COVID-19 crisis




                                         30
Figure 3: Outstanding dollar liquidity lines with Fed peaked between March-May 2020




                                        31
Figure 4: Estimated effect of the announcements of the swap agreements and FIMA on the rate of
                                  depreciation of the home currency
                        (a)                                                     (b)




                        (c)                                                     (d)




   Notes: The figure illustrates the accumulated impact of (a) the rate of deprecation of the home currency,
   (b) the change in 3-month cross-currency swap basis, (c) the change in the CDS spread to the Fed (d) the
   change in the 10-year government bond yield on the Fed announcing swap expansions or the
   establishment of the FIMA facility. The announcement takes place at t=0, and the cumulative impulse
   response functions are illustrated for the next five business days. The units for the y-axis are percent.




                                                    32
Figure 5 (a): Estimated effects of VIX, QE and domestic monetary policy easing on the
                        depreciation rate of the home currency




 Figure 5 (b): Estimated effects of VIX, QE and domestic monetary policy easing on
                               government bond yields




                                         33
Figure 5 (c): Estimated effects of VIX, QE and domestic monetary policy easing on CDS
                                         spreads




  Notes: The announcement takes place at t=0, and the cumulative impulse response functions are
  illustrated for the next five business days. The units for the y-axis are percent.




                                                  34
   Figure 6 (a): Estimated effects of FX auctions on the
         depreciation rate of the home currency




Figure 6 (b): Estimated effects of FX auctions on the change
          in the ten-year government bond yields




                             35
   Figure 6 (c): Estimated effects of FX auctions on the change in the CDS spread




Notes: The announcement takes place at t=0, and the cumulative impulse response functions are
illustrated for the next five business days.




                                                36
  Figure 7 (a): Interactive effects of swaps and financial exposure on the exchange rate




    Figure 7 (b): Interactive effects of foreign exchange auction and financial exposure
                                     on the exchange rate




Notes: The announcement takes place at t=0, and the cumulative impulse response functions are illustrated
for the next five business days.




                                                    37
               Figure 8 (a): Interactive effects of swaps and financial exposure
                            on the 10-year government bond yield




    Figure 8 (b): Interactive effects of foreign exchange auction and financial exposure
                           on the 10-year government bond yield




Notes: The announcement takes place at t=0, and the cumulative impulse response functions are illustrated
for the next five business days.




                                                    38
   Figure 9 (a): Interactive effects of swaps and financial exposure on the CDS spread




Figure 9 (b): Interactive effects of foreign exchange auction and financial exposure on the
                                          CDS spread




Notes: The announcement takes place at t=0, and the cumulative impulse response functions are illustrated
for the next five business days.




                                                    39
Appendix I: List of economies

 Argentina                        India                       Qatar
 AustraliaS                       Indonesia                   Romania
 Azerbaijan                       Israel                      Russian Federation
 Bangladesh                       JapanS                      Saudi Arabia
 Bolivia                          Kenya                       SingaporeS
 Bosnia and Herzegovina           Korea, Rep. S               South Africa
 BrazilS                          Kyrgyz Republic             Sri Lanka
 Bulgaria                         Macedonia                   SwedenS
 CanadaS                          Malawi                      SwitzerlandS
 Chile                            Malaysia                    Taiwan
 China                            MexicoS                     Tajikistan
 Colombia                         Moldova                     Tanzania
 Costa Rica                       Mozambique                  Thailand
 Croatia                          Namibia                     Tunisia
 Czech Republic                   New ZealandS                Turkey
 DenmarkS                         Nigeria                     Ukraine
 Ecuador                          NorwayS                     Uganda
 Euro areaS                       Pakistan                    United Arab Emirates
 Georgia                          Papua New Guinea            United KingdomS
 Ghana                            Paraguay                    Uruguay
 Hong Kong, China                 Peru                        Venezuela
 Hungary                          Philippines                 Zambia
 Iceland                          Poland


 Note: The superscript "S" refers to the economies that are given swap lines with the Fed.




                                                      40
Appendix II: Data Sources

We provide below a listing of the mnemonics for the variables used in the analysis, descriptions of these variables and the source(s) from which
the primary data for constructing these variables were taken.

 Variable           Variable description                                                                    Source
 BankExp            Consolidated claims of US banks on individual economies divided by the                  BIS Consolidated Banking Statistics
                    consolidated claims of US banks on all economies as of December 2019.
 TradeShare         Total US goods trade with the individual economy as a share of US goods trade           IMF Direction of Trade
                    with the world as of December 2019.
 KAOPEN             Chinn-Ito index of financial openness                                                   Chinn and Ito (2006, 2008)
 ALLIANCE           Dummy for economies that are in a formal military alliance with the US                  CIA Factbooks
 Global_Fin         Level of global financial exposure, measured by economy i's sum of external             Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001, 2007, and
                    assets and liabilities as a ratio to the world's external assets and liabilities over   2017)
                    the period of 2005 through 2015.
 Global_Trade       Level of global trade exposure measured by the share of economy i's sum of              IMF Direction of Trade Statistics
                    exports and imports in global trade (i.e., the world's sum of exports and imports.
 Cuml_fx            Cumulative exchange rate. the rate of change in the local currency value per            Haver
                    dollar with respect to the average local currency value during the first two weeks
                    of January 2020.
 fx_vol             Exchange rate volatility, measured by the standard deviations of the rate of            Haver
                    depreciation over rolling 14-day windows.
 stk_vol            Stock market volatility, measured by the standard deviations of the rate of stock       Haver
                    market total return over rolling 14-day windows.
 VIX                Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (VIX) in log                            https://www.cboe.com/tradable_products/vix/
 COVID              7-day moving average of new COVID-19 cases per million population                       Johns Hopkins University Coronavirus
                                                                                                            Resource Center (https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/ )
 MOBILITY           7-day moving average of the change in mobility. The change in mobility is the           Google Global Mobility Report; Baidu City
                    percentage change from baseline, of workplace mobility from Google Global               Movement Intensity data
                    Mobility Report for all economies except China. For China, the Baidu city
                    movement intensity data for Wuhan is used to construct the percentage change in
                    mobility from the baseline of first two weeks in January 2020.
 Lockdowns          Number of measures introduced/extended less number of measures phased-out,              ACAPS COVID-19 Government measures
                    for the following types of measures: Border closures, closure of businesses and         dataset: https://www.acaps.org/covid-19-
                    public services, complete border closures, curfews, domestic travel restrictions,       government-measures-dataset
                    full lockdowns, international flights suspension, isolation and quarantine
                    policies, limit public gatherings, partial lockdowns, state of emergency declared.

                                                                             41
Variable        Variable description                                                               Source
Ratings         Change in sovereign credit ratings by Fitch, Moody's or Standard and Poor's        Fitch, Moody's, and S&P
                (S&P). The variable takes the value +1 on days that see a ratings upgrade by any
                of the agencies, -1 on days with a downgrade and 0 otherwise.
Swapfima        Dummy variable that takes the value of one on the days of Fed swap                 Fed's website
                announcements for the swap recipients, and on the day of the FIMA facility
                announcement for all economies.
Auction_Own     Dummy for when economy i's central bank auctions US dollars                        Websites of the sample economies' central
                                                                                                   banks
Auction_Major   Dummy that takes the value 1 for days when US dollars are auctioned by major       Websites of the sample economies' central
                central banks (ECB, BOE, SNB, and BOJ) for economies other than those of           banks
                these four central banks.
QE              Dummy for the implementation of quantitative easing (QE) by the Fed on March       Fed's website
                23, 2020.
CDS             Credit default swap spreads on sovereign senior 5-year bond.                       Datastream
FedSwap         Dummy variable. Equals 1 if the economy received a Federal Reserve swap-line,      Fed's website
                0 otherwise.
d_FOREX         Rate of depreciation for the nominal exchange rates in local currency units per    Haver (WSJ and central bank rates)
                US dollar. End of day values.
USTreasury5y    Yield on 5-year Treasury bills, end of month values.                               Datastream
CROSS           3-month Cross-currency basis, i.e., deviations from CPI                            Datastream and Bloomberg




                                                                      42
