                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       DIVERSITY IN SCHOOLS:
 IMMIGRANTS AND THE EDUCATIONAL PERFORMANCE OF U.S. BORN STUDENTS

                                          David N. Figlio
                                          Paola Giuliano
                                      Riccardo Marchingiglio
                                            Umut Özek
                                          Paola Sapienza

                                        Working Paper 28596
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28596


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2021




This research was funded by the Russell Sage Foundation. We thank Jennifer Hunt, Andrea
Ichino, Victor Lavy, Daniele Paserman, Bruce Sacerdote, Cynthia van der Werf, and participants
at various seminars and conferences for helpful comments, and Gaia Dossi for truly outstanding
research assistantship. We are especially grateful to the Florida Department of Education and
Health for providing the linked anonymous population-level administrative data that permitted
this analysis to take place. All errors and opinions are those of the authors and do not reflect those
of the funders or the Florida Departments of Education and Health. Interested researchers may
request access to Florida administrative data through the processes described at fldoe.org/
accountability/accountability-reporting/external-research-requests.       Riccardo    Marchingiglio
performed this research while affiliated with the Department of Economics at Northwestern
University. The views presented are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of
Analysis Group, Inc. or its clients, nor do they necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by David N. Figlio, Paola Giuliano, Riccardo Marchingiglio, Umut Özek, and Paola
Sapienza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Diversity in Schools: Immigrants and the Educational Performance of U.S. Born Students
David N. Figlio, Paola Giuliano, Riccardo Marchingiglio, Umut Özek, and Paola Sapienza
NBER Working Paper No. 28596
March 2021
JEL No. I21,I24,J15

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the effect of exposure to immigrants on the educational outcomes of US-born students,
using a unique dataset combining population-level birth and school records from Florida. This
research question is complicated by substantial school selection of US-born students, especially
among White and comparatively affluent students, in response to the presence of immigrant
students in the school. We propose a new identification strategy to partial out the unobserved
non-random selection into schools, and find that the presence of immigrant students has a positive
effect on the academic achievement of US-born students, especially for students from
disadvantaged backgrounds. Moreover, the presence of immigrants does not affect negatively the
performance of affluent US-born students, who typically show a higher academic achievement
compared to immigrant students. We provide suggestive evidence on potential channels.


David N. Figlio                                 Umut Özek
School of Education and Social Policy           American Institutes for Research/CALDER
Northwestern University                         1000 Thomas Jefferson St. NW
2120 Campus Drive                               Washington, DC 20007
Evanston IL 60208                               uozek@air.org
and NBER
figlio@northwestern.edu                         Paola Sapienza
                                                Kellogg School of Management
Paola Giuliano                                  Northwestern University
Anderson School of Management                   2221 Campus Drive
UCLA                                            Evanston, IL 60208
110 Westwood Plaza                              and CEPR
C517 Entrepreneurs Hall                         and also NBER
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481                      paola-sapienza@northwestern.edu
and IZA
and also NBER
paola.giuliano@anderson.ucla.edu

Riccardo Marchingiglio
Northwestern University
Department of Economics and
Analysis Group, Inc.
180 North Stetson Avenue
Suite 2300
Chicago, IL 60601
riccardo.marchingiglio@u.northwestern.edu
    1. Introduction
        Over the past 50 years, immigration rates into the United States have risen dramatically. As a
result, almost one out of four (23 percent) public school students in the United States came from an
immigrant household in 2015 (either foreign-born students or second generation students), with
concentrations over 70% in several school districts (and even higher in some communities, including
as high as 93 percent in northeast Miami-Dade County, Florida, 91 percent in Jackson Heights and
North Corona, New York, and 85 percent in Westpark Tollway, Texas). These trends have generated
a policy debate about the effects of immigration on public education and the perceived costs that
immigrants may impose on public schools, local governments, and educational outcomes of the US-
born student population.
        Given the sheer size of immigrants in US schools and their unique cultural backgrounds,
studying their impact on US-born students is of first order importance. On one hand, immigrants may
face challenges in assimilation that may require additional school resources which could be taken away
from US-born students (Fix and Zimmerman, 1993). On the other hand, especially some groups of
immigrants, through hard work and resilience, outperform non-immigrant students with similar socio-
economic backgrounds (Hsin and Xie, 2014) and can positively affect exposed US-born students'
attitudes and behavior (Hunt, 2016). Yet, the academic research about the impact of immigrant
students on the educational performance of US-born students is limited 2, especially compared to the
literature about the effect of immigrants on labor market outcomes 3, primarily due to two important
empirical challenges.
        First, immigrant students are not randomly assigned to schools, and are more likely to enroll
in schools educating students from disadvantaged backgrounds (e.g., Card 2001; Figlio and Ozek


2 There are a few studies that examine the effects of immigrant students on US-born student outcomes. For
example, Schwartz and Stiefel (2011) use within-school variation and find a negative effect of immigrant share
on the performance of US-born students in New York City public schools. McHenry (2015) and Hunt (2016)
examine the effects on high school completion rates of native-born students and find positive immigrant
effects, especially among students from disadvantaged backgrounds. Similarly, Neymotin (2009) finds no
adverse effect of immigration on the SAT-scores and college application patterns of US-born students. There
are also studies in the US context that investigate the effects of specific immigrant groups (e.g., refugees) on
US-born student outcomes (Figlio and Ozek, 2019; Morales 2020; Ozek, forthcoming; Van der Werf 2021).
3 The results on the labor market effects of immigrants are mixed. Friedberg and Hunt (1995) and Card (2001)

find that immigration has a small negative effect on employment rates and wages of low-skilled native-born
workers, whereas Borjas (2003) finds a larger negative impact on the wages of low-skilled native-born workers,
particularly those without high school diplomas. Ottaviano and Peri (2012) argue that the small negative impact
of immigration on low-skilled native-born wages and employment is outweighed by increased demand for
higher-level workers and improved physical capital.

                                                       2
2019). Second, US-born students, especially those from comparatively affluent families, may decide to
leave when a large share of immigrant students move into their school district. Indeed, evidence shows
that in the US, following an influx of disadvantaged students and immigrants, affluent, especially
White, students move to private schools or districts with higher socio-economic status (SES) families,
a phenomenon which has been labeled "white flight" (Betts and Fairlie, 2003; Cascio and Lewis, 2012;
Fairlie and Resch, 2002; Li, 2009). Both of these factors imply that immigrant exposure is negatively
correlated with the SES of US-born students. Therefore, research that does not address the non-
random selection of US-born students is likely to estimate a correlation between immigrant exposure
and US-born student outcomes that is more negative than the true relationship. The unique features
of our data allow us to directly address both selection issues for the US. 4
        We study the effects of exposure to immigrants on the educational outcomes of US-born
students using unique administrative data from Florida that link population-level school records and
birth records. There are several advantages in using this dataset. First, birth records allow us to identify
siblings and control for all the observable and unobservable family characteristics (even family life-cycle
characteristics) with the inclusion of family-year fixed effects. Second, the dataset follows individual
students over time, thus allowing us to measure a cumulative exposure to immigrants. Using this
information, our first identification strategy compares test scores in math and reading of siblings who
experience different cumulative exposures to school-cohort-specific immigrant concentrations,
holding the heterogeneity in family life-cycle fixed. Further, because we have information on the entire
population of students attending public schools during this period, we can employ a second
identification strategy to address the possibility that families select schools differentially for each child
using an instrumental variable approach. Specifically, we build a measure of predicted immigrant
exposure using aggregate school-to-school transition probabilities, for each kid at each subsequent
grade, starting from the first grade the student is observed. For example, two siblings who started in
the same school (in different years) will have the same predicted transition matrix but a different
predicted exposure to immigrants, which depends on their specific cohort.




4
 Several papers have studied this topic outside the US finding zero or negative effects (Jensen and Rasmussen,
2011; Brunello and Rocco, 2013; Ballatore et al., 2018; Tornello, 2016; Ohinata and van Ours 2013; Geay et al.,
2013; and Schneeweis, 2015; Bossavie, 2020). Gould et al. (2009) successfully addressed the selection of
immigrants into schools by exploiting an exogenous inflow of refugees from the Soviet Union that occurred in
Israel during the 1990s. They find a negative effect of immigration on the probability of passing the high-school
matriculation exam, affecting mostly poor Israelis.

                                                       3
        Our empirical analysis proceeds in several steps. We first calculate a measure of cumulative
immigrant exposure using the longitudinal aspect of our data. We then estimate a specification similar
to the one commonly used in the extant literature in order to address the first form of nonrandom
selection described above. This specification compares students with different exposures to
immigrants, only controlling for school and grade fixed effects (both interacted with calendar year
dummies). When we run this regression, we find a significant--although small in magnitude--negative
correlation between the share of immigrants and the natives' scholastic performance in both
mathematics and reading. But this specification does not address the non-random selection of US-
born students based on the expected immigrant concentration of the school. We therefore compare
siblings' outcomes with the inclusion of family fixed effects. When we employ this specification, the
estimated relationship between immigrant concentration and student outcomes becomes positive.
This fundamental finding is unaffected by still more stringent identification strategies, such as
including family-year fixed effects to control for family lifecycle changes, or instrumental variable
approaches. The reason for the discrepancy between our findings and those that do not address
nonrandom US-born student selection into schools is that there is strong evidence that US-born
students indeed sort into schools on the basis of immigrant concentration. This sorting is concentrated
among White and affluent students, consistent with the white flight literature (Betts and Fairlie, 2003;
Cascio and Lewis, 2012). By contrast, our evidence suggests that, on average, Black and lower-SES
students do not move away from schools or districts with a larger fraction of immigrants.
        For the overall sample, the magnitude of the results indicates that moving from the tenth to
the 90th percentile in the distribution of cumulative exposure to foreign-born students (1% and 13%,
respectively) increases the score in mathematics and reading by 2.7% and 1.7% of a standard deviation,
respectively. This effect corresponds to 8.5% of the differences in scores between children whose
mother has a high school diploma and children whose mother has not completed high school. We
also find that this effect is twice as large for free-or-reduced-priced lunch (FRPL) eligible students and
for Black students.
        These heterogeneous effects hint at the possibility that US-born students with different
demographics are exposed to immigrant students with different levels of academic performance.
Indeed, we find that immigrants who go to schools with higher shares of Black or FRPL eligible
students underperform immigrants who go to school with higher shares of White or FRPL ineligible
US-born students. On the other hand, immigrants going to high-Black or high-poverty schools
outperform US-born students in the same school-year-grade, while White and FRPL ineligible US-

                                                    4
born students, on average, outperform foreign-born students in the same school-year-grade. We also
find that immigrants have fewer disciplinary incidents than US-born students, but the difference in
behavior is mostly observed in schools where the majority of US-born are disadvantaged students.
         If academic achievement and behavior matter to explain the positive effect of immigrant
exposure, one should expect that the higher the fraction of high performing and "better behaved"
immigrants, the more positive the impact on US-born students. The reflection problem (Manski, 1993)
and endogeneity issues do not allow the identification of the causal impact of the achievement of
immigrants on the performance of US-born students. Instead of including actual immigrant
performance in the regression, we calculate a proxy for expected performance, by using the average
immigrant academic performance and/or disciplinary behavior by country of origin and multiply it by
the fraction of immigrants in each grade/school/year. This measure of immigrant exposure weighted
by country of origin average performance proxies for the potential academic achievement (and
behavior) of immigrants. We show that the presence of immigrants with higher expected academic
performance correlates with better scores of US-born students in the overall sample and across every
subsample. After controlling for expected academic achievement of the immigrants, the coefficient
on the immigrant exposure variable remains similar to our baseline specification.
         It is also possible that what matters is not just the absolute performance of the immigrants,
but how much better or worse they perform vis-à-vis US-born students in the same school-grade-
year. We cannot test this hypothesis directly because we do not observe the potential performance of
each US-born student in absence of their exposure to immigrants. Nonetheless, we find suggestive
evidence that the effect on US-born students is larger when the immigrants systematically outperform
US-born students. Overall, these results suggest that immigrant students do not affect negatively US-
born students, even when the immigrants' academic achievement is lower than the US-born students,
and may have a positive impact on US-born students when immigrants outperform them.


   2. Data and Variables of Interest
   2.1      Data Sources
         We use a unique dataset of school records for the state of Florida, maintained by the Florida
Department of Education (FLDOE), merged with birth vital records from the Florida Bureau of Vital
Statistics. The individual-level administrative data from the FLDOE contain information on K-12
students who attended Florida public schools between 2002-2003 and 2011-2012. The data contain
for each child the results of the Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT) in reading and

                                                   5
mathematics administered annually to all students in grades 3 through 10, as well as disciplinary
incidents. The dataset also contains information about the country of origin of the child and the
language spoken at home. Birth vital records contain a larger set of SES measures for children born
in Florida (such as maternal education, marital status, and age of the mother when the child was born),
normally not included in school records. 5 The match with birth certificates allows us to identify
children belonging to the same family and to exploit within family variation. Since data from birth
certificates are available only for children born in Florida between 1994 and 2002, we limit our analysis
to these cohorts.
    2.2      Definition of Immigrants
          Our goal is to study the effect of immigrant exposure on the performance of US-born
students. We define as immigrants all students born in a foreign country (the information on the country
of origin is in the school administrative records). Therefore, given our definition, immigrant is
equivalent to foreign-born. 6 Because we do not have birth certificates for Puerto Rican students, we are
unable to include them in the sample of US-born students. Therefore, the best way to treat Puerto
Ricans in this analysis is not obvious: we can either include them with the foreign students to calculate
the foreign exposure measure or we can exclude them altogether from the analysis. We adopt both
strategies. In the baseline regression, we treat Puerto Ricans as "immigrants" on the ground that they
are culturally distinct from many other US citizens. However, in a robustness analysis, we do not
include them in the construction of the immigrant exposure variable and the results are unchanged
from the baseline. We therefore conclude that our choice of treatment of Puerto Rican-born students
as "immigrants" does not influence our findings.
          The birth certificates provide information on whether the mother was born abroad. Thus, we
could have added to the first generation immigrants children born in the US with parents born abroad



5 Birth certificates and school records were matched using first and last names, date of birth and social security
numbers. The sample of birth records consists of 2,047,633 observations. Of these, 1,652,333 were present in
Florida public school data. The match rate of 81% is consistent with the percentage of children who are born
in Florida, reside there until school age, and attend public school, as calculated from the Census and the
American Community survey for the corresponding years. See Figlio et al. (2014) for details about the nature
and additional evidence on the quality of the birth-school data merge.
6
  One complication in our data is that some US citizens born abroad (most notably because of parents serving
in the military) are recorded as "foreign-born" in the data. There is no perfect way to address this limitation,
but we can at least try to partially bound the effect by excluding observations from the four Florida counties
(Bay, Brevard, Clay, and Okaloosa) with large military concentrations to gauge whether our results are sensitive
to their inclusion; results remain highly consistent regardless of whether we include or exclude these military-
intensive counties (at request by the authors).

                                                        6
(second generation immigrants). Because we do not have information on the immigrant status of the
father we do not follow this strategy.
    2.3      Measure of Immigrant Exposure
          We adopt a cumulative measure of immigrant exposure, in which we aggregate the share of
foreign-born students to whom a US-born student has been exposed from kindergarten to the time
of observation (measured at the school-grade-year cell level.) This is the most flexible approach to
studying exposure because it does not require us to take a stand regarding the degree to which the
effects of immigrant exposure persist beyond contemporaneous exposure. Several papers in the
education literature have argued that the effects of time-varying inputs (schooling-related as well as
child- and family-related) may decay over time rather than only be observed contemporaneously
(Clotfelter et al., 2006; Clotfelter et al., 2007; Todd and Wolpin, 2003; Rothstein, 2010). Therefore, we
consider a general model of immigrant exposure using a geometric specification with different rates
of decay, where  represents the decay factor. For each student i in school s, current grade g and
academic year t, the measure of cumulative exposure (weighted by distance in time from the current
observation) is calculated using the following formula:
                                                          1-- 
                  _  
           =                                                                                      (1)
                                                                        1-(-)


    where _ is the exposure in grade .
    The literature does not provide a direction on the specific size of : the previous literature has
produced some estimates regarding decay in teachers' effect, but nothing specific regarding the effect
of peer students. This specification permits a wide range of models, from a model in which last year's
exposure is just as influential as contemporaneous exposure ( = 0) to a model in which only
contemporaneous exposure matters ( increasing to infinity). In our baseline, we begin with a zero
decay model (=0) and later we expand it to include different s. Thus, our baseline definition of
cumulative exposure for each student i in school s, grade g and academic year t, is:
                                              1
                =                                _                                     (2)
                                               
                                                 

    2.4      Outcome Variables
          Our main outcomes of interest are Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT) scores
in mathematics and reading from grade 3 to grade 10 (the first and last year of statewide testing).

                                                   7
Because Florida transitioned to a new version of the test, called FCAT 2.0, in 2011 and to aid in
interpretation, we standardize the statewide test scores to zero mean and unit variance at the
grade/year level over the entire population of students.
    2.5      Individual Controls
          In our specification, we include as controls several demographic variables (age in months,
gender, birth order fixed effects, and race dummies), a measure of low-income status (a dummy for
whether the student is eligible to receive free-or-reduced-priced lunch or attend a "provision 2"
school, where such a large fraction of students are eligible that individual documentation is not
collected, as almost all students are presumptively eligible), a measure for whether the student receives
special education services, and dummies for maternal education (high school graduate, some college
and four years of college or more, with the excluded group given by mothers who dropped out of
high school). 7
    2.6      Definition of US-born Students and Construction of the Sample of Interest
          We define as US-born students all students born in the US who speak English at home. Given
the large fraction of second generation immigrant students, we believe that the language restriction is
more likely to select students who fully identify as Americans. However, in robustness analysis we
remove this language restriction. In the Florida Department of Education data, we have the full
population of students going to Florida public schools during the period 2002-2012. 8 Given our
identification strategy, in our analysis we select the sample for which (1) we have test scores and (2)


7 The race/ethnicity variables are collected by Florida Department of Education according to the following
categories: Hispanic/Latino of any race (Hispanic for brevity), American Indian or Alaska Native (classified
into "Others"), Asian, Black or African American (Black for brevity), Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
(classified into "Others"), White, Two or more races (classified into "Others"). FLDOE forces a choice
between White, Black, or Hispanic, so each student chooses a single identity. To qualify for free or reduced
lunch, the family income has to be respectively below 185% and 130% of the federal income poverty. Provision
2 schools establish claiming percentages and serve all meals at no charge for a 4-year period. For details, see
http://www.fns.usda.gov/school-meals/provisions-1-2-and-3. Categories for special education include
mentally handicapped, orthopedically, speech, language, or visually impaired, deaf or hard of hearing. It also
includes students with emotional or behavioral disabilities, with autistic spectrum disorder, and other forms of
serious disabilities (such as students with traumatic brain injuries). Maternal education data are reported in birth
vital records.
8 In Table A2 of the On-line Appendix, we report the descriptive statistics of the US-born students going to

private and public schools in Florida. Using Census 2000 data, we compare the population of immigrant
students attending public schools in Florida (93%) with those of the US-born (88%). US-born students, on
average, are exposed to immigrant children who have lower SES than themselves, independently from the
school setting: the family income of US-born students going to private (public) schools is $102,409 ($55,838),
while the income of immigrant students going to private (public) schools is $86,163 ($43,526). The patterns are
similar for 2010.

                                                         8
we can link school records to birth certificates. We report descriptive statistics for this sample in
Columns 1 to 3 of Table A1.A, in the Appendix. This sample contains 8,010,198 (7,490,949)
observations for reading (math) scores. 9 The US-born students with a birth certificate in the Florida
Department of Education data are slightly positively selected compared to all students attending
Florida public schools (standardized math and reading scores are 0.044 and 0.052). As our most
demanding specification makes use of family-year fixed effects, we further restrict this sample to
student-year observations in families with at least two children in the Florida public school system in
a given academic year. This sample consists of 1,789,450 student-year observations (columns 4 to 6,
Table A1.A). When we restrict the sample to US-born students speaking English at home (Table
A1.A), we obtain 6,341,333 observations (columns 7 to 9). From this sample, restricting to
observations in families with at least two children in school in a given academic year leads to 1,450,139
observations for reading scores and 1,347,287 for math scores (Columns 10 to 12 of Table A1.A).
Our final sample has similar standardized test scores to the original sample with birth certificates: 0.05
for math and 0.034 for reading.
    2.7      Characteristics of Immigrants
          Columns 1 to 3 of Table A1.B report the sample statistics for the immigrant students who go
to school with the sample of U.S. born students described in Columns 1 to 3 of Table A1.A. Immigrant
students' performance in math (-0.097) and reading (-0.206) is lower than the one of US-born students
(0.044 and 0.052). Immigrants are also poorer (68% are FRPL eligible) than US-born (54%) and vary
significantly in terms of racial background, language ability, and academic performance. In terms of
racial composition, most of them are Hispanic (61%), while among US-born students only 22% are
Hispanic. Immigrants are also more exposed to other immigrants (18% compared to US-born students
who are exposed to 8% of immigrants). Consistent with evidence in other domains where immigrants
tend to commit fewer crimes than non-immigrants (Nunn et al., 2018), immigrant students are
involved in fewer disciplinary incidents (0.121) than US-born students (0.137).
          In Columns 4 to 12 of Table A1.B, we report the statistics of immigrants corresponding to
the US-born students described in Columns 4-12 of Table A1.A to verify that our selection of US-
born students does not lead to a different composition of immigrants in schools. Restricting to the
sample of US-born students with siblings in school and to those speaking English at home does not


9
 The discrepancy between reading and math observations is due to the fact that Florida stopped testing high
school students after 2009-10 school year in math (when they transitioned to FCAT 2.0). Therefore, we have
reading scores for 9th and 10th graders in 2010-11 and 2011-12, but no math scores.

                                                    9
change the characteristics of the foreign-born students compared to the sample of Column 1 to 3 of
Table A1.B.
     2.8      US-born Students' Exposure to Immigrant Students
           In the sample used in our regressions, students have an average cumulative exposure to
immigrant students of 6%, but there is a lot of variation across schools. Figure 1 shows the distribution
of the fraction of immigrants by institution, grade, and year. Most schools tend to have a fraction of
immigrants lower than 10%; however, there is a non-trivial number of schools with a fraction of
immigrants larger than 20%. Figure 2 maps the geographical distribution of immigrants in our sample
and shows that the largest fractions tend to be concentrated in the southern part of the state. Figures
3A and 3B map schools in our sample divided by top and bottom decile in the distribution of
immigrants for the whole state and the Miami-Dade County school district. Although the largest
concentration appears to be in Miami-Dade, substantial variation also exists elsewhere.
           To understand whether exposure changes over time, in Figure 4 we plot the average
concentration of exposure for US-born students, across grades (Figure 4A) and by academic year
(Figure 4B). The average concentration by academic year appears to be stable, suggesting that there is
not an increase over time in cohorts of immigrants. Instead, Figure 4A shows that from grade 3 to 10,
there is an increase in the fraction of immigrants, either because many first generation immigrants
enroll in schools in higher grades (after immigrating) and/or because of lower dropout rates of
immigrants in higher grades.
           We then look at whether US-born students with a different racial or socio-economic
background experience exposure to a different share and composition of immigrants. We start by
splitting the sample of US-born students by race (Figure 5) and we observe a substantial gap in
exposure to foreign-born. White students experience the lowest exposure to immigrants (around 6%),
Hispanic students the largest (around 12%), and Black students somewhere in between (8%). Also,
FRPL eligible students see a larger fraction of immigrants than non-eligible students but the difference
is less pronounced than when we split the sample by race (Figure 6).
           Table 2 lists the top 10 countries of origin of immigrants in Florida facing our sample of US-
born students and facing the sub-samples of US-born divided by race. 10 The top 10 countries of origin
in the overall sample are all Latin American countries. Together they constitute 65% of the immigrant


10 Note that, as mentioned above, we consider models in which we treat Puerto Ricans, all of whom are US
citizens, either as "US-born" or as "immigrants". For the purposes of Table 2, we count Puerto Ricans as
"immigrants," so that the reader can gauge the share of Puerto Ricans in the overall Florida student population.

                                                      10
sample. For the school-specific cohorts where the majority of US-born students is White, Hispanic,
or Black the results vary. 11 In school-cohorts where the majority of US-born students are White,
Mexico represents the largest fraction (13%); in addition, several non-Latin American countries are at
the top of the distribution: Germany (5%), Canada (4%) and China (3%). In school-cohorts where
the majority of US-born students are Hispanic, immigrants come mostly from Latin American
countries, especially Cuba (46%). The 10 largest countries of origin represent 85% of the overall
immigrant distribution. Finally, in school-specific cohorts where the majority of US-born students are
Black, the largest fraction of immigrants comes from Haiti (41%) and Jamaica (13%), and 78% of the
immigrant exposure comes from 10 countries.
           In Table 3, we divide again the set of school-specific cohorts by the predominant ethnicity of
the US-born student sample and examine the racial/ethnic composition of the immigrants. In the
overall sample, US-born students are exposed to Hispanic immigrants (62%), followed by Black
immigrants (17%), and White immigrants (13%). However, there is a large heterogeneity in exposure
once we split the schools by predominant races/ethnicities. US-born students in predominantly White
schools are exposed to fewer Hispanic immigrants (46%), while White students are 29% and Asian
students 13%. Students attending predominantly Hispanic schools are exposed to 92% of immigrants
of Hispanic origin and a smaller fraction of Black and White students (each group constitutes only 3%
of the total immigrant distributions). Finally, students going to predominantly Black schools are
exposed to mostly Black immigrants (63%), followed by Hispanic (28%) and Asian immigrants (only
5%). Taken all together, these initial descriptive statistics show that US-born students are exposed to
different subgroups of immigrant peers, depending on their race and ethnicity.


     3. Empirical Analysis
     3.1      Main Results
            Tables 4 and 5 present our main results. We regress our outcomes of interest, standardized
test scores in math and reading,  , of a student i, attending school s, in grade g, during the academic




11
  There are 4,158 schools across all years in our main sample, and 3,676 have at least one foreign-born student
in one cohort. 61,836 school-specific cohorts out of 84,019 have at least one foreign-born student. Among the
61,836 school-specific cohorts with at least one foreign-born student, 27,067 school-specific cohorts have a
majority of White US-born students, 8,336 school-specific cohorts have a majority of Black US-born students,
while 6,326 school-specific cohorts have a majority of Hispanic US-born students. The remaining schools in
our sample have either a foreign-born majority or a US-born majority of another racial/ethnic group.

                                                      11
year t on   defined in equation (2). 12 Our most demanding specification is
the following:
      =  +    +   +  +  +  +                                                                          (3)
where  is a vector of individual characteristics, including gender, age in months, whether the
student is a special-education student, birth order fixed effects, race, and FRPL eligibility;  are
grade-year fixed effects and  are school-year fixed effects;  are family-year fixed effects. We
cluster the standard errors at the cohort-school level.
         In Column 1, we start by running a specification only controlling for the non-linear interaction
of grade-year fixed effects ( ) , school-year fixed effects ( ), and a limited set of individual
controls,  (age in months, gender, birth order fixed effects, and whether the student has some
special education needs). The results are consistent with the previous literature (Schwartz and Stiefel,
2011): a significant negative correlation between the share of immigrants and the natives' scholastic
performance both in mathematics and reading. The beta coefficient of cumulative immigrant exposure
for the math score regressions (-0.006) is smaller than the corresponding beta coefficient for the
reading score regressions (-0.01).
         In Column 2, to correct for possible selection, we introduce a specific measure of students'
SES (whether the student is FRPL eligible) and control for race. The correlation between standardized
test scores and fraction of immigrants becomes positive, albeit insignificant, for math, and remains
negative, but insignificant for reading. In Column 3 we add, as an additional proxy for SES, maternal
education (because this variable is missing for some observations, the number of observations is
slightly lower). The math coefficient is now positive and significant, albeit very small, and the reading
coefficient becomes positive, but statistically insignificant.
         These measures of SES do not fully control for the selection of US-born students who might
select schools with small fractions of poor and immigrant students. We improve upon this
specification by introducing a family fixed effect,  , and compare across siblings. 13 Our specification
provides an effective way to control for selection into schools by families to the extent that this



12 The math and reading scores are standardized using the entire population of students. To make sure that the
results are not driven by a compositional effect (e.g. all the immigrant students underperform vis-à-vis the US-
born students, mechanically increasing their score), in robustness analysis we repeat the same specification and
standardize scores using only our sample of US-born students. The results are substantially the same.
13 As we include family fixed effects, we remove the controls for race, lunch status, and mother's education.


                                                      12
selection is made at the family level and it is not done differentially for each child. 14 The cumulative
immigrant exposure coefficient becomes positive and statistically significant for both reading and
mathematics. Indeed, the beta coefficient more than triples between the specifications in Columns 3
and 4 in both regressions. In Column 5, we present our most robust specification where we interact
the family fixed effects with calendar year dummies,  , to control for life-cycle family trends in the
same year and the results do not change substantially.
        To illustrate how much variation is captured by the different fixed effects, 15 in Figure A1 we
plot the distribution of the residuals for the cumulative immigrant exposure with four different
models. In green, we plot the distribution of the demeaned exposure measure (Model 0), in red we
plot the distribution of the residuals for the model including school-year and grade-year fixed effects
(Model 1), in blue we plot the distribution of the residuals after partialling out school-year, grade-year,
and family fixed effects (Model 2), and in yellow the residuals for the specification including school-
year, grade-year, and family-year fixed effects (Model 3). While the family fixed-effects capture a good
part of the variation, a lot still remains to be explained, indicating that we are running a meaningful
model. Figures A2 and A3 in the Appendix show the remaining variation of our outcomes of interest
(math and reading scores respectively), after the inclusion of different sets of fixed effects. As for the
residual variation in immigrant exposures, we still have enough variation left to estimate our
parameters.
        To understand the economic magnitude of our effects, we compare our estimates to the
relationship between maternal education and student outcomes. The beta coefficient (0.0121) of
immigrant exposure in Column 5 is equal, for mathematics, to 8.5% of the difference in standardized
test scores between students whose mothers does not have a high school diploma and students whose
mother has an high school diploma (the beta coefficient in this case is 0.143). 16 The beta coefficient
of immigrant exposure on reading scores (0.0058) is lower than math and corresponds to 4% of the
difference in standardized test scores between students whose mother does not have a high school


14 We  will return to the assumption that the family does not choose different schools for each child, based on
their attitudes, later.
15
   In a recent working paper, Miller, Shenhav and Grosz (2019) show that the external validity of estimates
obtained relying on within-family variation might be limited, if the research design suffers from "selection into
identification." We provide descriptive evidence that our results are not likely suffering from selection into
identifcation. First, in Section 4.2 we will provide evidence that our treatment effects do not change based on
differences in school choice between siblings. Second, after partialling out family fixed effects, the distributions
of our treatment and outcome variables still show significant variation (Figures A1-A3).
16 The excluded groups are mothers who are high school dropouts.


                                                        13
diploma and students whose mother has an high school diploma. Another way to calculate the
economic significance is to compute the impact of moving from low cumulative exposure to high
cumulative exposure. Moving from the 10th to the 90th percentile in the distribution of cumulative
exposure (1% and 13%, respectively) would increase the score in mathematics and reading by 2.8%
and 1.7% of a standard deviation, respectively. 17 We also study whether these magnitudes are different
across grades by plotting the coefficient of the immigrant share interacted with grade in the baseline
specification (Figure A4). We do not find any significant statistical difference across grades.
        As mentioned in Section 3.2, we elected to present as our baseline specification a measure of
cumulative exposure in which last year's exposure is just as important as this year's exposure (a decay
parameter =0). However, we have estimated models with a wide variety of decay parameters, . We
find highly consistent estimated effects of immigrant exposure regardless of the value of , suggesting
that, in our specific application, the choice of  does not drive our findings; these results are presented
in Figure A5.
        Our results are also robust to four additional specifications. The first pertains the treatment
of Puerto Rican students. As discussed previously, we re-run our specification, excluding Puerto
Ricans from the immigrant groups. The results are reported in the Appendix Table A3 and A4 and
are consistent with our previous sample's findings and the beta coefficients have similar magnitudes.
The second robustness includes third grade scores as a control and recalculate the measure of
immigrant exposure from third grade to the current grade. In this specification, the beta coefficient of
immigrant exposure is virtually identical to the preferred specifications of columns 4 and 5 (Table A5).
In the third robustness, we re-run the specifications of Table 4, using a different definition of US-
born students, including students who do not speak English at home. The results are quantitatively
similar to our main specification for math and readings (Tables A6 and A7). Immigrants belong
disproportionally to racial minority groups, lower-SES families, and have limited English proficiency.
Our immigrant exposure may, in principle, be a proxy for these characteristics. To study whether the
presence of immigrants and the achievement of US-born students is reflecting these socioeconomic
characteristics of the immigrants, in Table A8, we present our fourth robustness where we saturate
our model introducing a vector of cumulative exposures to racial minority groups, FRPL eligible peers,

17
  Lavy and Schlosser (2011) study the peer effects of female students on students' academic achievements in
Israel. They find that a 20-percentage-points increase in the proportion of female students translates into 4-5%
of a standard deviation increase in test scores for both boys and girls in high-school. In our context, a standard
deviation increase in cumulative exposure to foreign-born peers roughly corresponds to a 5 percent increase in
female share in Lavy and Schlosser (2011).

                                                       14
and to peers with limited English proficiency. Specifically, analogously to our main measure of
exposure described in equation (2), we calculate cumulative exposures to groups of students based on
additional characteristics: race (Black, Asian, and Hispanic) and fraction of FRPL eligible students,
and with limited English proficiency. Even in this saturated specification, the coefficient on immigrant
cumulative exposure remains statistically significant, with a similar magnitude.
         Taken together, these results suggest the presence of a strong selection of US-born students
into and out of schools potentially tampering the interpretation of regression results that do not
control for sorting. To study whether this sorting is driven by specific sub-populations of US-born
students, in Tables 6 and 7, we split the sample by race/ethnicity and SES. In Tables 6A and 6B, we
divide the sample into White and Black students and examine their performance in mathematics. 18
The conditional correlation between immigrant exposure and the performance of White US-born
students is very similar to Table 4: without the inclusion of any family control, it is negative and
significant, but becomes positive and significant with the inclusion of family fixed effects (the inclusion
of family-year fixed effects reduces significance and size of the beta coefficient). The results for Black
students are very different: the conditional correlation between immigrants' exposure and
performance is stable and positive, independently of the controls included in the analysis. These results
are consistent with the existing literature on "white flight" that suggests that White families are more
likely to select into schools with a low fraction of minority and immigrant students (e.g., Betts and
Fairlie, 2003). On the contrary, US-born Black students do not select specifically into schools based
on immigrant shares.
        In Tables 7A and 7B, to further validate this interpretation, we separate higher and lower-SES
US-born students using FRPL eligibility. The results show that higher-SES students select into schools
with a lower fraction of immigrants: the effect of immigrants is negative and significant when family
controls are not included and becomes negligible and statistically insignificant, when family
background is accounted for. Conversely, the results for lower-SES students show that this group
does not suffer from self-selection issues, similarly to Black students, and the coefficient is positive
and significant in every specification. 19



18 We only consider the subsamples of Black and White students because the sub-samples of Asian and Hispanic
students are not large enough to estimate the coefficient of interest. The sub-sample of Hispanic students is
significantly reduced by the restriction we impose on the language spoken at home. The results are similar for
reading (see Table A9 in the Appendix).
19
   Similar results are obtained for reading tests (Tables A10 in the Appendix).

                                                     15
          Another important difference that emerges from Tables 6 and 7 is that the impact of
immigrant exposure has differential effects on different subgroups. Compared with the overall sample,
the effect of immigrant exposure is twice as large for Black and FRPL eligible students; while for
White and FRPL ineligible students the effect is null and not significant.
    3.2        Additional Compositional and Selection Issues
          While our most conservative estimate includes family-year fixed effects, which control for
family lifecycle changes, one worry is that the results are mostly driven by the subset of siblings who
go to different schools and by certain families whose children are very distant in years. To address this
possibility, we run our baseline regressions for the sub-sample of siblings attending the same school.
We first select families with only two children and then we divide this sample into those families whose
children go into the same school in a given year and those who do not. The first sub-sample has
siblings who are much closer in age, on average 20.1 versus 34 months. The results are presented in
Table A11. Column 1 repeats our preferred specification with the sub-sample of all families with only
two children, column 2 presents results with children going to the same school, and column 3 shows
results with children going to different schools. If anything, the results seem to be stronger for the
subsample of children going to the same school.
          It is worth noting that our sibling comparison approach relies on the assumption that families
make their school choice decisions independently of child-specific characteristics. By contrast, if
parents were to send the highest achieving child to a school with fewer immigrants, the estimated
coefficient on the share of immigrants would be downward biased. Alternatively, if parents have
egalitarian preferences as in Becker and Tomes (1976) and believe that exposure to low-SES students
and immigrants have a negative effect on their children performance, they may send the lower
achieving child to a school with fewer immigrants. In this case, the estimated coefficient could be
upward biased. Because school choice programs (e.g., open enrollment, charter schools) have become
increasingly popular in Florida during the time frame of our study, this is a real possibility in our
analysis.
            To address the within family selection, we design an instrumental variable strategy. Families
may select different schools for their children either by choosing a different school at the beginning
of the academic cycle, or because, after choosing the same initial school, they select an alternative path
for their children. We first address the latter case by accounting for possible family selections of
different school paths for siblings who started in the same initial school (in possibly different
years/grades). This sub-sample of students, roughly 67% of the sample, includes more stable families

                                                     16
who do not move. Indeed, this sample is highly selected along academic achievement and various
socio-economic characteristics. For the subset of siblings who go to the same initial school, the average
math score is 0.192, the fraction FRPL eligible is 45%, the fraction of White/Black students is
68%/22%. Maternal education is also higher for the students in this group: fewer students have
mother who dropped out of high school (15%), while more students have mothers who completed 4
years of college (24%). 20
        Using all the FLDOE data during 2002-2011, we construct for the whole population of
students a transition matrix from school to school (grade by grade). Then, for each student in our IV
sample, starting in a given initial school, we use the school-to-school transition matrix to calculate the
transition probabilities for each pair of consecutive grades. More formally, the transition matrix from
grade g to grade g+1, is given by:
                                         11 12 13 ... ... ... 1
                                        11 12 13 ... ... ... 1 
                                                                   
                                                                    
                             ( + 1|) =  .    .    .             .
                                                                    
                                        .    .    .             .   
                                        
                                         1   2
                                                3
                                                     ... ... ...    

        where  is the probability that a student in school k at grade g ends up in school j at grade
g+1, and  is the total number of schools in the sample.
        We then multiply these transition probabilities with the fraction of immigrants observed in
each potential school. Defining the set of different transition probabilities for the whole set of schools:
                                                                      11
                                            ( + 1|)( ×) 
                                                                      =0

and the fraction of foreign students in a given school-grade-academic year:

                                                              12   2011
                                          (, )( ×1)                
                                                              =0 =2002




20 In this IV estimation, we ignore the families who sends their kids to different initial schools. To study the
motives behind the decision of having the second child in a different school, we analyze the sample of families
with two children both attending elementary school (up to 5th grade) at the time in which the younger sibling
enrolls in first grade. Among these families, 69% chose the same identical first school for both siblings in grade
1; 24% sent the two siblings to a different first initial school, but the first school of the younger sibling is the
same as the current school of the older sibling. This latter statistic suggests that when the first initial school is
different across sibling, it is generally due to the decision of the family to transfer all children to a new school,
probably due to residential relocation, rather than due to a choice based on children attitudes. The remaining
7% go to a first school which is different from the contemporaneous school of the older sibling: this sample
has much worse educational attainment and lower SES. Since selection into schools seems to be a prerogative
of high-SES families, the exclusion of this group from this IV analysis does not seem problematic.

                                                         17
The predicted exposure at (, ) based on Markov chains for given (0 , 0 ) is given by:
                                                        -1

        (, )( ×1) =  [ (, )|(0 , 0 )] =   ( + 1|)                                      (, )( ×1)
                                                       =0
                                                                             ( × )

        Overall in our model, two siblings will have the same transition matrix but a different exposure
to immigrants depending on the specific cohort they are in. Since our sample only includes families
whose siblings started in the same school, we include grade time year and family by initial school fixed
effect (family by year fixed effect would capture the full variation in immigrant exposure).
        The bin scatters for the first stage, based on the unconditional model and the model including
family and initial school fixed effects are presented respectively in Figures 7A and 7B and provide
evidence that the first stage is strong. The small difference between the actual exposure and the
predicted exposure indicates that there is little within family selection in this sample. Table 8 further
confirms the lack of differential selection within the family by reporting the full results of the IV
together with the OLS and the reduced form for the same sample. The coefficient of immigrant
exposure in the OLS is positive and significant. The instrumental variable coefficient is almost identical
confirming that school choice is mostly done at the family level.
        This IV strategy does not address potential selection of families sending their children to
different initial schools and excludes children if they are the third born or higher. While our analysis
shows that most families who send their kids to different initial schools do so because the whole family
has relocated, we design an alternative IV strategy, which also includes families sending their children
to different initial schools. We use as an instrument the cumulative exposure the students would have
had if she had gone to the same school of her oldest sibling. 21 Our findings are consistent (Table A12
in the Appendix).


     4. Heterogeneity
        Tables 6 and 7 have shown that immigrant exposure effects are stronger for less affluent and
Black US-born students. One possible reason is that US-born students with different demographic
characteristics face immigrants that, in relative terms, perform better or worse than them. The relative
standing of immigrant students may drive some of the heterogeneous results. We examine this


21
  To construct this alternative instrument, we attach to the younger sibling the school of the older sibling in
the corresponding grade. Thus, we retain only the observations for which we observe siblings in the same grade.
Because of this restriction, we are more likely to select siblings that are close in years.

                                                      18
hypothesis by analyzing our two academic achievement outcomes (math and reading scores) and study
whether relative academic differences could be driving our results. In Table 9, we calculate the mean
of these two outcome variables for US-born students in our sample and for the corresponding groups
of immigrant students going to school with them. We repeat this exercise for different SES sub-
samples. In the first two columns of Table 9, we calculate the average math standardized scores. For
the overall sample, US-born students have an average math score of 0.05, while the performance of
the immigrant students going to the same school is lower, at 0.006. However, when we consider high-
and low-SES students, the relative performance of immigrant students is very different. Immigrants
going to school with FRPL ineligible US-born students have an average math score of 0.17,
substantially lower than the score of their US-born schoolmates (0.475), but much higher than the
average math score of the immigrants going to school with the US-born, FRPL eligible students (-
0.137). Yet, these latter immigrants outperform US-born, FRPL eligible students (-0.303). These
patterns are also reflected in the relative differences between White and Black US-born students and
the population of immigrants going to school with them. Reading scores show very similar trends.
These results suggests that part of the effect of immigrant exposure may be driven by average relative
differences in performance, especially for those groups of students whose immigrant schoolmates
outperform them (Black and FRPL eligible students where the majority of the effect is concentrated).
       According to the literature, academic performance can also be affected by the level of
disruption in the classroom. This effect could be driven by imitation or by an improved learning
environment (Lazear, 2001; Carrell and Hoekstra, 2010; Carrell, Hoekstra, and Kuka, 2018). We
measure disciplinary behavior using a dummy variable indicating whether the student was involved in
a disciplinary incident during the school year (serious offense, often resulting in an in-school or out-
of-school suspension). As for academic performance, the disadvantaged US-born students, who
benefit more from the presence of immigrants are, on average, exposed to students behaving better
than them, suggesting that one of the potential mechanisms could be exposure to less disruptive
students. On average, immigrants behave better (0.119) than their classmates (0.169). However, when
we split the data into sub-samples based on SES, we find again strong evidence of selection. FRPL
ineligible and White US­born students go to school with immigrants who behave better (respectively,
0.104 and 0.11) than the immigrants going to school with FRPL eligible and Black US-born students
(respectively, 0.131 and 0.142). Also, White and FRPL ineligible US-born students have fewer
disciplinary incidents (respectively, 0.105 and 0.074), on average, than the immigrants going to school



                                                  19
with them, while Black and FRPL eligible US-born students have substantially more disciplinary
incidents (respectively, 0.31 and 0.247) than their immigrant schoolmates.
        To study whether the academic performance of immigrants drives our results, we need to
address two major challenges. First, it is impossible to analyze the importance of the relative difference
between US-born students and their immigrant schoolmates because we do not observe the potential
performance of each US-born student in absence of their exposure to immigrant students. Second,
the reflection problem (Manski, 1993) prevents us from including the absolute performance of
immigrant students in the regression because it may be affected by the performance of US-born
students. To address the latter problem, we can substitute the absolute performance of immigrant
students with a measure of the average immigrant academic performance by country of origin. This
strategy relies on the assumption that the expected individual performance of a given immigrant is
well proxied by the average performance of the immigrants coming from the same country of origin.
Previous research suggests that the performance of immigrant students from the same country of
origin is similar, independently from the country of destination (Figlio et al., 2019). We use these
measures of expected academic performance to weight our cumulative exposure to immigrants and
add this immigrant performance index to our baseline regressions. 22
        Table 10 shows the results for math scores when we include this immigrant performance index
into our analysis. In our preferred specification, with the inclusion of family-year fixed effects (column
5), this weighted index has a positive and significant coefficient, with a very similar economic
magnitude to the immigrant exposure's coefficient (0.0113). The size of the immigrant exposure
coefficient does not change compared to our baseline specification. 23




22 Our immigrant performance index is given by  _ ×  , where
 is the average math performance in the overall FLDOE data by country of origin, , and
 _ is the sum of the share of immigrants in school , grade , at time  that each
US-born student  observes (the sum of the shares of immigrants is equal to one). The distribution of the
country of origin performances (plotted in Figure A6, Panel A in the Appendix) confirm large differences
among countries of origin. Immigrant exposure is negatively correlated (-0.22) with the immigrant performance
index (in areas where there are more immigrants, the average academic achievement of the immigrant is lower).
23 In our baseline specification, column 5 of Table 4, the beta coefficient is 0.0121. Note how without family

fixed effects, the immigrant performance index is three times larger than in the specification with family fixed
effects, probably capturing part of the selection into schools. Indeed, the inclusion of this variable reduces the
selection effect, as shown by comparing the coefficients of our main variable across specifications: the first
column of Table 4 had a negative and significant coefficient of immigrant exposure, while the equivalent
coefficient in the first column of Table 10 is positive and insignificant.

                                                       20
        To study the potential impact of disciplinary behavior of immigrants, Table 11 repeats the
same exercise by constructing an immigrant performance index based on the average disciplinary
behavior of the immigrants by country of origin. 24 Exposure to better-behaved immigrants has a
positive and significant effect on academic outcomes, albeit small (beta coefficient is -0.006). This
channel does not affect the direct impact of immigrant exposure: the beta coefficient of this variable
remains similar (0.011) to the baseline specification (0.0121). 25
        When we split the sample by SES (Tables 12A and 12B), we find some interesting results in
comparison to Tables 6 and 7. The immigrant performance index based on math scores has very
similar beta coefficient in both subsamples, suggesting that the absolute performance of the
immigrants has a consistent positive effect on all US-born students, while our main variable
(immigrant exposure) behaves exactly as in Tables 6 and 7: positive and significant for FRPL eligible
and Black students, null and insignificant for White and FRPL ineligible students. 26
        Overall, these results suggest that the presence of immigrants with higher academic
performance correlates with better scores of US-born students. Even after controlling for absolute
performance of immigrant students, a higher fraction of immigrants is still associated with higher
achievement of US-born students, concentrated among those students exposed to immigrants who,
in relative terms, perform better than they do. Remarkably, immigrant students do not negatively affect
US-born students, even when their academic achievement is relatively lower.


     5. Alternative Interpretations
        It is possible that when many immigrant students attend the same school, they are
"segregated" in special classes, for example because these students take remedial English classes while
US-born students attend separate classes with potentially better targeted resources. If this is true, our
results may simply reflect lower availability of resources in schools with fewer immigrants or may
coincide artificially with less exposure of US-born students to immigrants. To investigate if this is the
case, we make use of aggregate school-level measures of the classroom distribution of students,


24
   Lazear (2001) presents a disruption model of education in which individual disruption negatively affects the
production of education.
25 The distribution of the country of origin disciplinary behavior (Figure A6, Panel B in the Appendix) confirm

large differences among countries of origin. Immigrant exposure is positively correlated (0.16) with the
immigrant performance index based on disciplinary incidents (in areas where there are more immigrants, the
average behavior of the immigrants is better).
26 When we use the immigrant performance index based on disciplinary incidents, the results are very similar

(Table A13 in the Appendix).

                                                      21
provided by the Florida Department of Education. We calculate a measure of segregation for each
school, year, and grade:
                                                            
                            =                             -  
                                                          
                                                 

        where  is the number of foreign-born students in each classroom,  is the number
of foreign-born students in the school, year, and grade,  is the number of US-born students in
each classroom in the school,  is the number of US-born students in the school. We first
present in Figure A7 the correlation between the percentage of foreign-born students in the school,
year, grade, and the segregation index. Differently from the hypothesis above, the larger the fraction
of foreign-born students, the lower the amount of segregation. In Figure A8, we plot the histograms
of foreign-born exposure for those schools with segregation level above and below the median. In
Table A14, we present a regression analysis in which we explore whether segregation is potentially a
threat for our interpretation of the results. In column 1, we weight the cumulative exposure coefficient
by segregation and re-estimate the Column 5 model of Table 4 for math scores. The results show a
beta coefficient slightly smaller but not significantly different from our baseline regression. Then, we
compute the level of segregation in the contemporaneous school (columns 2 and 3) and in the first
school the student was enrolled in (columns 4 and 5) and we split into the subsample of schools with
above (columns 2 and 4) and below (columns 3 and 5) median segregation levels. Using these sub-
samples, we find that the positive effect of immigrant exposure is not concentrated in the schools with
higher segregation of immigrants. The beta coefficient is always higher in the sub-samples of schools
with lower segregation. Because these data are aggregate-level measures only, and not at the individual
level, we are unable to study other specific classroom effects, but the analyses we are able to conduct
with the available data invariably indicate that immigrant segregation within schools is not responsible
for our results.
        A second explanation is that presence of immigrants increases the overall school diversity in
cohorts with higher immigrant shares and our regression is indirectly capturing a positive impact of
diversity on learning. To study this hypothesis we create a measure of diversity based on race following
the literature on political economy (e.g., Alesina et al., 2003), as one minus the Herfindahl index of
students by race. We calculate this measure for the entire school population and compute its
cumulative counterpart, following equation (1). Table A15, column 1 presents the results adding this




                                                  22
diversity measure which is positive but not statistically significant. The coefficient of our measure of
immigrant exposure is unaffected.
        Another possibility is that a higher share of immigrants is proxying for higher diversity of
immigrants, and that it is the latter to be relevant for the academic achievement of the US-born
students. To address this possibility, following the same procedure as above, we calculate two
additional measures of diversity based on the population of immigrant students: one by race and the
other by country of origin. Columns 2 and 3 report regressions results where we include these controls
in our baseline. Both measures of diversity are positive and insignificant, and the coefficient of our
main explanatory variable is unaffected, ruling out the interpretation that immigrant exposure has an
impact on academic achievement through increased diversity.


    6. Conclusions
        We study the effect of exposure to immigrants on educational outcomes of US-born students
using a large panel combining population-level administrative data from the Florida Department of
Education Data Warehouse and birth records from the Florida Department of Vital Statistics. Our
data allow us to use a novel identification strategy to deal with school selection problems, comparing
the test scores in math and reading of siblings who experience different school-cohort-specific
immigrant concentrations, holding the heterogeneity of the families' life cycles fixed.
        Our main result points to a strong selection of US-born students into and out of schools
potentially tampering the interpretation of regression analysis that do not control for this sorting
mechanism. This selection problem is concentrated among White US-born and higher-SES students
consistently with the white flight literature: White native students are more likely to flee schools that
attract a large fraction of immigrants.
        Our identification strategy provides new results about the effects of immigrants on the
educational outcomes of US-born students: once selection is accounted for with family fixed effects,
the correlation between cumulative immigrant exposure and academic achievement of US-born
students is positive and significant. Moving from the 10th to the 90th percentile in the distribution of
cumulative exposure (1% and 13%, respectively) increases the score in mathematics and reading by
2.8% and 1.7% of a standard deviation, respectively. The effect is double in size for disadvantaged
students (Black and FRPL eligible students). For affluent students the effect is very small, suggesting
that immigrant students do not negatively affect US-born students, even when immigrants' academic
achievement is lower than the US-born schoolmates. Even after controlling for absolute performance

                                                   23
of immigrant students, a higher fraction of immigrants is still associated with higher achievement of
US-born students, concentrated among those students exposed to immigrants who, in relative terms,
perform better than they do. This finding suggests that our results may be driven by the relative
differences in performance and behavior of immigrants and their US-born schoolmates. Overall, the
presence of immigrants benefits disadvantaged US-born students and does not negatively affect
affluent US-born students.


       References
Alesina, A., A. Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat, and R. Wacziarg (2003) "Fractionalization."
       Journal of Economic Growth 8: 155-94.
Ashraf, Q., O. Galor, and M. Klemp (2015), "Heterogeneity and Productivity," Working Papers 2015-
       4, Brown University, Department of Economics.
Ballatore R., M. Fort, and A. Ichino (2018), "The Tower of Babel in the Classroom Immigrants and
       Natives in Italian Schools," Journal of Labor Economics.
Becker, G. and N. Tomes (1976), "Child Endowments and the Quantity and Quality of Children,"
       Journal of Political Economy 84: 143-162.
Betts, J., and R. Fairlie (2003) "Does Immigration Induce `Native Flight' from Public Schools into
       Private Schools?" Journal of Public Economics 87: 987­1012.
Bossavie, L. (2020), "The Effect of Immigration on Natives' School Performance: Does Length of
       Stay in the Host Country Matter?" Journal of Human Resources 55: 733-766
Brunello, G. and L. Rocco (2013), "The Effect of Immigration on the School Performance of Natives:
       Cross Country Evidence Using PISA Test Scores," Economics of Education Review 32: 234-246.
Card, D. (2001), "Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of
       Higher Immigration," Journal of Labor Economics 59: 22-64.
Carrell, S. and M. Hoekstra (2010), "Externalities in the Classroom: How Children Exposed to
       Domestic Violence Affect Everyone's Kids", American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2:
       211-228.
Carrell, S., M. Hoekstra, and E. Kuka (2018), "The Long-run Effects of Disruptive Peers", American
       Economic Review 108: 3377-3415.
Cascio, E. U., and E. G. Lewis (2012), "Cracks in the Melting Pot: Immigration, School Choice, and
       Segregation." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4 (3): 91-117.



                                                   24
Clotfelter, C., H. Ladd, and J. Vigdor (2006), "Teacher-Student Matching and the Assessment of
       Teacher Effectiveness," Journal of Human Resources 41: 778­820.
Clotfelter, C., H. Ladd, and J. Vigdor (2007), "How and Why Do Teacher Credentials Matter for
       Student Achievement?," Working paper 12828, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fairlie R. and A. Resch (2002), "Is there "White Flight" into Private Schools? Evidence from the
       National Educational Longitudinal Survey," Review of Economics and Statistics 84: 21­33.
Figlio, D., J. Guryan, K. Karbownik, and J. Roth (2014) "The Effects of Poor Neonatal Health on
       Children's Cognitive Development," American Economic Review 104: 3921-3955.
Figlio, D., P. Giuliano, U. Özek, and P. Sapienza (2019), "Long-Term Orientation and Educational
       Performance," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11: 272-309.
Figlio, D. and U. Özek (2019), "Unwelcome Guests? The Effects of Refugees on the Educational
       Outcomes of Incumbent Students," Journal of Labor Economics, 37 (4): 1061-1096.
Fix, M. and W. Zimmerman (1993) Educating Immigrant Children: Chapter I in the Changing City,
       Washington: Urban Institute Press.
Geay, C. , McNally, S. and Telhaj, S. (2013), "Nonnative Speakers of English in the Classroom: What
       Are the Effects on Pupil Performance?" Economic Journal 123: F281-F307.
Gould, E., Lavy, V. and Daniele Paserman, M. (2009), "Does Immigration Affect the LongTerm
       Educational Outcomes of Natives? QuasiExperimental Evidence," Economic Journal 119:
       1243-1269.
Hsin, A. and Y. Xie (2014), "Explaining Asian-Americans' Academic Advantage Over Whites,"
       PNAS, 111 (23), 8416-8421.
Hunt, J. (2016), "The Impact of Immigration on the Educational Attainment of Natives," Journal of
       Human Resources 52: 1060-1118.
Jensen, P. and A. Rasmussen (2011), "The Effect of Immigrant Concentration in Schools on Native
       and Immigrant Children's Reading and Math Skills," Economics of Education Review 30: 1503-
       1515,
Lavy, V. and A. Schlosser (2011), "Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender Peer Effects at School."
       American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3: 1­33.
Lazear, E. (2001), "Educational Production," Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 777-803.
Li, M. (2009), "Is There "White Flight" into Private Schools? New Evidence from High School and
       Beyond," Economics of Education Review 28: 382­392.


                                                  25
Manski, C. (1993). Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem. Review of
       Economic Studies 60: 531-542.
McHenry, P. (2015) "Immigration and the Human Capital of Natives." Journal of Human Resources 50:
       34­71.
Morales, N. C., Do Refugee Students Affect the Academic Achievement of Peers? Evidence from a
       Large      Urban   School       District   (November   16,    2020).    Available   at    SSRN:
       https://ssrn.com/abstract=3731794
Miller, D., N. Shenhav and M. Grosz (2019), "Selection into Identification in Fixed Effects Models
       with Application to Head Start," working paper 26174, National Bureau of Economic
       Research.
Neymotin, F. (2009), "Immigration and its Effect on the College-going Outcomes of Natives,"
       Economics of Education Review 28: 538­550.
Nunn, R., J. O'Donnell, and J. Shambaugh (2018) "A Dozen Facts about Immigration," The Hamilton
       Project.
Ohinata, A. and van Ours, J. C. (2013), "How Immigrant Children Affect the Academic Achievement
       of Native Dutch Children," Economic Journal 123: 308-331.
Ozek U. (forthcoming), Examining the Educational Spillover Effects of Severe Natural Disasters: The
       Case of Hurricane Maria, The Journal of Human Resources.
Rothstein, J. (2010), "Teacher Quality in Educational Production: Tracking, Decay, and Student
       Achievement," Quarterly Journal of Economics 125: 175-214.
Schneeweis N. (2015) "Immigrant Concentration in Schools: Consequences for Native and Migrant
       Students," Labour Economics 35: :63­76.
Schwartz, A. and Stiefel, L. (2011). Immigrants and Inequality in Public Schools. In Whither
       Opportunity?: Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children's Life Chances (pp. 419-441). Russell Sage
       Foundation.
Todd, P. and K. Wolpin (2003), "On the Specification and Estimation of the Production Function for
       Cognitive Achievement," Economic Journal 113: F3­ F33.
Tonello M. (2016), "Peer Effects of Non-native Students on Natives' Educational Outcomes:
       Mechanisms and Evidence," Empirical Economics 51: 383-414.
Van der Werf, C. (2021),"The Impact of Refugees on Native Students' Academic Achievement."
Louisiana State University, mimeo.



                                                    26
Figures




Figure 1: Distribution of foreign-born students as a share (a measure in the interval [0,1]) of the total
number of students across institution-grade-year cells. The y-axis refers to the fraction of observations
corresponding to values of the x-axis. The reference sample of US-born students is an unbalanced
longitudinal sample of US-born students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home
and have at least one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two students are
observed for each family.




                                                   27
Figure 2: Concentration of foreign-born students across school districts in Florida. For each district we
computed the percentage of foreign-born students over the total population of students across all years in
the sample. The distribution across districts has been split in deciles and each gradation of blue corresponds
to a decile in the distribution. Lighter blue indicates a lower percentage of foreign-born students, while
darker blue indicates a higher concentration. The reference sample of US-born students is an unbalanced
longitudinal sample of US-born students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home
and have at least one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two students are
observed for each family.




                                                     28
Figure 3A: Each dot in the map corresponds to one educational institution (a school). For each school we
computed the percentage of foreign-born students over the total population of students across all years in
the sample. The distribution across schools has been split in deciles and each gradation of blue corresponds
to a decile in the distribution. Lighter blue indicates a lower percentage of foreign-born students, while
darker blue indicates a higher concentration. The reference sample of US-born students is an unbalanced
longitudinal sample of US-born students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home
and have at least one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two students are
observed for each family.




                                                    29
Figure 3B: Each dot corresponds to an educational institution in the Miami-Dade school district. The
meaning of the color is the same as in Figure 3A, meaning that lighter colors correspond to lower deciles
in the distribution of foreign-born students concentration in the whole state of Florida. The size of the dots
corresponds to the size of the student body. The reference sample of US-born students is an unbalanced
longitudinal sample of US-born students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home
and have at least one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two students are
observed for each family.




                                                     30
Figure 4A: Using observations across the entire time span available in the data (2002-2011), we compute
the average share of foreign-born classmates for US-born English-speaking students, for each grade from
3 to 10. The reference sample of US-born students is an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born
students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using
observations in academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family.




                                                    31
Figure 4B: Using observations across the entire time span available in the data (2002-2011), we compute
the average share of foreign-born classmates for US-born English-speaking students, for each year from
2002 to 2011. The reference sample of US-born students is an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born
students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using
observations in academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family.




                                                    32
Figure 5: Using observations across the entire time span available in the data (2002-2011), we compute
the average share of foreign-born classmates for three major racial/ethnic groups of US-born English-
speaking students, for each grade from 3 to 10 The red line shows average exposures to foreign-born
students for White US-born students, the blue line shows an analogous figure for Black US-born students,
and the green line does exactly the same for Hispanic US-born students. The reference sample of US-born
students is an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who
speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least
two students are observed for each family.




                                                    33
Figure 6: Using observations across the entire time span available in the data (2002-2011), we compute
the average share of foreign-born classmates for two groups of US-born English-speaking students (namely,
those who are eligible for free or reduced-price lunch, and those who are not), for each grade from 3 to 10.
The red line shows average exposures to foreign-born students for US-born students who are not eligible
for free or reduced-price lunch, while the orange line shows the same average exposure for eligible US-
born students. The reference sample of US-born students is an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born
students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using
observations in academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family.




                                                    34
Figure 7A: This figure is a binned scatter plot that shows the raw correlation between the predicted
cumulative exposure to foreign-born students and the actual cumulative exposure. Please refer to the text
for details on the construction of the predicted cumulative exposure. The dashed line represents the 45-
degree locus, along which the two variables are identical. The reference sample of US-born students is an
unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English
at home. The sample is further restricted to students from families where all siblings attended the same
initial school (i.e. the first school a student is observed in).




                                                   35
Figure 7B: This figure is a binned scatter plot that shows the correlation between the predicted cumulative
exposure to foreign-born students and the actual cumulative exposure, conditional on family by initial
school Fixed Effects. Please refer to the text for details on the construction of the predicted cumulative
exposure. The dashed line represents the 45-degree locus, along which the two variables are identical. The
reference sample of US-born students is an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students observed
in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home. The sample is further restricted to students from
families where all siblings attended the same initial school (i.e. the first school a student is observed in).




                                                     36
                                                      Tables

          Variable                                       Observations    Mean        Std. Dev.

          Outcomes:

          Math Standardized Score                            1,347,287   0.050        0.993

          Reading Standardized Score                         1,450,139   0.034        0.992

          Incidents (ever involved in)                       1,450,139   0.169        0.375

          Explanatory variable of interest:

          Foreign-born Exposure                              1,347,287   0.060        0.052

          Individual or family characteristics:

          Female (Indicator)                                 1,347,287   0.498        0.500

          Age in Months                                      1,347,287   135.5         23.2

          Special Education (Indicator)                      1,347,287   0.147        0.354

          Birth Order                                        1,347,287   2.199        1.170

          White (Indicator)                                  1,347,287   0.603        0.489

          Black (Indicator)                                  1,347,287   0.297        0.457

          Hispanic (Indicator)                               1,347,287   0.052        0.223

          Asian (Indicator)                                  1,347,287   0.007        0.082

          Other (Indicator)                                  1,347,287   0.042        0.200

          Free/Reduced-Price Lunch (Indicator)               1,347,287   0.546        0.498

          Limited English Proficiency (Indicator)            1,347,287   0.002        0.043

          Mother High School Drop-out (Indicator)            1,344,542   0.200        0.400

          Mother High School Graduate (Indicator)            1,344,542   0.367        0.482

          Mother Some College (Indicator)                    1,344,542   0.239        0.426

          Mother 4-year College or more (Indicator)          1,344,542   0.194        0.396




Table 1: Summary statistics. Each variable is measured on observations such that the score in mathematics
is non missing; except the reading score and the incident variables, which are measured whenever available.
Cumulative exposure to foreign-born students (foreign-born exposure) is computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade. The acronyms
FRL and LEP indicate `Free/Reduced-price Lunch' and `Limited English Proficiency', respectively. All
statistics are computed on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students observed in grades from
3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using observations in academic years
in which at least two students are observed for each family.


                                                        37
              Overall            White Majority         Hispanic Majority                Black Majority
 1    Cuba              16%    Mexico        13%    Cuba                    46%    Haiti                   41%
 2    Mexico            10%    Puerto Rico     7%   Colombia                 9%    Jamaica                 13%
 3    Haiti             10%    Colombia        7%   Mexico                   7%    Mexico                   6%
 4    Colombia           8%    Germany         5%   Venezuela                6%    Puerto Rico              4%
 5    Puerto Rico        6%    Cuba            4%   Puerto Rico              4%    Cuba                     3%
 6    Venezuela          5%    Canada          4%   Honduras                 3%    Honduras                 3%
 7    Jamaica            3%    Haiti           3%   Dominican Republic       3%    Dominican Republic       2%
 8    Peru               3%    Venezuela       3%   Argentina                3%    The Bahamas              2%
 9    Argentina          2%    Brazil          3%   Peru                     3%    Colombia                 2%
 10   Honduras           2%    China           3%   Nicaragua                3%    Japan                    1%

 Top-10
 Cumulative             65%                  50%                            85%                            78%


Table 2: Top 10 countries of origin of immigrants in Florida facing our sample of US-born students.
White/Hispanic/Black majority indicates that only school-specific cohorts with more than 50% US-born of
that specific race/ethnicity are selected. The reference sample of US-born students is an unbalanced
longitudinal sample of US-born students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home
and have at least one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two students are
observed for each family. The cumulative percentages may not add up to the column total due to within-
cell rounding.




                     Overall             White Majority      Hispanic Majority         Black Majority
      1        Hispanic         62%   Hispanic        46%   Hispanic       92%      Black           63%
      2        Black            17%   White           29%   Black            3%     Hispanic        28%
      3        White            13%   Asian           13%   White            3%     Asian             5%

      Top-3 Cumulative          91%                   88%                    98%                    95%


Table 3: Top racial/ethnic groups of immigrants in Florida facing our sample of US born students.
White/Hispanic/Black majority indicates that only school-specific cohorts with more than 50% US-born of
that specific race/ethnicity are selected. All statistics are computed on an unbalanced longitudinal sample
of US-born students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one
sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family.
The cumulative percentages may not add up to the column total due to within-cell rounding.




                                                      38
                                                Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)

                                         (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)

             Foreign-born Exposure    -0.123**       0.019      0.077*     0.293***    0.229***
                                       (0.053)      (0.042)     (0.040)     (0.054)     (0.074)

             Individual Controls          X            X           X           X             X
             School x Year FE             X            X           X           X             X
             Grade x Year FE              X            X           X           X             X
             Race FE                                   X           X
             Lunch Status                              X           X
             Mother's Education FE                                 X
             Family FE                                                         X
             Family x Year FE                                                                X

             Observations            1,347,287     1,347,287   1,344,542   1,347,287   1,347,287
             R-squared                 0.302         0.359       0.379       0.682       0.769

             Mean LHS                  0.0504       0.0504      0.0510      0.0504         0.0504
             SD LHS                     0.993        0.993       0.993       0.993          0.993
             Mean RHS                  0.0604       0.0604      0.0604      0.0604         0.0604
             SD RHS                    0.0523       0.0523      0.0523      0.0523         0.0523
             Standardized
             Coefficient              -0.00648      0.00102     0.00406     0.0154         0.0121


Table 4: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in mathematics standardized by
year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, and several
controls. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students observed in
grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using observations in
academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family. Individual controls include:
gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects. Lunch status is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. Mother's education fixed effects are
three dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school diploma, some college, or
a four-year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      39
                                                Reading standardized score (3rd-10th grade)

                                          (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)

             Foreign-born Exposure     -0.194***       -0.026      0.040     0.176***     0.110*
                                         (0.049)      (0.039)     (0.037)     (0.048)     (0.064)

             Individual Controls           X             X           X           X              X
             School x Year FE              X             X           X           X              X
             Grade x Year FE               X             X           X           X              X
             Race FE                                     X           X
             Lunch Status                                X           X
             Mother's Education FE                                   X
             Family FE                                                           X
             Family x Year FE                                                                   X

             Observations              1,450,139    1,450,139    1,447,279   1,450,139   1,450,139
             R-squared                   0.303        0.356        0.377       0.667       0.752

             Mean LHS                   0.0340        0.0340      0.0345      0.0340          0.0340
             SD LHS                      0.992         0.992       0.992       0.992           0.992
             Mean RHS                   0.0614        0.0614      0.0614      0.0614          0.0614
             SD RHS                     0.0528        0.0528      0.0528      0.0528          0.0528
             Standardized
             Coefficient                -0.0103      -0.00138     0.00214     0.00934     0.00583




Table 5: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in reading standardized by year
and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of foreign-
born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, and several controls. All
regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students observed in grades from 3rd
to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using observations in academic years in
which at least two students are observed for each family. Individual controls include: gender, age in months,
special education, and birth order fixed effects. Lunch status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student
is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. Mother's education fixed effects are three dummy variables equal
to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school diploma, some college, or a four-year college or more,
respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       40
                                                 Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                                    Sample restriction: Race = 'White'
                                         (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)

             Foreign-born Exposure    -0.610***      -0.395***   -0.261***    0.213***       0.128
                                        (0.064)        (0.061)     (0.058)     (0.075)      (0.107)

             Individual Controls          X              X            X           X           X
             School x Year FE             X              X            X           X           X
             Grade x Year FE              X              X            X           X           X
             Race FE                                     X            X
             Lunch Status                                X            X
             Mother's Education FE                                    X
             Family FE                                                            X
             Family x Year FE                                                                 X

             Observations              811,790        811,790     810,559     811,790       811,790
             R-squared                  0.263          0.284       0.312       0.671         0.764

             Mean LHS                   0.305          0.305        0.305       0.305        0.305
             SD LHS                     0.911          0.911        0.911       0.911        0.911
             Mean RHS                  0.0531         0.0531       0.0531      0.0531       0.0531
             SD RHS                    0.0470         0.0470       0.0470      0.0470       0.0470
             Standardized
             Coefficient               -0.0314        -0.0204      -0.0135     0.0110       0.00661


Table 6A: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in mathematics standardized
by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, and several
controls. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born White students observed
in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using observations in
academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family. Individual controls include:
gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects. Lunch status is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. Mother's education fixed effects are
three dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school diploma, some college, or
a four-year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       41
                                              Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                                 Sample restriction: Race = 'Black'
                                          (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)       (5)

               Foreign-born Exposure   0.517***   0.500***   0.481***    0.450***   0.402***
                                        (0.067)    (0.066)    (0.065)     (0.097)    (0.137)

               Individual Controls         X          X          X          X           X
               School x Year FE            X          X          X          X           X
               Grade x Year FE             X          X          X          X           X
               Race FE                                X          X
               Lunch Status                           X          X
               Mother's Education FE                             X
               Family FE                                                    X
               Family x Year FE                                                         X

               Observations             399,586    399,586    398,269    399,586    399,586
               R-squared                 0.266      0.273      0.283      0.593      0.716

               Mean LHS                 -0.495     -0.495      -0.495     -0.495     -0.495
               SD LHS                    0.951      0.951       0.951      0.951      0.951
               Mean RHS                 0.0663     0.0663      0.0664     0.0663     0.0663
               SD RHS                   0.0522     0.0522      0.0522     0.0522     0.0522
               Standardized
               Coefficient              0.0283     0.0274      0.0264     0.0246     0.0220


Table 6B: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in mathematics standardized
by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, and several
controls. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of Black US-born students, observed
in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using observations in
academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family. Individual controls include:
gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects. Lunch status is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. Mother's education fixed effects are
three dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school diploma, some college, or
a four-year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                    42
                                             Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                       Sample restriction: Lunch Status = No Free/Reduced-price
                                        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)

            Foreign-born Exposure     -0.460***   -0.424***   -0.296***      -0.002      -0.034
                                        (0.067)     (0.065)     (0.061)     (0.080)     (0.113)

            Individual Controls           X           X           X            X           X
            School x Year FE              X           X           X            X           X
            Grade x Year FE               X           X           X            X           X
            Race FE                                   X           X
            Lunch Status                              X           X
            Mother's Education FE                                 X
            Family FE                                                          X
            Family x Year FE                                                               X

            Observations              611,698      611,698     610,918     611,698      611,698
            R-squared                  0.218        0.235       0.270       0.672        0.763

            Mean LHS                    0.475       0.475        0.475       0.475       0.475
            SD LHS                      0.867       0.867        0.867       0.867       0.867
            Mean RHS                   0.0601      0.0601       0.0601      0.0601      0.0601
            SD RHS                     0.0520      0.0520       0.0520      0.0520      0.0520
            Standardized
            Coefficient                -0.0276     -0.0254     -0.0178      -0.0001    -0.00202


Table 7A: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in mathematics standardized
by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, and several
controls. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students not eligible for
free or reduced-price lunch, observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at
least one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two students are observed for each
family. Individual controls include: gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects.
Lunch status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch.
Mother's education fixed effects are three dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a
high school diploma, some college, or a four-year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in
parenthesis clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                     43
                                              Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                         Sample restriction: Lunch Status = Free/Reduced-price
                                          (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)

               Foreign-born Exposure   0.368***    0.283***   0.301***    0.452***    0.399***
                                        (0.053)     (0.050)    (0.049)     (0.074)     (0.102)

               Individual Controls         X           X          X           X           X
               School x Year FE            X           X          X           X           X
               Grade x Year FE             X           X          X           X           X
               Race FE                                 X          X
               Lunch Status                            X          X
               Mother's Education FE                              X
               Family FE                                                      X
               Family x Year FE                                                           X

               Observations             735,589    735,589     733,624     735,589     735,589
               R-squared                 0.250      0.280       0.293       0.620       0.728

               Mean LHS                  -0.303     -0.303      -0.302     -0.303      -0.303
               SD LHS                     0.952      0.952       0.952      0.952       0.952
               Mean RHS                  0.0607     0.0607      0.0607     0.0607      0.0607
               SD RHS                    0.0525     0.0525      0.0525     0.0525      0.0525
               Standardized
               Coefficient               0.0203     0.0156      0.0166     0.0250      0.0220


Table 7B: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in mathematics standardized
by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, and several
controls. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students eligible for free
or reduced-price lunch, observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least
one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two students are observed for each
family. Individual controls include: gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects.
Lunch status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch.
Mother's education fixed effects are three dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a
high school diploma, some college, or a four-year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in
parenthesis clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



                                                     44
                                             Sample restriction: siblings who go to the same initial school
                                                     Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                               (1)                        (3)                       (5)
                                               IV                     Red. Form                    OLS

 Foreign-born Exposure                       0.319**                                            0.338***
                                             (0.155)                                             (0.068)
 Foreign-born Exposure (Predicted)                                    0.139**
                                                                      (0.067)

 Individual controls                            X                        X                          X
 Year x Grade FE                                X                        X                          X
 Family x Initial School FE                     X                        X                          X

 Observations                                821,892                  821,892                    821,892
 R-squared                                      -                      0.668                      0.668

 Dependent Variable (mean)                    0.192                    0.192                      0.192
 Dependent Variable (sd)                      0.954                    0.954                      0.954
 RHS (mean)                                   0.062                    0.066                      0.062
 RHS (sd)                                     0.055                    0.052                      0.055
 Standardized coefficient                     0.018                    0.008                      0.019


Table 8: This table shows results on the instrumental variable approach described in the text. Column (1)
presents the Two Stage Least Square coefficient, Column (2) presents the reduced form coefficient, and
Column (3) shows the OLS version of the coefficient. The construction of the predicted Foreign-born
exposure is described in the text. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born
students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one sibling. The
sample is further restricted to students from families where all siblings attended the same initial school (i.e.
the first school a student is observed in). Individual controls include: gender, age in months, special
education, and birth order fixed effects. Lunch status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible
for free or reduced-price lunch. Year x grade FEs are indicators for each unique year-grade combination.
Family x Initial school FEs are indicators for each unique family-initial school combination. Robust
standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       45
                                               Math         Score   Reading      Score    Incidents
                                               (Standardized)       (Standardized)        (indicator)
                                               Obs.        Mean     Obs.         Mean     Obs.          Mean
sample: Whole sample
US-born speaking English                       1,347,287   0.050    1,450,139    0.034    1,450,139     0.169
Immigrants who go to school with those above   948,590     0.006    1,025,267    -0.071   948,590       0.119

sample: White US born students
US-born speaking English                       811,790     0.305    873,281      0.288    873,281       0.105
Immigrants who go to school with those above   788,626     0.093    861,388      0.026    862,803       0.110

sample: Black US born students
US-born speaking English                       399,586     -0.495   430,975      -0.511   430,975       0.310
Immigrants who go to school with those above   763,358     -0.180   837,098      -0.275   838,408       0.142

sample: No-Free/Reduced price lunch US born
US-born speaking English                       611,698     0.475    658,656      0.459    658,656       0.074
Immigrants who go to school with those above   817,046     0.170    892,540      0.101    893,879       0.104

sample: Free/Reduced price lunch US born
US-born speaking English                       735,589     -0.303   791,483      -0.319   791,483       0.247
Immigrants who go to school with those above   899,632     -0.137   976,310      -0.220   977,931       0.131


Table 9: This table shows descriptive statistics of test scores and incident rates across different subset of
students. In particular, it shows the mean of each variable for the sample of US-born students speaking
English, and for the foreign-born students who are in the same school-cohort. These statistics are shown
first for the entire sample of US-born students and then for four different subsets, based on reported race
and free lunch eligibility.




                                                      46
                                                      Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)

                                              (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)           (5)

          Foreign-born Exposure              0.007        0.085**    0.122***    0.294***    0.216***
                                            (0.052)       (0.042)     (0.040)     (0.055)     (0.077)
          Immigrant performance index
          (Math score)                     0.308***      0.152***    0.106***    0.036***    0.040***
                                            (0.009)       (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.008)

          Individual Controls                  X             X           X           X             X
          School x Year FE                     X             X           X           X             X
          Grade x Year FE                      X             X           X           X             X
          Race FE                                            X           X
          Lunch Status                                       X           X
          Mother's Education FE                                          X
          Family FE                                                                  X
          Family x Year FE                                                                         X

          Observations                    1,279,001      1,279,001   1,276,539   1,279,001   1,279,001
          R-squared                         0.305          0.360       0.381       0.687       0.777

          Mean LHS                          0.0579         0.0579      0.0585     0.0579         0.0579
          SD LHS                             0.993          0.993       0.993      0.993          0.993
          Mean RHS                          0.0633         0.0633      0.0633     0.0633         0.0633
          SD RHS                            0.0520         0.0520      0.0520     0.0520         0.0520
          Standardized Coefficient         0.000379       0.00445     0.00640     0.0154         0.0113


Table 10: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in mathematics standardized
by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, a cumulative
index of foreign-born peers' math performance (computed as the average performance index across
previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade), and several controls. A school-cohort index
of foreign-born performance is computed as a weighted average of country-specific mean math test scores,
weighted by the share of students from a given country, in a given school-specific cohort. All regressions
are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who
speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least
two students are observed for each family. Individual controls include: gender, age in months, special
education, and birth order fixed effects. Lunch status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible
for free or reduced-price lunch. Mother's education fixed effects are three dummy variables equal to 1 if
the mother of the student has a high school diploma, some college, or a four-year college or more,
respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                        47
                                                    Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)

                                            (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)            (5)

         Foreign-born Exposure           -0.100*         0.032      0.086**    0.286***        0.209***
                                         (0.052)        (0.042)     (0.040)     (0.055)         (0.077)
         Immigrant performance index
         (Behavior)                     -1.919***     -0.864***    -0.588***   -0.182***   -0.222***
                                          (0.066)       (0.050)      (0.048)     (0.044)     (0.059)

         Individual Controls                X              X           X           X              X
         School x Year FE                   X              X           X           X              X
         Grade x Year FE                    X              X           X           X              X
         Race FE                                           X           X
         Lunch Status                                      X           X
         Mother's Education FE                                         X
         Family FE                                                                 X
         Family x Year FE                                                                         X

         Observations                   1,279,001      1,279,001   1,276,539   1,279,001   1,279,001
         R-squared                        0.304          0.360       0.380       0.687       0.777

         Mean LHS                         0.0579        0.0579       0.0585     0.0579          0.0579
         SD LHS                            0.993         0.993        0.993      0.993           0.993
         Mean RHS                         0.0633        0.0633       0.0633     0.0633          0.0633
         SD RHS                           0.0520        0.0520       0.0520     0.0520          0.0520
         Standardized Coefficient        -0.00524      0.00170      0.00448     0.0150          0.0110


Table 11: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in mathematics standardized
by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, a cumulative
index of foreign-born peers' behavioral performance (computed as the average performance index across
previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade), and several controls. A school-cohort index
of foreign-born behavioral performance is computed as a weighted average of country-specific average
likelihood of being involved in a disciplinary incident, weighted by the share of students from a given
country, in a given school-specific cohort. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of
US-born students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one
sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family.
Individual controls include: gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects. Lunch
status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. Mother's
education fixed effects are three dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school
diploma, some college, or a four-year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis
clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      48
                                                 Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                           Sample restriction: Lunch Status = No Free/Reduced-price
                                             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)

         Foreign-born Exposure           -0.374***    -0.351***    -0.243***     -0.017      -0.061
                                           (0.067)      (0.065)      (0.062)    (0.082)     (0.117)
         Immigrant performance index
         (Math score)                    0.192***     0.160***     0.106***    0.028***    0.035***
                                          (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.009)     (0.013)

         Individual Controls                 X            X            X           X           X
         School x Year FE                    X            X            X           X           X
         Grade x Year FE                     X            X            X           X           X
         Race FE                                          X            X
         Lunch Status                                     X            X
         Mother's Education FE                                         X
         Family FE                                                                 X
         Family x Year FE                                                                      X

         Observations                     587,588      587,588     586,877      587,588     587,588
         R-squared                         0.219        0.236       0.271        0.675       0.769

         Mean LHS                           0.480        0.480        0.480       0.480       0.480
         SD LHS                             0.867        0.867        0.867       0.867       0.867
         Mean RHS                          0.0624       0.0624       0.0624      0.0624      0.0624
         SD RHS                            0.0518       0.0518       0.0518      0.0518      0.0518
         Standardized Coefficient         -0.0224      -0.0209      -0.0145     -0.00100    -0.00362


Table 12A: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in mathematics standardized
by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, a cumulative
index of foreign-born peers' math performance (computed as the average performance index across
previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade), and several controls. A school-cohort index
of foreign-born performance is computed as a weighted average of country-specific mean math test scores,
weighted by the share of students from a given country, in a given school-specific cohort. All regressions
are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students not eligible for free or reduced-price
lunch, observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using
observations in academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family. Individual
controls include: gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects. Lunch status is a
dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. Mother's education
fixed effects are three dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school diploma,
some college, or a four-year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered
by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                     49
                                         Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                         Sample restriction: Lunch Status = Free/Reduced-price
                                         (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)

          Foreign-born Exposure          0.451***    0.340***    0.342***     0.452***    0.386***
                                         (0.053)     (0.050)     (0.049)      (0.076)     (0.107)
          Immigrant performance index
          (Math score)                   0.191***    0.126***    0.096***     0.038***    0.040***
                                         (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.011)

          Individual Controls            X           X           X            X           X
          School x Year FE               X           X           X            X           X
          Grade x Year FE                X           X           X            X           X
          Race FE                                    X           X
          Lunch Status                               X           X
          Mother's Education FE                                  X
          Family FE                                                           X
          Family x Year FE                                                                X

          Observations                   691,413     691,413     689,662      691,413     691,413
          R-squared                      0.251       0.280       0.294        0.627       0.739

          Mean LHS                       -0.301      -0.301      -0.301       -0.301      -0.301
          SD LHS                         0.952       0.952       0.952        0.952       0.952
          Mean RHS                       0.0641      0.0641      0.0642       0.0641      0.0641
          SD RHS                         0.0522      0.0522      0.0522       0.0522      0.0522
          Standardized Coefficient       0.0247      0.0186      0.0188       0.0248      0.0212


Table 12B: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in mathematics standardized
by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, a cumulative
index of foreign-born peers' math performance (computed as the average performance index across
previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade), and several controls. A school-cohort index
of foreign-born performance is computed as a weighted average of country-specific mean math test scores,
weighted by the share of students from a given country, in a given school-specific cohort. All regressions
are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students eligible for free or reduced-price lunch,
observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using
observations in academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family. Individual
controls include: gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects. Lunch status is a
dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. Mother's education
fixed effects are three dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school diploma,
some college, or a four-year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered
by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                    50
Appendix
Tables

                                                                         All US-Born                                                   English-speaking US-born
                                                      All observations                  2+ siblings per year                    All observations                  2+ siblings per year

                                                (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)        (7)          (8)         (9)       (10)         (11)       (12)

 Variable                                    Obs.           Mean     Std. Dev.   Obs.           Mean     Std. Dev.     Obs.           Mean     Std. Dev.   Obs.          Mean      Std. Dev.

 Outcomes:
 Math Standardized Score                     7,490,949      0.044        0.971   1,662,403      0.043          0.986   5,924,346      0.071        0.969   1,347,287     0.050        0.993

 Reading Standardized Score                  8,010,198      0.052        0.968   1,789,450      0.016          0.983   6,341,333      0.096        0.967   1,450,139     0.034        0.992

 Incidents (ever involved in)                8,010,198      0.143        0.350   1,789,450      0.162          0.368   6,341,333      0.149        0.356   1,450,139     0.169        0.375



 Explanatory variable of interest:
 Foreign-born Exposure                       7,490,949      0.079        0.070   1,662,403      0.074          0.067   5,924,346      0.065        0.057   1,347,287     0.060        0.052



 Individual or family characteristics:
 Female (Indicator)                          7,490,949      0.495        0.500   1,662,403      0.498          0.500   5,924,346      0.495        0.500   1,347,287     0.498        0.500

 Age in Months                               7,490,949      131.9         23.6   1,662,403      135.4           23.2   5,924,346      132.1         23.6   1,347,287     135.5           23.2

 Special Education (Indicator)               7,490,949      0.138        0.345   1,662,403      0.145          0.352   5,924,346      0.139        0.346   1,347,287     0.147        0.354

 Birth Order                                 7,490,949      1.985        1.142   1,662,403      2.201          1.179   5,924,346      1.973        1.123   1,347,287     2.199        1.170

 White Student (Indicator)                   7,490,949      0.493        0.500   1,662,403      0.509          0.500   5,924,346      0.601        0.490   1,347,287     0.603        0.489

 Black (Indicator)                           7,490,949      0.225        0.418   1,662,403      0.271          0.444   5,924,346      0.255        0.436   1,347,287     0.297        0.457

 Hispanic (Indicator)                        7,490,949      0.217        0.412   1,662,403      0.165          0.371   5,924,346      0.082        0.274   1,347,287     0.052        0.223

 Asian (Indicator)                           7,490,949      0.020        0.141   1,662,403      0.014          0.116   5,924,346      0.013        0.112   1,347,287     0.007        0.082

 Other (Indicator)                           7,490,949      0.045        0.207   1,662,403      0.041          0.198   5,924,346      0.049        0.217   1,347,287     0.042        0.200

 Free/Reduced-Price Lunch (Indicator)        7,490,186      0.536        0.499   1,662,403      0.579          0.494   5,923,759      0.486        0.500   1,347,287     0.546        0.498

 Limited English Proficiency (Indicator)     7,490,949      0.038        0.190   1,662,403      0.019          0.136   5,924,346      0.004        0.066   1,347,287     0.002        0.043

 Mother High School DO (Indicator)           5,219,361      0.224        0.417   1,658,296      0.219          0.414   4,164,506      0.194        0.395   1,344,542     0.200        0.400

 Mother High School Graduate (Indicator)     5,219,361      0.376        0.484   1,658,296      0.365          0.481   4,164,506      0.381        0.486   1,344,542     0.367        0.482

 Mother Some College (Indicator)             5,219,361      0.234        0.423   1,658,296      0.232          0.422   4,164,506      0.249        0.432   1,344,542     0.239        0.426

 Mother 4-year College or more (Indicator)   5,219,361      0.166        0.372   1,658,296      0.185          0.388   4,164,506      0.176        0.381   1,344,542     0.194        0.396




Table A1.A: Summary statistics of US born students. All statistics are computed on an unbalanced sample
of students born between 1994 and 2002, observed in any grade between 3 and 10. Each variable is
measured on observations such that the score in mathematics is non-missing; except the reading score and
the incident variables, which are measured whenever available. Columns 1-6 show summary statistics
computed on the entire sample of observations of US-born students in (columns 1-3), and on the restricted
sample of observations such that at least two siblings are observed in a given year in (4-6). In columns 7-
12 we do the same exercise for US-born students speaking English. Columns (10-12) contain our main
sample and it is identical to Table 1 in the text. Cumulative exposure to foreign-born students (foreign-born
exposure) is computed as the average share of foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts
including the current grade.




                                                                                        1
                                                        Foreign-born peers of all US-Born                                  Foreign-born peers of English-speaking US-born

                                                  All observations               US-fam. 2+ siblings per year               All observations               US-fam. 2+ siblings per year

                                           (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)           (7)         (8)        (9)           (10)        (11)       (12)

 Variable                                  Obs.       Mean       Std. Dev.     Obs.        Mean       Std. Dev.     Obs.        Mean       Std. Dev.     Obs.        Mean       Std. Dev.

 Outcomes:

 Math Standardized Score                   875,990    -0.097           1.109   854,867     -0.093           1.107   875,585     -0.097           1.109   830,857     -0.087        1.106

 Reading Standardized Score                946,117    -0.206           1.142   924,771     -0.202           1.141   945,642     -0.206           1.142   900,324     -0.195        1.138

 Incidents (ever involved in)              946,117     0.127           0.333   924,771       0.128          0.335   945,642      0.126           0.333   900,324      0.130        0.337



 Explanatory variable of interest:

 Foreign-born Exposure                     875,990     0.176           0.107   854,867       0.176          0.107   875,585      0.176           0.107   830,857      0.173        0.106



 Individual or family characteristics:

 Female (Indicator)                        875,990     0.490           0.500   854,867       0.490          0.500   875,585      0.490           0.500   830,857      0.490        0.500

 Age in Months                             875,990     137.8            25.8   854,867       138.4           25.6   875,585      137.8            25.8   830,857      139.0            25.6

 Special Education (Indicator)             875,990     0.087           0.282   854,867       0.087          0.282   875,585      0.087           0.282   830,857      0.087        0.282

 Birth Order                               875,990     2.160           1.355   854,867       2.154          1.359   875,585      2.160           1.355   830,857      2.157        1.360

 White (Indicator)                         875,990     0.131           0.337   854,867       0.130          0.336   875,585      0.131           0.337   830,857      0.133        0.339

 Black (Indicator)                         875,990     0.166           0.372   854,867       0.166          0.372   875,585      0.166           0.372   830,857      0.169        0.374

 Hispanic (Indicator)                      875,990     0.614           0.487   854,867       0.614          0.487   875,585      0.614           0.487   830,857      0.607        0.488

 Asian (Indicator)                         875,990     0.068           0.252   854,867       0.068          0.252   875,585      0.068           0.252   830,857      0.070        0.255

 Other (Indicator)                         875,990     0.022           0.145   854,867       0.021          0.145   875,585      0.022           0.145   830,857      0.022        0.146

 Free/Reduced-Price Lunch (Indicator)      875,829     0.682           0.466   854,708       0.682          0.466   875,424      0.682           0.466   830,704      0.677        0.467

 Limited English Proficiency (Indicator)   875,990     0.321           0.467   854,867       0.318          0.466   875,585      0.321           0.467   830,857      0.315        0.464




Table A1.B: Summary statistics of immigrant students. The summary statistics displayed are computed on
the sample of foreign-born peers going to school with different groups of US-born students. Columns 1-3
shows summary statistics computed on the sample of foreign-born peers of all US-born students. Columns
4-6 shows the same statistics for the restricted sample of observations of foreign-born peers going to school
with US-born students in families such that at least two siblings are observed in a given year. In columns
7-12 we repeat the same exercise after restricting to foreign-born peers going to school with US-born
students speaking English at home. Cumulative exposure to foreign-born students (foreign-born exposure)
is computed as the average share of foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including
the current grade. Each variable is measured on observations such that the score in mathematics is non-
missing; except the reading score variable, which is measured for observations such that the reading score
is non missing.




                                                                                         2
                                              Panel A: Enrollment in Public School
                           US born students                     1st generation        2nd generation
                           Obs.      Mean                      Obs.       Mean       Obs.       Mean


                                                       Census 2000 (5%)


          Kindergarten     6,415     82.29%                    646        84.83%     2,582     81.14%
          Grade 1 to 4     26,500    86.69%                    3,279      93.44%     9,438     86.76%
          Grade 5 to 8     26,581    87.86%                    4,477      93.52%     8,244     87.58%
          Grade 9 to 12    21,813    90.58%                    5,289      93.67%     6,576     87.61%


          Overall sample   81,309    87.77%                   13,691      93.15%     26,840    86.68%


                                                       Census 2010 (1%)


          Kindergarten     1,147     82.65%                     91        74.73%      632      83.23%
          Grade 1 to 4     4,556     85.45%                    557        89.77%     2,301     88.57%
          Grade 5 to 8     5,047     85.56%                    855        90.64%     2,036     87.18%
          Grade 9 to 12    4,726     87.85%                    1,114      92.91%     1,861     88.07%


          Overall sample   15,476    86.01%                    2,617      90.87%     6,830     87.53%


                                                 Panel B: Family Income (USD)
                           US born students                      1st generation       2nd generation
                           Obs.      Mean                      Obs.       Mean       Obs.       Mean


                                                       Census 2000 (5%)


          Public school    71,364    55,838                   12,648      43,526     23,264    52,842
          Private school   9,945    102,409                    928        86,163     3,576     106,669


          Overall sample   81,309    61,534                   13,576      46,441     26,840    60,014


                                                       Census 2010 (1%)


          Public school    13,311    71,906                    2,372      54,343     5,978     65,630
          Private school   2,165    123,921                    238        115,190     852      136,119


          Overall sample   15,476    79,183                    2,610      59,892     6,830     74,423

Table A2: This table reports the fraction of students by grade and family income enrolled in public and
private schools in Florida. The data are based on Census 2000 and 2010 and report the statistics for US-
born students, first generation and second generation immigrant students. "2nd generation" is identified as
having at least the mother or the father born abroad.




                                                               3
                                                            Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)

                                                   (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)

Foreign-born Exposure                            -0.001      0.087**       0.124***      0.321***      0.250***
                                                 (0.055)     (0.044)        (0.042)       (0.056)       (0.077)

Individual Controls                                X             X             X             X            X
School x Year FE                                   X             X             X             X            X
Grade x Year FE                                    X             X             X             X            X
Race FE                                                          X             X
Lunch Status                                                     X             X
Mother's Education FE                                                          X
Family FE                                                                                    X
Family x Year FE                                                                                          X



Observations                                    1,347,287   1,347,287      1,344,542     1,347,287     1,347,287
R-squared                                         0.302       0.359          0.379         0.682         0.769

Mean LHS                                         0.0504      0.0504         0.0510        0.0504        0.0504
SD LHS                                            0.993       0.993          0.993         0.993         0.993
Mean RHS                                         0.0563      0.0563         0.0563        0.0563        0.0563
SD RHS                                           0.0504      0.0504         0.0504        0.0504        0.0504
Standardized Coefficient                        -4.74e-05    0.00443        0.00627       0.0163        0.0127

Table A3: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in mathematics standardized
by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students (excluding Puerto-Rican students),
computed as the average share of foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including
the current grade, and several controls. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of
US-born students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one
sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family.
Individual controls include: gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects. Lunch
status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. Mother's
education fixed effects are three dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school
diploma, some college, or a four-year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis
clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                    4
                                                            Reading standardized score (3rd-10th grade)

                                                   (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)

Foreign-born Exposure                            -0.059         0.055        0.099**       0.210***        0.139**
                                                 (0.052)       (0.041)       (0.039)        (0.050)        (0.067)

Individual Controls                                X              X             X              X             X
School x Year FE                                   X              X             X              X             X
Grade x Year FE                                    X              X             X              X             X
Race FE                                                           X             X
Lunch Status                                                      X             X
Mother's Education FE                                                           X
Family FE                                                                                      X
Family x Year FE                                                                                             X

Observations                                    1,450,139     1,450,139     1,447,279      1,450,139      1,450,139
R-squared                                         0.303         0.356         0.377          0.667          0.752

Mean LHS                                         0.0340        0.0340        0.0345         0.0340        0.0340
SD LHS                                            0.992         0.992         0.992          0.992         0.992
Mean RHS                                         0.0572        0.0572        0.0572         0.0572        0.0572
SD RHS                                           0.0508        0.0508        0.0508         0.0508        0.0508
Standardized Coefficient                        -0.00304       0.00282       0.00507        0.0108        0.00710

Table A4: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in reading standardized by
year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students (excluding Puerto-Rican students),
computed as the average share of foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including
the current grade, and several controls. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of
US-born students observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one
sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family.
Individual controls include: gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects. Lunch
status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. Mother's
education fixed effects are three dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school
diploma, some college, or a four-year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis
clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                    5
                                                 Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)

                                          (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)

             Foreign-born Exposure     0.073**      0.118***    0.148***    0.245***    0.190***
                                       (0.030)       (0.029)     (0.029)     (0.034)     (0.046)
             Math Score in 3rd
             Grade                    0.764***      0.742***    0.732***    0.657***    0.656***
                                       (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.002)

             Individual Controls          X             X           X           X             X
             School x Year FE             X             X           X           X             X
             Grade x Year FE              X             X           X           X             X
             Race FE                                    X           X
             Lunch Status                               X           X
             Mother's Education FE                                  X
             Family FE                                                          X
             Family x Year FE                                                                 X

             Observations             1,275,020     1,275,020   1,272,415   1,275,020   1,275,020
             R-squared                  0.687         0.691       0.693       0.788       0.867

             Mean LHS                   0.0558       0.0558      0.0564      0.0558         0.0558
             SD LHS                      0.987        0.987       0.987       0.987          0.987
             Mean RHS                   0.0652       0.0652      0.0652      0.0652         0.0652
             SD RHS                     0.0574       0.0574      0.0574      0.0574         0.0574
             Standardized
             Coefficient               0.00426       0.00685     0.00862     0.0142         0.0110


Table A5 This table shows estimates from models equivalent to those reported in Table 4, except that (i)
the score in mathematics in 3rd grade is included as an explanatory variable; (ii) the sample is restricted to
a subset of observations that exclude the 3rd grade. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by
school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       6
                                              Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                       Sample: US born students speaking any language at home
                                         (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)

             Foreign-born Exposure    -0.226***      0.003     0.086***    0.230***    0.161***
                                        (0.042)     (0.033)     (0.032)     (0.044)     (0.061)

             Individual Controls          X            X           X           X           X
             School x Year FE             X            X           X           X           X
             Grade x Year FE              X            X           X           X           X
             Race FE                                   X           X
             Lunch Status                              X           X
             Mother's Education FE                                 X
             Family FE                                                         X
             Family x Year FE                                                              X

             Observations             1,662,403    1,662,403   1,658,296   1,662,403   1,662,403
             R-squared                  0.289        0.342       0.360       0.675       0.763

             Mean LHS                   0.0430      0.0430      0.0437       0.0430      0.0430
             SD LHS                      0.986       0.986       0.986        0.986       0.986
             Mean RHS                   0.0744      0.0744      0.0744       0.0744      0.0744
             SD RHS                     0.0666      0.0666      0.0666       0.0666      0.0666
             Standardized
             Coefficient               -0.0153     0.000216     0.00578      0.0155      0.0109


Table A6: This table shows estimates from models equivalent to those reported in Table 4, except that the
sample of US-born students is not restricted based on language spoken at home. This table shows the
estimates of a linear regression of test scores in mathematics standardized by year and grade on the
cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of foreign-born students
across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, and several controls. All regressions
are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students (speaking any language at home)
observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who have at least one sibling, using observations in academic years in
which at least two students are observed for each family. Individual controls include: gender, age in months,
special education, and birth order fixed effects; lunch status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is
eligible for free or reduced-price lunch; mother's education fixed effects are three dummy variables equal
to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school diploma, some college, or a four-year college or more,
respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      7
                                              Reading standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                       Sample: US born students speaking any language at home
                                          (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)

             Foreign-born Exposure    -0.372***    -0.064**      0.026     0.227***    0.169***
                                        (0.039)     (0.032)     (0.030)     (0.039)     (0.052)

             Individual Controls          X           X           X            X           X
             School x Year FE             X           X           X            X           X
             Grade x Year FE              X           X           X            X           X
             Race FE                                  X           X
             Lunch Status                             X           X
             Mother's Education FE                                X
             Family FE                                                         X
             Family x Year FE                                                              X

             Observations             1,789,450   1,789,450   1,785,147   1,789,450   1,789,450
             R-squared                  0.292       0.341       0.361       0.661       0.746

             Mean LHS                  0.0158       0.0158      0.0165      0.0158      0.0158
             SD LHS                     0.983        0.983       0.983       0.983       0.983
             Mean RHS                  0.0756       0.0756      0.0756      0.0756      0.0756
             SD RHS                    0.0672       0.0672      0.0672      0.0672      0.0672
             Standardized
             Coefficient               -0.0254     -0.00440    0.00177      0.0155      0.0115


Table A7: This table shows estimates from models equivalent to those reported in Table 5, except that the
sample of US-born students is not restricted based on language spoken at home. This table shows the
estimates of a linear regression of test scores in reading standardized by year and grade on the cumulative
exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of foreign-born students across previous
school-specific cohorts including the current grade, and several controls. All regressions are run on an
unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students (speaking any language at home) observed in grades
from 3rd to 10th, who have at least one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two
students are observed for each family. Individual controls include: gender, age in months, special education,
and birth order fixed effects; lunch status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free
or reduced-price lunch; mother's education fixed effects are three dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother
of the student has a high school diploma, some college, or a four-year college or more, respectively. Robust
standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      8
                                                     Math stdz score        Reading stdz score
                                                            Sample: 3rd to 10th grade
                                                           (1)                     (2)

              Foreign-born Exposure                       0.357***              0.209***
                                                           (0.080)               (0.070)
              Blacks' Exposure                             -0.069*             -0.130***
                                                           (0.038)               (0.032)
              Hispanics' Exposure                          -0.086*               -0.050
                                                           (0.050)               (0.044)
              Asians' Exposure                             0.321**              0.459***
                                                           (0.129)               (0.118)
              Free-Lunch Exposure                        -0.244***             -0.229***
                                                           (0.033)               (0.030)
              Limited English Proficiency Exposure          -0.079             -0.128***
                                                           (0.053)               (0.047)

              Observations                               1,347,287             1,450,139
              R-squared                                    0.769                 0.752

              Mean LHS                                    0.050                   0.034
              SD LHS                                      0.993                   0.992
              Mean RHS                                    0.060                   0.061
                                                          0.052                   0.053
              Standardized coefficient                    0.019                   0.011


Table A8: This table shows estimates from models equivalent to those reported in column 5 of Table 4 and
Table 5, but adding controls for other exposures. Column (1) shows the estimates of a linear regression of
test scores in mathematics standardized by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born
students, computed as the average share of foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts
including the current grade, and several individual controls. Additionally, it includes controls for the
cumulative exposure to Black students, the cumulative exposure to Hispanic students, the cumulative
exposure to Asian students, the cumulative exposure to students enrolled in the Free Lunch program, and
the cumulative exposure to students enrolled in the Limited English Proficiency program. Column (2)
shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in reading standardized by year and grade on the
cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of foreign-born students
across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, and several individual controls.
Additionally, it includes controls for the cumulative exposure to Black students, the cumulative exposure
to Hispanic students, the cumulative exposure to Asian students, the cumulative exposure to students
enrolled in the Free Lunch program, and the cumulative exposure to students enrolled in the Limited English
Proficiency program. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students
speaking English at home, observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who have at least one sibling, using
observations in academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family. Individual
controls include: gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects; lunch status is a
dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch; mother's education
fixed effects are three dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school diploma,
some college, or a four-year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered
by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                     9
                                               Reading standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                                    Sample restriction: Race = 'White'
                                           (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)       (5)

             Foreign-born Exposure     -0.759***    -0.528***    -0.378***     0.044       -0.009
                                         (0.062)      (0.059)      (0.056)    (0.073)     (0.099)

             Individual Controls           X            X            X           X           X
             School x Year FE              X            X            X           X           X
             Grade x Year FE               X            X            X           X           X
             Race FE                                    X            X
             Lunch Status                               X            X
             Mother's Education FE                                   X
             Family FE                                                           X
             Family x Year FE                                                                X

             Observations               873,281      873,281      872,002     873,281     873,281
             R-squared                   0.247        0.266        0.294       0.643       0.738

             Mean LHS                     0.288        0.288        0.288       0.288      0.288
             SD LHS                       0.933        0.933        0.933       0.933      0.933
             Mean RHS                    0.0539       0.0539       0.0539      0.0539     0.0539
             SD RHS                      0.0473       0.0473       0.0473      0.0473     0.0473
             Standardized
             Coefficient                -0.0385      -0.0268      -0.0191     0.00224    -0.000439


Table A9_A: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in reading standardized by
year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, and several
controls. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born White students, observed
in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using observations in
academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family. Individual controls include:
gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects; lunch status is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch; mother's education fixed effects are three
dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school diploma, some college, or a four-
year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       10
                                                Reading standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                                     Sample restriction: Race = 'Black'
                                            (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)

               Foreign-born Exposure     0.563***    0.551***   0.533***    0.371***    0.286***
                                          (0.059)     (0.058)    (0.058)     (0.082)     (0.110)

               Individual Controls           X           X          X           X           X
               School x Year FE              X           X          X           X           X
               Grade x Year FE               X           X          X           X           X
               Race FE                                   X          X
               Lunch Status                              X          X
               Mother's Education FE                                X
               Family FE                                                        X
               Family x Year FE                                                             X

               Observations              430,975     430,975     429,598     430,975     430,975
               R-squared                  0.286       0.296       0.307       0.593       0.707

               Mean LHS                   -0.511      -0.511      -0.511      -0.511      -0.511
               SD LHS                      0.904       0.904       0.904       0.904       0.904
               Mean RHS                   0.0677      0.0677      0.0677      0.0677      0.0677
               SD RHS                     0.0528      0.0528      0.0527      0.0528      0.0528
               Standardized
               Coefficient                0.0328      0.0322      0.0311      0.0217      0.0167


Table A9_B: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in reading standardized by
year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, and several
controls. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born Black students, observed
in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using observations in
academic years in which at least two students are observed for each family. Individual controls include:
gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects; lunch status is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch; mother's education fixed effects are three
dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school diploma, some college, or a four-
year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       11
                                               Reading standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                         Sample restriction: Lunch Status = No Free/Reduced-price
                                           (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)

             Foreign-born Exposure     -0.460***    -0.424***    -0.296***     -0.002     -0.034
                                         (0.067)      (0.065)      (0.061)    (0.080)     (0.113)

             Individual Controls           X            X            X           X           X
             School x Year FE              X            X            X           X           X
             Grade x Year FE               X            X            X           X           X
             Race FE                                    X            X
             Lunch Status                               X            X
             Mother's Education FE                                   X
             Family FE                                                           X
             Family x Year FE                                                                X

             Observations               611,698      611,698      610,918     611,698     611,698
             R-squared                   0.218        0.235        0.270       0.672       0.763

             Mean LHS                     0.475       0.475        0.475        0.475       0.475
             SD LHS                       0.867       0.867        0.867        0.867       0.867
             Mean RHS                    0.0601      0.0601       0.0601       0.0601      0.0601
             SD RHS                      0.0520      0.0520       0.0520       0.0520      0.0520
             Standardized                                                                     -
             Coefficient                -0.0276      -0.0254      -0.0178    -9.63e-05    0.00202


Table A10_A: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in reading standardized
by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, and several
controls. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students ineligible for
free or reduced-price lunch, observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at
least one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two students are observed for each
family. Individual controls include: gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects;
lunch status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch; mother's
education fixed effects are three dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school
diploma, some college, or a four-year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis
clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      12
                                               Reading standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                          Sample restriction: Lunch Status = Free/Reduced-price
                                           (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)

               Foreign-born Exposure     0.368***   0.283***    0.301***   0.452***    0.399***
                                          (0.053)    (0.050)     (0.049)    (0.074)     (0.102)

               Individual Controls          X           X           X          X           X
               School x Year FE             X           X           X          X           X
               Grade x Year FE              X           X           X          X           X
               Race FE                                  X           X
               Lunch Status                             X           X
               Mother's Education FE                                X
               Family FE                                                       X
               Family x Year FE                                                            X

               Observations              735,589     735,589    733,624     735,589     735,589
               R-squared                  0.250       0.280      0.293       0.620       0.728

               Mean LHS                   -0.303     -0.303      -0.302      -0.303     -0.303
               SD LHS                      0.952      0.952       0.952       0.952      0.952
               Mean RHS                   0.0607     0.0607      0.0607      0.0607     0.0607
               SD RHS                     0.0525     0.0525      0.0525      0.0525     0.0525
               Standardized
               Coefficient                0.0203     0.0156      0.0166      0.0250     0.0220


Table A10_B: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in reading standardized
by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, and several
controls. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students eligible for free
or reduced-price lunch, observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least
one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two students are observed for each
family. Individual controls include: gender, age in months, special education, and birth order fixed effects;
lunch status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch; mother's
education fixed effects are three dummy variables equal to 1 if the mother of the student has a high school
diploma, some college, or a four-year college or more, respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis
clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      13
                                   Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)


                                                          (1)       (2)          (3)
                         Sample                           All     Same        Different
                                                                  school       School

                         Foreign-born Exposure        0.199**    0.243**        0.173
                                                      (0.082)    (0.114)       (0.108)

                         Individual Controls              X         X            X
                         School x Year FE                 X         X            X
                         Grade x Year FE                  X         X            X
                         Family x Year FE                 X         X            X

                         Observations                1,118,170   425,816      692,354
                         R-squared                     0.785      0.770        0.795

                         Mean LHS                     0.0928      0.0666        0.109
                         SD LHS                        0.980       0.985        0.977
                         Mean RHS                     0.0607      0.0599       0.0611
                         SD RHS                       0.0528      0.0538       0.0523
                         Standardized Coefficient     0.0107      0.0132      0.00928


Table A11: This table shows estimates from a model equivalent to the one reported in column (5) of Table
4 with a different sample selection. In column (1), we include only observations of siblings in families with
exactly 2 siblings in a given year. In column (2), among the observations used in column (1), we select only
observations of siblings going to the same school in a given year. In column (3), among the observations
used in column (1), we select only observations of siblings going to different schools in a given year. Robust
standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                     14
                                               Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                            (1)                  (2)                   (3)
                                             IV              Red. Form                OLS

 Foreign-born Exposure                   0.515***                                   0.221***
                                          (0.110)                                    (0.067)
 Foreign-born Exposure
 (Predicted)                                                  0.280***
                                                               (0.060)

 Grade x Year FE                             X                    X                    X
 School x Year FE                            X                    X                    X
 Family FE                                   X                    X                    X

 Observations                            854,191               854,191              854,191
 R-squared                                  -                   0.688                0.688

 Mean LHS                                  0.149                0.149                0.149
 SD LHS                                    0.974                0.974                0.974
 Mean RHS                                  0.060                0.062                0.060
 SD RHS                                    0.052                0.054                0.052
 Standardized coefficient                  0.028                0.016                0.012

 First stage (coefficient)               0.545***                 -                     -
 First stage (se)                         (0.005)                 -                     -


Table A12: This table shows results on the instrumental variable approach using as instrument for foreign-
born exposure the exposure that the student would have had if she/he had attended the same school attended
by the eldest sibling in the given grade. Column (1) presents the Two Stage Least Square coefficient,
Column (2) presents the reduced form coefficient, and Column (3) shows the OLS version of the coefficient.
All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal sample of US-born students observed in grades from
3rd to 10th, who speak English at home and have at least one sibling. We further restrict the sample by
excluding households with twins, and children whose firstborn sibling is not in our sample for a given
grade. Each observation is a student-year. Individual controls include: gender, age in months, special
education, and birth order fixed effects. Lunch status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible
for free or reduced-price lunch. Grade x year FEs are indicators for each unique year-grade combination.
School x year FEs are indicators for each unique school-year combination. All columns also include a
family FE. At the bottom of column (1) we report the coefficient and standard error for the variable Foreign-
born exposure in the first stage of the 2SLS estimation. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by
cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      15
                                                  Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                            Sample restriction: Lunch Status = No Free/Reduced-price
                                             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)

         Foreign-born Exposure            -0.424***    -0.392***   -0.271***     -0.020      -0.065
                                            (0.067)      (0.065)     (0.062)     (0.082)     (0.117)
         Immigrant performance index
         (Behavior)                       -0.107***    -0.105***   -0.096***   -0.080***    -0.088***
                                            (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.004)

         Individual Controls                  X            X           X            X           X
         School x Year FE                     X            X           X            X           X
         Grade x Year FE                      X            X           X            X           X
         Race FE                                           X           X
         Lunch Status                                      X           X
         Mother's Education FE                                         X
         Family FE                                                                  X
         Family x Year FE                                                                       X

         Observations                      587,588     587,588      586,877     587,588      587,588
         R-squared                          0.219       0.236        0.271       0.675        0.769

         Mean LHS                            0.480        0.480       0.480       0.480       0.480
         SD LHS                              0.867        0.867       0.867       0.867       0.867
         Mean RHS                           0.0624       0.0624      0.0624      0.0624      0.0624
         SD RHS                             0.0518       0.0518      0.0518      0.0518      0.0518
         Standardized Coefficient          -0.0253      -0.0234     -0.0162     -0.00122    -0.00386


Table A13_A: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in mathematics
standardized by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the
average share of foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade,
a cumulative index of foreign-born peers' behavioral performance (computed as the average performance
index across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade), and several controls. A school-
cohort index of foreign-born behavioral performance is computed as a weighted average of country-specific
average likelihood of being involved in a disciplinary incident, weighted by the share of students from a
given country, in a given school-specific cohort. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal
sample of US-born students not eligible for free or reduced-price lunch observed in grades from 3rd to 10th,
who speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at
least two students are observed for each family. Individual controls include: gender, age in months, special
education, and birth order fixed effects. Lunch status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible
for free or reduced-price lunch. Mother's education fixed effects are three dummy variables equal to 1 if
the mother of the student has a high school diploma, some college, or a four-year college or more,
respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      16
                                                  Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                              Sample restriction: Lunch Status = Free/Reduced-price
                                              (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)        (5)

         Foreign-born Exposure            0.376***     0.291***    0.305***     0.442***     0.377***
                                           (0.053)      (0.050)     (0.049)      (0.076)      (0.107)
         Immigrant performance index
         (Behavior)                       -0.106***    -0.099***   -0.091***    -0.050***   -0.064***
                                            (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.004)

         Individual Controls                  X            X           X            X            X
         School x Year FE                     X            X           X            X            X
         Grade x Year FE                      X            X           X            X            X
         Race FE                                           X           X
         Lunch Status                                      X           X
         Mother's Education FE                                         X
         Family FE                                                                  X
         Family x Year FE                                                                        X

         Observations                      691,413     691,413      689,662      691,413     691,413
         R-squared                          0.251       0.280        0.293        0.627       0.739

         Mean LHS                           -0.301      -0.301       -0.301      -0.301       -0.301
         SD LHS                              0.952       0.952        0.952       0.952        0.952
         Mean RHS                           0.0641      0.0641       0.0642      0.0641       0.0641
         SD RHS                             0.0522      0.0522       0.0522      0.0522       0.0522
         Standardized Coefficient           0.0206      0.0160       0.0167      0.0243       0.0207


Table A13_B: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in mathematics
standardized by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the
average share of foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade,
a cumulative index of foreign-born peers' behavioral performance (computed as the average performance
index across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade), and several controls. A school-
cohort index of foreign-born behavioral performance is computed as a weighted average of country-specific
average likelihood of being involved in a disciplinary incident, weighted by the share of students from a
given country, in a given school-specific cohort. All regressions are run on an unbalanced longitudinal
sample of US-born students eligible for free or reduced-price lunch observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who
speak English at home and have at least one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least
two students are observed for each family. Individual controls include: gender, age in months, special
education, and birth order fixed effects. Lunch status is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is eligible
for free or reduced-price lunch. Mother's education fixed effects are three dummy variables equal to 1 if
the mother of the student has a high school diploma, some college, or a four-year college or more,
respectively. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      17
                                                   Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)

                                          (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)
                                                        Segregation: current
                                                                                  Segregation: first school
                                                              school
                                                        High           Low          High           Low

 Foreign-born Exposure                                 0.296        0.368***        0.213        0.304**
                                                      (0.198)        (0.134)       (0.201)       (0.151)
 Foreign-born Exposure (weighted)     0.264***
                                       (0.096)

 Individual Controls                      X               X             X             X              X
 School x Year FE                         X               X             X             X              X
 Grade x Year FE                          X               X             X             X              X
 Family x Year FE                         X               X             X             X              X

 Observations                         1,347,103       681,801       656,548        674,090       670,528
 R-squared                              0.769          0.849         0.858          0.859         0.859
 Mean LHS                               0.050          0.032         0.078          0.089         0.012
 SD LHS                                 0.993          0.984         0.997          0.975         1.010
 Mean RHS                               0.037          0.042         0.079          0.052         0.069
 SD RHS                                 0.038          0.036         0.060          0.042         0.060
 Standardized coefficient               0.010          0.011         0.022          0.009         0.018


Table A14: This table shows the estimates of a linear regression of test scores in mathematics standardized
by year and grade on the cumulative exposure to foreign-born students, computed as the average share of
foreign-born students across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade, and several
controls. In Column 1, share of foreign-born students is weighted by a segregation index computed at the
school-specific cohort level. In Columns 2 to 5 we estimate the same model as in Table 4 (Column 5),
except that we divide the sample based on the segregation index being above or below the median. In
Columns 2 and 3 the segregation index is computed in the current school, while in Columns 4 and 5 the
relevant segregation index is the one of the initial school in which the student is observed in our data. See
the text for details about the construction of the segregation index. All regressions are run on an unbalanced
longitudinal sample of US-born students, observed in grades from 3rd to 10th, who speak English at home
and have at least one sibling, using observations in academic years in which at least two students are
observed for each family. Individual controls include: gender, age in months, special education, and birth
order fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1.




                                                     18
                                              Math standardized score (3rd-10th grade)
                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)

                     Diversity dimension:       Race            Race         Country
                     Population diversity:       All        Foreign-Born   Foreign-Born

                     Foreign-born Exposure    0.225***       0.228***       0.210***
                                               (0.076)        (0.077)        (0.079)
                     Diversity Exposure         0.009          0.008          0.013
                                               (0.030)        (0.011)        (0.010)

                     Individual Controls          X              X              X
                     School x Year FE             X              X              X
                     Grade x Year FE              X              X              X
                     Family x Year FE             X              X              X

                     Observations             1,347,289      1,318,366      1,318,366
                     R-squared                  0.769          0.772          0.772

                     Mean LHS                  0.0504         0.0516         0.0516
                     SD LHS                     0.993          0.994          0.994
                     Mean RHS                  0.0604         0.0618         0.0618
                     SD RHS                    0.0523         0.0521         0.0521
                     Standardized
                     Coefficient               0.0118         0.0120         0.0110


Table A15: This table shows estimates from three specifications analogous to Column (5) in Table 4,
including as explanatory variables three different proxies of diversity exposure calculated as the average
exposure across previous school-specific cohorts including the current grade. In Column 1, the diversity
index is 1 minus the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) for the overall sample of students computed on
different reported racial groups. In Column 2 and 3, the diversity index is 1 minus the Herfindahl-Hirschman
Index (HHI) calculated only on the sample of foreign-born students based on race (Column 2) and country
of origin (Column 3). Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by school-cohort. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       19
Figures




Figure A1: Distribution of cumulative exposure to foreign-born students and its residuals. Model 0 refers
to the demeaned distribution (i.e., the raw distribution centered at zero). Model 1 is the distribution of
residuals after conditioning on school-year and grade-year Fixed Effects; Model 2 is the distribution of
residuals after conditioning on school-year, grade-year, and family Fixed Effects; Model 3 is the
distribution of residuals after conditioning on school-year, grade-year, and family-year Fixed Effects.
Distributions corresponding to models 0 through 2 are described by the left y-axis, while the distribution
corresponding to Model 3 is described by the y-axis on the right-hand side of the graph.




                                                   20
Figure A2: Distribution of standardized math scores and its residuals. Model 0 refers to the demeaned
distribution (i.e., the raw distribution centered at zero). Model 1 is the distribution of residuals after
conditioning on school-year and grade-year Fixed Effects; Model 2 is the distribution of residuals after
conditioning on school-year, grade-year, and family Fixed Effects; Model 3 is the distribution of residuals
after conditioning on school-year, grade-year, and family-year Fixed Effects. Distributions corresponding
to models 0 through 2 are described by the left y-axis, while the distribution corresponding to Model 3 is
described by the y-axis on the right-hand side of the graph.




                                                    21
Figure A3: Distribution of standardized reading scores and its residuals. Model 0 refers to the demeaned
distribution (i.e., the raw distribution centered at zero). Model 1 is the distribution of residuals after
conditioning on school-year and grade-year Fixed Effects; Model 2 is the distribution of residuals after
conditioning on school-year, grade-year, and family Fixed Effects; Model 3 is the distribution of residuals
after conditioning on school-year, grade-year, and family-year Fixed Effects. Distributions corresponding
to models 0 through 2 are described by the left y-axis, while the distribution corresponding to Model 3 is
described by the y-axis on the right-hand side of the graph.




                                                    22
Figure A4: This figure plots the coefficient of the variable Foreign-born Exposure in a regression
with the same specification as Table 4, column (5), but on the subsample of students enrolled in a
given grade.




                                               23
Figure A5: This figure plots the coefficient for cumulative exposure for different lambda based on the
equation (1) in the text.




                                                 24
Figure A6A: This graph shows the distribution of the cross-country immigrant performance index based
on math performance. We construct the country-specific performance index by averaging the standardized
math score by country of origin.




                                                 25
Figure A6B: This graph shows the distribution of the cross-country immigrant performance index based
on number of incidents. We construct the country-specific performance index by averaging the number of
incidents by country of origin.




                                                 26
Figure A7: This figure reports the binned scatter plot depicting the average segregation index as a function
of the share of foreign-born students across school-grade-year cells. See the text for details about the
construction of the segregation index.




Figure A8: This figure reports the distribution of the share of foreign-born students across school-grade-
year cells for cells above and below median segregation index. See the text for details about the construction
of the segregation index.




                                                     27
