                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE VOICE OF MONETARY POLICY

                                    Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                         Tho Pham
                                     Oleksandr Talavera

                                     Working Paper 28592
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28592


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




We thank Annette Vissing-Jorgensen and seminar participants at University of Reading and
University of Birmingham for comments. We are grateful to Eric Swanson for sharing his series
of monetary policy shocks. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Tho Pham, and Oleksandr Talavera. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Voice of Monetary Policy
Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Tho Pham, and Oleksandr Talavera
NBER Working Paper No. 28592
March 2021
JEL No. D84,E31,E58,G12

                                            ABSTRACT

We develop a deep learning model to detect emotions embedded in press conferences after the
meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee and examine the influence of the detected
emotions on financial markets. We find that, after controlling for the Fed's actions and the
sentiment in policy texts, positive tone in the voices of Fed Chairs leads to statistically significant
and economically large increases in share prices. In other words, how policy messages are
communicated can move the stock market. In contrast, the bond market appears to take few vocal
cues from the Chairs. Our results provide implications for improving the effectiveness of central
bank communications.

Yuriy Gorodnichenko                                Oleksandr Talavera
Department of Economics                            University of Birmingham
530 Evans Hall #3880                               Edgbaston
University of California, Berkeley                 Birmingham
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                            B15 2TT
and IZA                                            United Kingdom
and also NBER                                      oleksandr.talavera@gmail.com
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu

Tho Pham
University of Reading
Department of Economics
Reading RG6 6UR
United Kingdom
anhthodav@gmail.com
"How can a president not be an actor?"                                          Ronald Reagan (1980)
"As Chairman, I hope to foster a public conversation about what the Fed is doing to support a
strong and resilient economy. And one practical step in doing so is to have a press conference like
this after every one of our scheduled FOMC meetings. ... [This] is only about improving
communications."                                                     Jerome Powell (2018)1


1    Introduction

In a famous analysis, Mehrabian (1971) posited a 7-55-38 rule of communication: the words convey
7 percent of a message, the body language (gestures, facial expressions, etc.) accounts for 55 percent,
and the tone delivers 38 percent. While the debate on exact percentages for each channel is far from
settled, it is clear that effective communication has to rely on more than just the text. Central banks
have been increasingly relying on communication-based tools (e.g., forward guidance) to manage
the public's expectations, but do central bankers utilize communication to its full potential?

        Textual analyses of policy statements, minutes, and transcripts (e.g., Rozkrut et al., 2007;
Hansen and McMahon, 2016, Hansen et al., 2018, Cieslak et al., 2019, Ehrmann and Talmi, 2020)
suggest that central bankers' words carry a lot of weight,2 but little is known about the effects of
their non-verbal communication. To shed more light on this issue, we use deep learning methods
to quantify tone (vocal emotions) embedded in the answers given by Federal Reserve Chairs during
press conferences. To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first to examine the effects of
central bank communications through the vocal dimension. In other words, we move beyond text
analysis and study how policy messages are voiced and whether emotions in voice tone can move
financial markets.

        We focus on policy communication during press conferences for several reasons. First,
press conferences have been commonly used as an important communication tool.3 As suggested
by Ehrmann and Fratzche (2007) and emphasized by Powell (2018), press conferences,
particularly the Q&A sessions, play a key role in helping financial markets and the general public
to understand policy outlook and interpretation of current economic conditions. Especially during

1
  https://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20180613.pdf
2
  More generally, central banks have significant power to influence the macroeconomy and expectations. For example,
a large number of studies have documented the effectiveness of policy announcements in moving financial markets
(e.g., Kuttner, 2001, Gurkaynak et al., 2005) or shaping firm and household inflation expectations (e.g., Coibion et
al., 2019; Enders et al., 2019; Lamla and Vinogradov, 2019).
3
  See Kedan and Stuart (2014) for a review of central banks which use press conferences as a communication tool.

                                                                                                                  1
times of high uncertainty, market participants tend to seek further guidance/clarification through
press conferences' Q&A sessions. Second, press conferences allow policymakers to go off script
and communicate soft information via non-verbal channels and thus, influence investors' decision
making.4 Finally, because video/audio recordings of press conferences are available in a consistent
format,5 we can measure the tone of communication in a consistent manner and hence, provide a
systematic analysis of how voice tone can influence economic outcomes.

         Specifically, we split a given press conference into audio segments corresponding to each
question raised during the event and the response of the speaker. The split audios are then run
through a machine-learning procedure which is trained to recognize emotions from voice
variations. Each answer is rated in terms of three emotions: positive (happy or pleasantly surprised
emotions), negative (sad or angry emotions), and neutral. After aggregating the tone of answers
for a given press conference, we examine how the tone of the press conference affects a variety of
financial variables at high frequencies. We find that the tone can materially move the financial
markets. For example, switching the tone of the press conference from negative (-1) to positive
(+1) could raise S&P 500 returns by approximately 200 basis points. This order of magnitude is
comparable to the magnitudes one can observe after a two-standard deviation shock to forward
guidance. In other words, the voice component can generate economically large effects on the
stock market. We also find that inflation expectations and exchange rates respond to the variation
in voice tone, e.g., a more positive tone leads to a decrease in expected inflation. At the same time,
there is no evidence of bond market reactions to voice variations in our sample. These results
suggest that policy communication is more nuanced than reading and/or posting prepared remarks
and speeches. It appears that a certain level of acting skill may be helpful to ensure that the public
receives the policy message fully and correctly.

         In addition to the vast literature on policy communication (see Blinder et al., 2008 and
Coenen et al., 2017 for comprehensive surveys) and high-frequency analyses of monetary policy
shocks (e.g., Kuttner, 2001, Gurkaynak et al., 2005, and many others), our study relates to research
investigating the economic impacts of vocal cues. Using a sample of CEOs' speeches during

4
  Caffi and Janney (1994), Visschedijk et al. (2013), Dricu et al. (2017), and others document that voice conveys
information beyond the verbal content and that information contained in voice can affect decision making.
5
  Video recordings can be used to study body language (e.g., facial expressions, gestures). However, videos are harder
to analyze because cameras are moving (different speakers, different angles). In this respect, audio tracks offer a more
consistent measurement. As a result, we focus on variation in voice tone.

                                                                                                                      2
earnings conference calls, Hobson et al. (2012) find that the vocal markers of cognitive dissonance
can predict the likelihood of irregularity restatements. In a related study, Mayew and Venkatachalam
(2012) show that market participants and analysts react to the affective states of managers expressed
through vocal cues, e.g., happy/unhappy voices. For example, positive affect is positively related to
changes in stock recommendations and future unexpected earnings. These results suggest that the
affective states contain useful information about firms' fundamentals. In a more recent study, Hu
and Ma (2020) find that positivity about a startup shown through the visual, verbal, and vocal
dimensions increases the likelihood of being funded even if the startup's quality is low. Apart from
having a different focus (central banking communication vs. CEO/manager communication), we
differ in the tools employed to quantify the variation in tone. Earlier studies use commercial software
or pre-trained machine learning algorithms for voice analysis, while we develop a customized deep
learning model for detecting speech emotion. Our approach offers several advantages in terms of
flexibility, room for further development, and implementations. For example, we can fine-tune the
model's parameters to achieve a higher accuracy rate, which is not a feature available to commercial
software. Similarly, the customized model allows us to adjust the number and/or the class of
emotions, which also cannot be done with the commercial software and pre-trained algorithms.

       The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we describe the financial,
text, and speech data used in the analysis and how the data are analyzed. Section 3 presents our
empirical analyses and results. Section 4 concludes and discusses implications.



2   FOMC speeches: voice and linguistic analysis

Our sample runs from 2011 (when the first press conference was held) to June 2019. During this
period, 67 meetings and 36 press conferences were held. For each meeting, the FOMC statement and
the transcript of the press conference are collected from the Federal Reserve (Fed) website. The press
conferences' videos are downloaded from the Fed's official Youtube channel. We use only the audio
component of these videos. Because the Q&A session is the only part of the press conference that is
not scripted, our analysis focuses on the answers of the Chair during the Q&A. Our audio sample
contains 692 answers of 3 speakers (Ben Bernanke, Janet Yellen, and Jerome Powell).




                                                                                                     3
2.1     Voice Tone

In this section, we describe how we train a neural network model (a deep learning algorithm) to
recognize emotions. We also explain the mechanism of the neural network algorithm and how it
is applied to predict voice emotion.



2.1.1    Emotion Detection Using Neural Networks

Voice can be characterized by various parameters such as pitch (indicating the level of
highness/lowness of a tone) and frequency (indicating the variation in the pitch) which are useful
in determining the mood/emotion of a speaker. Building on earlier research on voice recognition
(e.g., Pan et al., 2012; Gao et al., 2017; Likitha et al., 2017; Bhavan et al., 2019), we use Librosa,
a Python package, to extract the following vocal features: 40 Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients
(MFCCs), 12 Chroma coefficients (Chromagram), and 128 Mel Spectrogram Frequencies (Mel).
These features are later used as inputs for our deep learning model.

         We use two data sets to train and validate our model. The first is the Ryson Audio-Visual
Database of Emotional Speech and Song (RAVDESS). To create these data, 12 actors and 12
actresses speak two statements in a neutral North American accent and 8 emotions (calm, happy,
sad, angry, fearful, surprised, disgust, neutral). The second data set is the Toronto Emotional
Speech Set (TESS). To create these data, 2 actresses speak a set of 200 words in 7 emotions (happy,
sad, angry, fearful, pleasantly surprised, disgust, neutral). These data sets are widely used in the
computer science literature to build the speech emotion/expression systems (see, e.g., Verma and
Mukhopadhyay, 2016, Gao et al., 2017, Choudhury et al., 2018, Bhavan et al., 2019, Andersson,
2020). Because fearful/disgust emotions are unlikely to arise during the Q&A sessions, we only
use audios for 5 emotions: happy, (pleasantly) surprised, neutral, sad, and angry.

         After extracting the vocal features from each recording in RAVDESS and TESS, we build
a neural network model, i.e., a computing system consisting of different layers where each layer
is a collection of different neurons (nodes). The output of one layer is used as the input for the
proceeding layer. We illustrate the mechanism behind a neural work comprised of three fully
connected layers in Figure 1. The first layer in this network is the input layer with three nodes and
each node is a feature of the training audio data. The second layer is a hidden layer consisting of


                                                                                                    4
four nodes ( , k=[1;4]) which are the activation functions of the input features  (i=[1;3]).
Particularly, a node  is connected with the input through weight ( , ) and bias ( ):
                ,     . The weighted summations are passed on an activation function such as a
binary step function, linear activation function, or non-linear activation function, to obtain the
outputs  (k=[1;4]). Applying the same procedure on these outputs gives us the final output (i.e.,
the classification of emotion). We use 80% of RAVDESS and TESS as the training sample and
the remaining 20% are used for validation.

        After experimenting with different hyper-parameters of the neural network, e.g., using
different types of layers, different combinations of those layers, and different activation functions,
we obtain a network containing 3 fully connected (dense) layers (i.e., 1 hidden layer) with 200
units (200 nodes) and the softmax activation function.6 This trained model gives us an accuracy
score of 84%. The accuracy in predicting angry, sad, neutral, surprised, and happy emotion is 87%,
84%, 74%, 87%, and 80%, respectively.



2.1.2   Emotion Detection Output

After training the neural network to recognize emotions from variations in vocal features (MFCCs,
Chromagram, and Mel Spectrogram), we feed the audio tracks of the policymakers' answers into
the neural network and classify the answer into positive ("happy" or "pleasantly surprised"
emotion), negative ("sad" or "angry" emotion), or neutral. We measure the tone of responses for
a given Q&A session as follows:

                                                            
                                                                                                    (1)
                                                            
where  ranges from -1 (negative emotions) to +1 (positive emotions). We report
descriptive statistics in Panel A of Table 1 and scores for each Q&A session in Appendix Table 1.

        We find that Ben Bernanke on average had more positive emotions in his voice than Janet
Yellen, who in turn had generally more positive emotions in her voice than Jerome Powell. Bernanke
had five Q&A sessions with only positive emotions in his voice. In contrast, Jerome Powell had five


6
  Softmax is a mathematical function that translates a vector of inputs into a vector of probabilities. The softmax
function normalizes the outputs so that the resulting probabilities sum to one.

                                                                                                                 5
Q&A sessions with only negative emotions. Janet Yellen's sessions always had a mix of positive and
negative emotions. The average tone across these central bankers is close to zero. There is
considerable within-speaker variation in the tone, with Jerome Powell exhibiting the largest variation.



2.2    Textual Analysis

Similar to Apel and Grimaldi (2014) and Neuhierl and Weber (2019), we use a "search and count"
approach to classify the text sentiment into hawkish versus dovish sentiment. In particular, we
build four lists of nouns, adjectives, and verbs of which combinations will indicate either tight
monetary policy/strong economic outlook (i.e., hawkish) or expansionary monetary policy/weak
economic outlook (i.e., dovish). As indicated in Table 2, a phrase combined of (1) A1 and A2 or
(2) B1 and B2 is classified as "dovish" while a phrase combined of (1) A1 and B2 or (2) B1 and
A2 is classified as "hawkish". To increase the accuracy of our classification, the search and count
approach is performed on each part of a sentence then aggregated over the whole document.7 Since
negations such as "won't"', "aren't" can alter the meaning of the text, for each part of a text, a
hawkish (dovish) phrase is only counted as hawkish (dovish) if the text does not contain a negation
word/phrase. In contrast, if a hawkish phrase is accompanied by a negation word/phrase, then it is
counted as dovish and vice versa.8 The number of dovish and hawkish phrases detected in FOMC
press releases and press conferences' transcripts are reported in Panel B of Table 1. The dovish
phrases are generally used more often in FOMC communications during the examined period.

        We use the following formula to measure the aggregate sentiment of the text of an FOMC
statement/remarks/Q&A:

                                                               
                                                                                                    (2)
                                                               
where   and   are the counts of respective phrases in the FOMC
statements as well as press conferences' transcripts when a press conference is held.

7
  For example, the sentence "With inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim
to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and
longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent" contains 2 parts, "With inflation running
persistently below this longer-run goal" and "the Committee will aim to...2 percent". Search and count is performed
on each part separately, then aggregated over the whole sentence, and latter aggregated over the whole document.
8
  A similar approach was applied in Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen (2020) where a negative word accompanied by
"not" is considered positive.

                                                                                                                 6
 is in the range of [-1;1]. A positive value of  indicates an
expansionary monetary policy or that expansionary monetary policy is expected.

           We find (Panel B of Table 1) that the sentiment of texts during the terms of Bernanke and
Yellen was generally more dovish than Powell's.9 This pattern likely reflects that policy rate
increases dominated during Powell's period in our sample. The within-speaker variation in the text
sentiment is broadly similar across the Fed Chairs. Note that the variation in text sentiment during
Q&A sessions is larger than the variation in the text sentiment for statements and remarks, which
likely reflects the less scripted nature of Q&A sessions relative to other communication types. The
correlation of sentiment for statement and remarks is discernibly positive (          0.4), while the text
sentiment of responses during Q&A sessions is approximately uncorrelated with the text sentiment
of statements (           0.06). At the same time, the text sentiments for Q&A and remarks are
correlated at           0.32. To measure the totality of the sentiment, we compute 
using all three sources (statement, remarks, and Q&A responses). Given that we have a limited
number of events in our sample, this approach allows us to save degrees of freedom but our results
are robust to using  measured for each source separately or in other combinations.



2.3      Co-movement in Policy Actions and Word

How much do text sentiment and voice tone co-move? Although one might think that text and voice
should be highly congruent, Figure 2 demonstrates that the relationship between these two channels
of communication is more nuanced. Specifically, the positive messages conveyed in the tonality of
voice are associated with more dovish statements in the accompanying texts, but this relationship is
fairly weak. For example, the correlation between the text sentiment in statements and the voice tone
in the corresponding Q&A sessions is                    0.35. The correlation for Q&A tone with the text
sentiment in remarks or Q&A is even lower: 0.16 and 0.24, respectively. In fact, Figure 2 shows that
it is not uncommon to observe dovish texts and negative tonality. These results suggest that the tone
of Q&A responses may generate variation in policy communication that is unrelated to what is
contained in the texts of policymakers' statements, remarks, or even Q&A responses themselves.




9
    Text sentiment scores for each meeting are listed in Appendix Table 2.

                                                                                                        7
        In a similar spirit, the variation in tone appears to be only weakly correlated with actual
policy shocks (panels A-C in Figure 3) identified as in Swanson (2020): a shock to the policy rate
(FFR shock), a forward guidance (FG) shock, or an asset purchase (AP) shock. There is a stronger
correlation between voice tone and the stage of the policy cycle. Specifically, the correlation
between the shadow rate (measured as in Wu and Xia, 2016)10 and voice tone is -0.29 (for
comparison, the correlation with FFR shocks is -0.17), i.e., voice tone becomes more negative as
the policy rate increases. We conclude that voice tone has variations unrelated to the Fed's actions
and verbal (text) communication.



3    Empirical analysis

In this section, we investigate whether voice tone can move various financial indicators. In
particular, we estimate the following specification in the spirit of Jordà (2005):

         ,                                                                                             (3)
                                      
                                   

where  dates FOMC meetings.  measures voice tone of the Q&A session at date .
 indicates the sentiment in the policy statement, remarks, and Q&A responses.
 ,  , and  are policy shocks identified using intraday data by
Swanson (2020). These policy shocks are normalized to have unit variance over a "typical" period
(e.g., the FFR shock is normalized to have unit variance for the period that excludes zero lower
bound).  is the shadow policy rate from Wu and Xia (2016). Policy shocks and the
shadow rate control for "actions" of the Fed so that we can identify more cleanly the effects of voice
tone on outcome variables.11 Note that we code  equal to zero for FOMC meetings
without Q&A sessions. Our results are robust to focusing only on meetings with Q&A sessions.


10
   The updated series of the shadow rate are available at https://sites.google.com/view/jingcynthiawu/shadow-rates.
11
   To check the robustness of our findings, we control for releases of macroeconomic data (unemployment rate, non-
farm payroll, and GDP growth) in a version of specification (3). While most of the FOMC announcements were not
overlapped with the releases of other macro data releases over the examined period, there are few exceptions. In
particular, five FOMC announcements were released on the same day as the release of gross domestic product (GDP)
data but none of these five were accompanied by a press conference. At the same time, seven FOMC announcements
(six of which were followed by a press conference) were made on the same day as consumer price index data releases.

                                                                                                                 8
        We estimate specification (3) for each horizon  separately and plot the estimated

coefficients, e.g.,             , to illustrate the dynamics of the response to a form of policy action

or communication. Note that while high-frequency analyses tend to find clear responses to policy
announcements at the intraday frequencies (e.g., Kuttner, 2001, Swanson, 2020), we use the daily
frequency which, given dramatic volatility for some financial indicators, often yields statistically
insignificant estimates (see, e.g., Gorodnichenko and Weber, 2016). However, one could expect
that the response may build over time, consistent with the notion of "slow- moving" capital
proposed by Fleckenstein et al. (2014). Hence, using daily series offers an opportunity to examine
responses at longer horizons, which may be important for identifying policy actions and
communication tools with durable effects.

        The outcome variables are daily financial indicators available from Thomson Reuters and
other popular sources including Yahoo Finance and Tiingo. We generally use prices of exchange-
traded funds (ETFs) that track popular indices. For example, we use the SPY, an ETF fund that tracks
the S&P 500 index, to measure reactions of the stock market to policy shocks. We measure returns
on ETF funds or similar securities as the log close price at date             minus log open price at date .
Hence, the return on the day of an FOMC meeting is the log difference between close and open prices.

        Because the sample is relatively small (67 FOMC meetings), we estimate specification (3)
using bootstrap methods to correct for possible biases in the estimates as well as to construct
confidence intervals with good coverage. Specifically, 90 percent confidence intervals are based
on the 5th and 95th percentiles of the estimates generated in bootstrap draws. As a robustness check,
we also estimate specification (3) with  as the only regressor.



3.1    Stock market reactions

When we use the SPY ETF to measure the reactions of the stock market to policy actions and
communications, we find (Panel B of Figure 4) that a more positive voice tone leads to an increase
in share prices. Specifically, the impact response (i.e.,            0) of the stock market is weak and not
significant statistically. Over time, the response builds up and after five days, the return on SPY


We found that controlling for the releases of macroeconomic news does not have a materially important effect on the
reported estimates.

                                                                                                                 9
reaches approximately 100 basis points for a unit increase in voice tone. The response levels off
after the first few days and stays statistically significant at 10 percent. We observe this pattern
irrespective of whether we include controls (Panel B) or not (Panel A) in specification (3).

       On the other hand, the sentiment of the policy texts does not appear to have a statistically
discernible effect on the SPY in our sample, although the point estimates are positive, suggesting
that more dovish sentiment leads to a boom in the stock market. This finding is qualitatively in
line with the results documented in the literature. For example, employing the high-frequency
event study approach, Rosa (2011b) shows that surprise hawkish FOMC statements lead to a
reduction in equity returns. However, using monthly data over the 1998 ­ 2014 period, Hansen
and McMahon (2016) find a statistically insignificant reaction of stock markets to FOMC
statements talking more about strong economic conditions.

       The FFR shock does not have a statistically significant effect on the stock market, which
likely reflects the fact that the sample period is dominated by the zero-lower bound and changes
in the short-term policy rate probably provided a rather limited outlook for the stance of monetary
policy. Changes in the pace of asset purchases by the central bank (AP shock) also do not have a
clear effect on the stock market, a finding consistent with Swanson (2020). Note that our sample
does not include the first round of quantitative easing in 2009, which led to a strong reaction of
the stock market (see, e.g., Chodorow-Reich, 2004, Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011).
For this sample period, however, a forward guidance shock leads to a persistent decrease in stock
prices, in line with the intra-day responses estimated by Swanson (2020). This response is
consistent with the signaling effect suggested by Campbell et al. (2012), i.e., an FG shock reveals
that the Fed could be pessimistic about the state of the economy. Note that the magnitude of the
stock market response to a unit decrease in voice tone is approximately equal to the response we
observe after a one-standard-deviation forward-guidance shock. Thus, the variation in voice tone
has economically significant effects.

       To further understand the reaction of the stock market to policy actions and messages, we
examine the response of the CBOE Volatility Index VIX (Figure 5), a popular measure of the stock
market's expectations about future volatility. We also study the responses of futures on the VIX
to have a more refined sense of how policy can influence outlook for volatility. Specifically, we
use VIXY (Figure 6; VIX Short-Term Futures) and VIXM (Appendix Figure 7; VIX Mid-Term


                                                                                                10
Futures ETF) ETFs. We find that Fed actions (FFR/FG/AP shocks) tend to raise the volatility in
the stock market. The sentiment in the texts does not lead to an apparent response in the volatility
indices. In contrast, a positive voice tone tends to decrease current and anticipated volatility. This
result is consistent with the notion that central banks can shape uncertainty about future economic
conditions (Hansen et al., 2019). The variation in voice tone has economically significant effects:
a unit decrease in the tone increases the volatility by the amount that is roughly equal to the increase
after a one-standard-deviation shock to forward guidance.

       Relatedly, monetary policy can convey information about the path of interest rates and thus
reduce the interest rate risk (Hattori et al., 2016). To quantify the importance of this channel, we

                                                                                                  ,
measure the interest rate risk with the following spread:  ,                        
                                                                                              ,


             ,
                 , where        is the price of LQD ETF (investment grade corporate bonds) and
         ,

       is the price of interest-rate-hedged corporate bond LQDH ETF. A decrease in this measure
indicates a decline in the perceived interest rate risk. Our results (Figure 7) suggest that a more
positive tone leads to a reduction in investors' expectation about interest rate risk. Consistent with
this interpretation and in line with the existing studies which document the impact of policy actions
on bond risk premia (e.g., Hattori et al., 2016), we find that a forward guidance shock reduces
uncertainty about the future path of interest rate. Note that a unit decrease in voice tone and a one-
standard-deviation increase in the FG shock generate similar responses of the spread, again
pointing to economic significance of voice tone. In contrast, an AP shock could signal the lower
amount of interest rate risk in investor portfolio in the future, and thus, increase the perceived
current interest rate risk, which is consistent with the analysis in Gorodnichenko and Ray (2017).
Intuitively, asset purchases are a form of discretionary policy and deployment of such a tool
increases uncertainty about the future path of policy.



3.2   Bond market reactions

Kuttner (2001), Swanson (2020), and many others document a strong reaction of the bond market to
monetary policy shocks. Consistent with these earlier works, we find (Figure 8) that the price of
GOVT ETF (a fund covering U.S. government nominal debt) decreases in response to a forward


                                                                                                      11
guidance shock (i.e., yields rise) and increases in response to an asset-purchase shock (i.e., yields
fall). FFR shocks do not lead to a statistically significant response in GOVT prices, which likely
reflects the prominence of the zero lower bound in our sample. In contrast to the strong responses of
the stock market, responses of the bond market to voice tone are not statistically significant.
Similarly, text sentiment does not move GOVT prices materially. These findings are consistent with
Cieslak and Pang (2020) or Ehrmann and Talmi (2020), who document that bond market reaction to
Fed communications is weak. Using ETFs for government debt with different maturities, we also
examine if there could be a differential response across the maturity space. We find qualitatively
similar responses for all maturities (Appendix Figure 1 through Appendix Figure 6) although the
magnitudes of the responses to FFR/FG/AP shocks tend to be smaller for shorter maturities.

       An important dimension of monetary policy transmission is how policy can influence
interest rates faced by the corporate sector. While the bond market is highly integrated, the pass-
through from U.S. government debt to corporate debt may be limited and nuanced. As a first stab
at this question, we use the LQD ETF (a fund covering investment grade corporate bonds) and find
(Figure 9) that policy actions (FFR/FG/AP shocks) tend to move yields in the same direction they
move yields for U.S. government debt. Text sentiment does not have a statistically significant
effect on LQD prices. A positive voice tone appears to elevate LQD prices (i.e., yields fall) for a
few days after an FOMC meeting but this effect is short-lived and statistically insignificant. The
results are broadly similar when we use the IVR ETF (real estate investment trust; Figure 10) to
gauge the responses of the real estate sector, although a more dovish text sentiment appears to raise
the IVR price after about a week.



3.3   Inflation Expectations

Management of inflation expectations is a key element of monetary policy (see Coibion et al.,
2020 for a survey). To evaluate the success of policymakers in this matter we use two popular
metrics. The first one is the spread between nominal and inflation-protected U.S. government
                                                             ,                  ,
bonds. Specifically, we use             ,                                             as a measure of
                                                         ,                  ,

the spread, where         is the price of GOVT ETF (nominal bonds) and              is the price of TIP
ETF (inflation-protected bonds). An increase in this spread can be interpreted as signalling a


                                                                                                    12
decrease in expected inflation. The second one is the GLD ETF, a fund that tracks the gold spot
price. This ETF is used as a hedge against inflation: an increase in the price of GLD signals a
higher expected inflation. Although neither of these measures is perfect (e.g., the spread varies not
only due to changes in inflation expectations but also with changes in liquidity conditions; gold
prices can move for reasons unrelated to inflation), these two measures are consistently available
and are based on reasonably deep markets.

         We find that the responses of the GOVT-TIP spread (Figure 11) and GLD (Figure 12) paint
a similar picture. As before, the FFR shock does not have a clear impact. The FG shock lowers
inflation expectations, while the AP shock raises inflation expectations. More dovish text
sentiment appears to raise inflation expectations (the GLD price increases), but this response is not
statistically significant. Moreover, it does not seem to have support from the GOVT-TIP spread,
which appears to decrease (i.e., expected inflation is lower), although again the estimates are not
statistically significant. The impact response of the GOVT-TIP spread to a positive voice tone is
close to zero, but the spread gradually increases (thus, signaling lower expected inflation) and
peaks after about 10 days. The GLD price has similar dynamics (i.e., lower expected inflation) but
the estimates are less precise. Hence, voice tone seems to have an independent effect on inflation
expectations. One may conjecture that positive tone plays a signaling role: a happy tone of the Fed
Chair indicates satisfaction with future inflation dynamics.



3.4    Exchange Rate

Exchange rate is an important channel for monetary policy transmission in the increasingly
globalized economy. To shed more light on how policy actions and communication can work via
this channel, we examine the responses of two key exchange rates: yen/dollar (JPY; Figure 13)
and euro/dollar (EURO; Figure 14).12 We find that policy actions generally lead to mixed reactions
across currencies in our sample. For example, after an FFR shock (monetary tightening), the dollar
depreciates against the euro (although the effect is not statistically significant) and appreciates
against the yen.13 In a similar spirit, after a more dovish text sentiment (opposite to monetary


12
  We also report results for the pound/dollar (GBP) exchange rate in Appendix Figure 8.
13
  Analyses using intraday data (e.g., Swanson, 2020) find that the dollar appreciates against the euro and yen after a
FFR shock.

                                                                                                                  13
tightening), the dollar appreciates against the euro and depreciates against the yen. In contrast, a
more positive voice tone leads to appreciation of the dollar against the euro but there is no
statistically significant response for the yen/dollar exchange rate. While somewhat unexpected, the
relatively lower level of reaction of the yen/dollar exchange rate to the monetary policy shocks has
been also observed in other studies (e.g., Fatum and Scholnick, 2008, Rosa, 2011a).



3.5    Discussion

In general, our findings shed new light onto the effectiveness of press conferences as a central
bank communication tool. We show that just as the actions of the Fed move financial markets so
too does the vocal aspect of FOMC press conferences. In other words, the vocal dimension of the
central bank communication conveys information beyond that in the text, and market participants
form their expectations and make their decisions based on that information.

         Why does non-verbal communication matter? One explanation is that due to asymmetric
information between the public and the central bank, market participants tend to look for more
information through the aspects which are not explicitly "scripted" such as the voice tone or body
language of the Fed Chair. These non-verbal elements of communication can signal the Fed's
perspective on current/future economic outlook and/or the course of future monetary policy. In
fact, it is not uncommon that investors and media watch/listen to the FOMC press conference,
analyze the Chair's voice, and attempt to interpret what it (i.e., the voice tone/emotion) means. In
other words, the press and financial market investors appear to pay attention to the non-verbal
communication.14 For example, the Wall Street Journal15 reported Ben Bernanke's voice as either
shaky or quavering during the first FOMC press conference on 27 April 2011. In a similar spirit,
the tone of Jerome Powell's voice at the press conference on 16 September 2020 was perceived to
be consistent with the prior press conferences, which was then interpreted as a signal of
downplaying his dovish position.16




14
   See, e.g., https://cutt.ly/FzbnCBo; https://cutt.ly/fzbn1le (Accessed on 10 March 2021)
15
   https://cutt.ly/3zbnQbe (Accessed on 10 March 2021)
16
   https://cutt.ly/RzbnAm5 (Accessed on 10 March 2021)

                                                                                                 14
4   Concluding remarks

Press conferences are an important communication tool for delivering and explaining monetary
policy decisions to the public. Unlike press releases, transcripts, or minutes, a press conference
contains both verbal and non-verbal channels. The latter offers an opportunity to communicate
"soft" information. Machine learning applied to text analysis allowed researchers to better measure
messages in written policy documents and thus quantify the importance of soft information. Other
parts of communication (emotions, moods, tones, body language) could be equally (if not more)
important but these have proven to be particularly difficult to quantify. Building on recent
advances in voice recognition and deep learning, we attempt to shed new light on the effects of
non-verbal policy communication.

       Our analysis of variation in the Fed Chairs' voice tone during Q&A sessions after FOMC
meetings shows that the non-verbal communication can have a statistically and economically
discernible effect on a variety of financial indicators. For example, our results suggest that the
voice tone of policy communication may have a significant effect on the stock market above and
beyond what is contained in the Fed's actions or actual words (texts). This reaction is consistent
with the Fed communicating a more positive outlook for the economy and reducing uncertainty.
Inflation expectations and exchange rates also respond to voice tone. In contrast, the bond market
appears to take few vocal cues from the Fed Chairs.

       Although future work should dig deeper into understanding nuances of using voice to
communicate policy, our results clearly have important policy implications. How messages are said
appears to be potentially as important as what is in the messages. This does not make the job of
central bankers easier and possibly adds another qualification (voice control) to the job requirement.
However, this could be a prerequisite for anybody interested in using a public arena for policy
communication. Indeed, to paraphrase Ronald Reagan, how can a Fed Chair not be an actor?




                                                                                                   15
References

Andersson, K., 2020. "Speech Emotion Recognition in Neurological Disorders Using
       Convolutional Neural Network." In Brain Informatics: 13th International Conference
       Proceedings 12241: 287. Italy: Springer, 12241, p. 287.

Apel, M. and Grimaldi, M., 2014. "How Informative Are Central Bank Minutes?" Review of
       Economics 65(1):53-76.

Bhavan, A., Chauhan, P., and Shah, R.R., 2019. "Bagged support vector machines for emotion
       recognition from speech." Knowledge-Based Systems 184:104886.

Blinder, A.S., Ehrmann, M., Fratzscher, M., De Haan, J., and Jansen, D.J., 2008. "Central Bank
       Communication and Monetary Policy: A Survey of Theory and Evidence." Journal of
       Economic Literature 46(4): 910-45.

Caffi, C. and Janney, R.W., 1994. "Toward a pragmatics of emotive communication." Journal of
       Pragmatics 22(3-4): 325-373.

Campbell, J., Evans, C., Fisher, J., and Justiniano, A., 2012. "Macroeconomic Effects of Federal
       Reserve Forward Guidance." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 1-80.

Chodorow-Reich, G., 2014. "Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy on Financial
       Institutions." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:155-227.

Choudhury, A.R., Ghosh, A., Pandey, R., and Barman, S., 2018. "Emotion Recognition from
       Speech Signals using Excitation Source and Spectral Features." In 2018 IEEE Applied
       Signal Processing Conference. IEEE, pp. 257-261.

Cieslak, A. and Pang, H., 2020. "Common shocks in stocks and bonds." National Bureau of
       Economic Research Working Paper No. w28184.

Cieslak, A. and Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2020. "The Economics of the Fed Put." The Review of
       Financial Studies. In Press.

Cieslak, A., Morse, A. and VissingJorgensen, A., 2019. "Stock returns over the FOMC cycle."
       Journal of Finance 74(5): 2201-2248.




                                                                                             16
Coenen, G., Ehrmann, M., Gaballo, G., Hoffmann, P., Nakov, A., Nardelli, S., Persson, E., and
       Strasser, G., 2017. "Communication of monetary policy in unconventional times,"
       European Central Bank Working Paper Series 2080.

Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., and Weber, M., 2019. "Monetary policy communications and
       their effects on household inflation expectations." National Bureau of Economic Research
       Working Paper No. w25482.

Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., Kumar, S., and Pedemonte, M., 2020. "Inflation expectations as
       a policy tool?" Journal of International Economics 124(C): 103297.

Dricu, M., Ceravolo, L., Grandjean, D., and Frühholz, S., 2017. "Biased and unbiased perceptual
       decision-making on vocal emotions." Scientific Reports 7(1):1-16.

Ehrmann, M. and Fratzscher, M., 2007. "The timing of central bank communication." European
       Journal of Political Economy 23(1):124-145.

Ehrmann, M. and Talmi, J., 2020. "Starting from a blank page? Semantic similarity in central bank
       communication and market volatility." Journal of Monetary Economics 111: 48-62.

Enders, Z., Hünnekes, F., and Müller, G.J., 2019. "Monetary policy announcements and
       expectations: Evidence from German firms." Journal of Monetary Economics 108: 45-63.

Fatum, R. and Scholnick, B., 2008. "Monetary policy news and exchange rate responses: Do only
       surprises matter?" Journal of Banking & Finance 32(6):1076-1086.

Fleckenstein, M., F. Longstaff, and H. Lustig, 2014. "The TIPS-Treasury Bond Puzzle." Journal
       of Finance 69(5): 2151-2197.

Gao, Y., Li, B., Wang, N. and Zhu, T., 2017. "Speech emotion recognition using local and global
       features." In International Conference on Brain Informatics. Springer, pp. 3-13.

Gorodnichenko, Y. and Weber, M., 2016. "Are Sticky Prices Costly? Evidence from the Stock
       Market." American Economic Review 106(1): 165-199.

Gorodnichenko, Y., and Ray, W., 2017. "The Effects of Quantitative Easing: Taking a Cue from
       Treasury Auctions," NBER Working Papers 24122 (updated February 2021).




                                                                                              17
Gürkaynak, G., Sack, B., and Swanson, E., 2005. "Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words? The
       Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements," International
       Journal of Central Banking 1(1), May.

Hansen, S., and McMahon, M., 2016. "Shocking language: Understanding the macroeconomic
       effects of central bank communication." Journal of International Economics 99: S114-S133.

Hansen, S., McMahon, M., and Prat, A., 2018. "Transparency and deliberation within the FOMC:
       a computational linguistics approach." Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(2): 801-870.

Hansen, S., McMahon, M., and Tong, M., 2019. "The long-run information effect of central bank
       communication," Journal of Monetary Economics 108(C): 185-202.

Hattori, M., Schrimpf, A., and Sushko, V., 2016. "The response of tail risk perceptions to
       unconventional monetary policy." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8(2):
       111-36.

Hobson, J.L., Mayew, W.J., and Venkatachalam, M., 2012. "Analyzing speech to detect financial
       misreporting." Journal of Accounting Research 50(2): 349-392.

Hu, A. and Ma, S., 2020. "Human Interactions and Financial Investment: A Video-Based
       Approach." Working Paper.

Jordà, Ò., 2005. "Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections." American
       Economic Review 95(1):161-182.

Kedan, D. and Stuart, R., 2014. "Central bank communications: a comparative study." Quarterly
       Bulletin 2(14): 89-104.

Krishnamurthy, A. and Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2011. "The Effects of Quantitative Easing on
       Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy" Brookings Papers on Economic
       Activity 42(2 (Fall)): 215-287.

Kuttner, K., 2001. "Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from the Fed Funds
       Futures Market." Journal of Monetary Economics 47(3): 523­544.

Lamla, M.J. and Vinogradov, D.V., 2019. "Central bank announcements: Big news for little
       people?" Journal of Monetary Economics 108: 21-38.



                                                                                             18
Likitha, M.S., Gupta, S.R.R., Hasitha, K., and Raju, A.U., 2017. "Speech based human emotion
       recognition   using   MFCC."     In   2017   International   Conference     on   Wireless
       Communications, Signal Processing and Networking. IEEE, pp. 2257-2260.

Mayew, W.J. and Venkatachalam, M., 2012. "The power of voice: Managerial affective states and
       future firm performance." Journal of Finance 67(1): 1-43.

Mehrabian, A., 1971. Silent Messages: Implicit Communication of Emotions and Attitudes.
       Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, p.30.

Neuhierl, A. and Weber, M., 2019. "Monetary policy communication, policy slope, and the stock
       market," Journal of Monetary Economics 108(C): 140-155.

Pan, Y., P. Shen, and L. Shen, 2012. "Speech emotion recognition using support vector machine."
       International Journal of Smart Home 6(2):101-108.

Rosa, C., 2011a. "The high-frequency response of exchange rates to monetary policy actions and
       statements." Journal of Banking & Finance 35(2): 478-489.

Rosa, C., 2011b. "Words that shake traders: The stock market's reaction to central bank
       communication in real time." Journal of Empirical Finance 18(5): 915-934.

Rozkrut, M., Rybiski, K., Sztaba, L., and Szwaja, R., 2007. "Quest for central bank
       communication: Does it pay to be "talkative"?" European Journal of Political Economy
       23(1): 176-206.

Swanson, E.T., 2020. "Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset
       Purchases on Financial Markets." Journal of Monetary Economics. In Press.

Verma, D. and Mukhopadhyay, D., 2016. "Age driven automatic speech emotion recognition
       system." In 2016 International Conference on Computing, Communication and
       Automation. IEEE, pp.1005-1010.

Visschedijk, G.C., Lazonder, A.W., van der Hulst, A., Vink, N., and Leemkuil, H., 2013.
       "Modelling human emotions for tactical decisionmaking games." British Journal of
       Educational Technology 44(2): 197-207.

Wu, J.C. and Xia, F.D., 2016. "Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy at the
       Zero Lower Bound." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 48(2-3): 253-291.

                                                                                             19
                                  Table 1. FOMC meetings' statistics
                                                        All        Bernanke         Yellen         Powell
                                                        (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)

 Meetings                                               67             25             31              11
 Press conference                                       36             12             16              8

             Panel A. Voice analysis of responses in Q&A during press conferences
 Answers (count)
       Positive                                 377         200           109                        68
       Negative                                 285          43           131                        111
       Neutral                                   30           0            28                         2
       Voice tone
                mean                            0.09        0.64         -0.13                      -0.30
                standard deviation              0.75        0.58          0.61                      0.82

                                         Panel B. Textual analysis
 Statement
        Hawkish                                        182             76             79              27
        Dovish                                         195             81             96              18
        Text sentiment
                mean                                   -0.01          0.04           0.07           -0.23
                standard deviation                     0.21           0.11           0.17           0.23
 Remarks
        Hawkish                                        335             108            156             71
        Dovish                                         391             139            179             73
        Text sentiment
                mean                                   0.07           0.11           0.06            0.02
                standard deviation                     0.19           0.22           0.17            0.17
 Q&A
        Hawkish                                        442             155            203            84
        Dovish                                         551             196            250            105
        Text sentiment
                mean                                   0.13           0.12           0.12            0.16
                standard deviation                     0.26           0.29           0.23            0.32
 Statement, Remarks, Q&A
        Text sentiment
                mean                                   0.09           0.12           0.09            0.06
                standard deviation                     0.16           0.17           0.15            0.20
Notes: This table shows the statistics related to text and voice data of FOMC meetings and press conferences.
Column (1) shows statistics for all FOMC meetings during the 2011 ­ July 2019 period. Columns (2)-(4) show
the statistics for the FOMC meetings chaired by Ben Bernanke, Janet Yellen, and Jerome Powell, respectively.
Positive, Negative, and Neutral indicate the number of answers expressed in the positive, negative, and neutral
emotion, respectively. Voice tone is the average emotion for a given FOMC press conference (
                               ). Hawkish and Dovish are the number of hawkish and dovish phrases in the text,
respectively. The average text sentiment is measured by                                                 .



                                                                                                            20
                      Table 2. Dictionary for hawkish and dovish words.
 Panel A1                                         Panel A2
 inflation expectation, interest rate, bank rate, anchor, cut, subdue, declin, decrease, reduc,
 fund rate, price, economic activity, inflation, low, drop, fall, fell, decelarat, slow, pause,
 employment                                       pausing,       stable,       non-accelerating,
                                                  downward, tighten
 Panel B1                                         Panel B2
 unemployment, growth, exchange rate, ease, easing, rise, rising, increase, expand,
 productivity, deficit, demand, job market, improv, strong, upward, raise, high, rapid
 monetary policy
 Panel C
 weren't, were not, wasn't, was not, did not, didn't, do not, don't, will not, won't
Notes: This table shows the words/phrases used to classify text into dovish/hawkish.




                                                                                              21
                                  Figure 1. Conceptual neural network




Notes: This figure shows a conceptual neural network with 3 layers for classifying voice features into emotions.
The left layer is the input layer with three nodes and each node is a feature of the training audio data. The middle
layer is a hidden layer consisting of four nodes ( , k=[1;4]) which are the activation functions of the input
features  (i=[1;3]). A node  is connected with the input the through weight ( , ) and bias ( ):
   ,  . The weighted summations are passed on the softmax activation function to obtain the
outputs  (k=[1;4]). The right layer is the output layer.




                                                                                                                22
                                        Figure 2. Voice tone vs. Text sentiment.




Notes: The figure shows the joint distribution of voice tone and text sentiment across FOMC meetings.




                                                                                                        23
                                          Figure 3. Policy Words vs. Actions.




Notes: The figure shows the joint distribution of voice tone and policy actions/stance. Federal Funds Rate (FFR), forward
guidance (FG), and asset purchase (AP) shocks are from Swanson (2020). The shadow policy rate is from Wu and Xia (2016).




                                                                                                                            24
                                         Figure 4. Response of SPY ETF (S&P 500) to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.

                                                                                                                                                                      25
                                             Figure 5. Response of VIX (CBOE Volatility Index) to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.
                                                                                                                                                                      26
                               Figure 6. Response of VIXY ETF (VIX Short-Term Futures) to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.
                                                                                                                                                                      27
Figure 7. Response of LQD ETF (investment grade corporate bond) minus LQDH EFT (interest rate hedged corporate bond) to policy actions and messages.




     Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.

                                                                                                                                                                           28
                                Figure 8. Response of GOVT ETF (U.S. government debt) to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.
                                                                                                                                                                      29
                                     Figure 9. Response of LQD ETF (corporate debt) to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.
                                                                                                                                                                      30
                            Figure 10. Response of IVR ETF (debt for the real estate sector) to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.
                                                                                                                                                                      31
Figure 11. Response of GOVT ETF (nominal U.S. government debt) minus TIP EFT (inflation-protected U.S. government debt) to policy actions and messages.




      Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.
                                                                                                                                                                            32
                                           Figure 12. Response of GLD ETF (gold) to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.
                                                                                                                                                                      33
               Figure 13. Response of the Japanese Yen to one U.S. Dollar (yen/dollar) exchange rate to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.
                                                                                                                                                                      34
                   Figure 14. Response of the Euro to one U.S. Dollar (euro/dollar) exchange rate to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.

                                                                                                                                                                      35
      Online Appendix

Additional Tables and Figures




                                36
                Appendix Table 1. Voice tone for responses during Q&A sessions.
                                                    Positive       Neutral     Negative
    Press conference date           Speaker                                                     Tone
                                                   responses      response     responses
    April 27, 2011                 Bernanke            17             0             1        0.89
    June 22, 2011                  Bernanke            19             0             0        1.00
    November 2, 2011               Bernanke            19             0             0        1.00
    January 25, 2012               Bernanke            18             0             0        1.00
    April 25, 2012                 Bernanke            19             0             0        1.00
    June 20, 2012                  Bernanke            22             0             1        0.91
    September 13, 2012             Bernanke            23             0             0        1.00
    December 12, 2012              Bernanke            20             0             3        0.74
    March 20, 2013                 Bernanke            14             0             7        0.33
    June 19, 2013                  Bernanke            10             0            11        -0.05
    September 18, 2013             Bernanke             1             0            17        -0.89
    December 18, 2013              Bernanke            18             0             3        0.71
    March 19, 2014                  Yellen              7             5             4        0.19
    June 18, 2014                   Yellen              2             0            14        -0.75
    September 17, 2014              Yellen              2             1             9        -0.58
    December 17, 2014               Yellen              1             4            10        -0.60
    March 18, 2015                  Yellen             15             0             5        0.50
    June 17, 2015                   Yellen              1             3            13        -0.71
    September 17, 2015              Yellen             16             1             1        0.83
    December 16, 2015               Yellen              4             1            13        -0.50
    March 16, 2016                  Yellen             12             1             3        0.56
    June 15, 2016                   Yellen             11             0             4        0.47
    September 21, 2016              Yellen             5              0            14        -0.47
    December 14, 2016               Yellen             12             5             3        0.45
    March 15, 2017                  Yellen              9             1             8        0.06
    June 14, 2017                   Yellen              7             0             9        -0.13
    September 20, 2017              Yellen              4             1             9        -0.36
    December 13, 2017               Yellen              1             5            12        -0.61
    March 21, 2018                  Powell              0             0            20        -1.00
    June 13, 2018                   Powell              0             0            22        -1.00
    September 26, 2018              Powell              9             0            15        -0.25
    December 19, 2018               Powell              0             0            21        -1.00
    January 30, 2019                Powell             16             2             7        0.36
    March 20, 2019                  Powell             25             0             1        0.92
    May 1, 2019                     Powell             18             0             5        0.57
    June 19, 2019                   Powell              0             0            20        -1.00
    July 31, 2019                   Powell              0             0            24        -1.00
Notes: This table shows the number of positive, negative, and neutral responses as well as the aggregate voice
tone for each press conference in the sample.




                                                                                                           37
                 Appendix Table 2. Text sentiment for statement, remarks and Q&A.
                                               Text                                                    Text
Press conference date         Speaker                       Press conference date         Speaker
                                             Sentiment                                              Sentiment
January 26, 2011             Bernanke          0.333         September 17, 2015           Yellen    0.186
March 15, 2011               Bernanke          0.111          October 28, 2015            Yellen    0.000
April 27, 2011               Bernanke         -0.129         December 16, 2015            Yellen    0.000
June 22, 2011                Bernanke          0.137          January 27, 2016            Yellen    0.333
August 9, 2011               Bernanke         -0.200           March 16, 2016             Yellen    -0.059
September 21, 2011           Bernanke          0.000           April 27, 2016             Yellen    0.286
November 2, 2011             Bernanke          0.292            June 15, 2016             Yellen    0.026
December 13, 2011            Bernanke         -0.333            July 27, 2016             Yellen    0.231
January 25, 2012             Bernanke          0.364         September 21, 2016           Yellen    0.031
March 13, 2012               Bernanke          0.000          November 2, 2016            Yellen    0.111
April 25, 2012               Bernanke          0.036         December 14, 2016            Yellen    -0.061
June 20, 2012                Bernanke          0.405          February 1, 2017            Yellen    -0.250
August 1, 2012               Bernanke          0.333           March 15, 2017             Yellen    0.071
September 13, 2012           Bernanke          0.138            June 14, 2017             Yellen    0.073
October 24, 2012             Bernanke          0.125            July 26, 2017             Yellen    0.000
December 12, 2012            Bernanke          0.071         September 20, 2017           Yellen    0.212
January 30, 2013             Bernanke          0.250          November 1, 2017            Yellen    0.143
March 20, 2013               Bernanke          0.000         December 13, 2017            Yellen    0.034
May 1, 2013                  Bernanke          0.067          January 31, 2018            Yellen    -0.429
June 19, 2013                Bernanke          0.134           March 21, 2018             Powell    -0.042
July 31, 2013                Bernanke          0.125             May 2, 2018              Powell    -0.333
September 18, 2013           Bernanke         -0.067            June 13, 2018             Powell    0.156
October 30, 2013             Bernanke         -0.067           August 1, 2018             Powell    -0.600
December 18, 2013            Bernanke          0.023         September 26, 2018           Powell    -0.286
January 29, 2014             Bernanke         -0.048          November 8, 2018            Powell    -0.200
March 19, 2014                Yellen           0.258         December 19, 2018            Powell    0.000
April 30, 2014                Yellen           0.077          January 30, 2019            Powell    0.286
June 18, 2014                 Yellen          -0.094           March 20, 2019             Powell    0.067
July 30, 2014                 Yellen          -0.077             May 1, 2019              Powell    0.333
September 17, 2014            Yellen          -0.127            June 19, 2019             Powell    -0.070
October 29, 2014              Yellen           0.400            July 31, 2019             Powell    0.067
December 17, 2014             Yellen           0.367
January 28, 2015              Yellen           0.091
March 18, 2015                Yellen           0.259
April 29, 2015                Yellen           0.059
June 17, 2015                 Yellen           0.206
July 29, 2015                 Yellen           0.077
  Notes: This table shows the aggregate text sentiment for each FOMC meeting in the sample.




                                                                                                        38
        Appendix Figure 1. Response of SHV ETF (Short Treasury Bond ETF; maturities one year or less) to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.

                                                                                                                                                                      39
                       Appendix Figure 2. Response of SHY ETF (1-3 Year Treasury Bond ETF) to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.
                                                                                                                                                                      40
                        Appendix Figure 3. Response of IEI ETF (3-7 Year Treasury Bond ETF) to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.

                                                                                                                                                                      41
                      Appendix Figure 4. Response of IEF ETF (7-10 Year Treasury Bond ETF) to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.

                                                                                                                                                                      42
                        Appendix Figure 5. Response of TLH ETF (10-20 Year Treasury Bond) to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.

                                                                                                                                                                      43
                       Appendix Figure 6. Response of TLT ETF (20+ Year Treasury Bond ETF) to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.

                                                                                                                                                                      44
                       Appendix Figure 7. Response of VIXM ETF (VIX Mid-Term Futures ETF) to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.

                                                                                                                                                                      45
        Appendix Figure 8. Response of the British Pound to one U.S. Dollar (pound/dollar) exchange rate to policy actions and messages.




Notes: the figure reports estimated slope coefficients  (Specification (3)) for policy communication/actions. Dashed lines show 90% bootstrap confidence intervals.

                                                                                                                                                                      46
