                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       SOVEREIGN DEBT IN THE 21ST CENTURY:
                      LOOKING BACKWARD, LOOKING FORWARD

                                     Kris James Mitchener
                                      Christoph Trebesch

                                      Working Paper 28598
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28598


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




We thank Matthew Cunningham, Jonathan Oeztunc, Torge Marxen, Brenton Stefko and Thore
Petersen for very helpful research assistance and Josefin Meyer and Lucie Stoppok for sharing
data and making suggestions. We further thank Andreea Maerean, Rui Esteves, Galine Hale,
Steve Haber, Kim Oosterlinck, and Noel Maurer for helpful discussion and comments. Trebesch
gratefully acknowledges financial support from the German Research Foundation (DFG, SPP
1859). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Kris James Mitchener and Christoph Trebesch. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sovereign Debt in the 21st Century: Looking Backward, Looking Forward
Kris James Mitchener and Christoph Trebesch
NBER Working Paper No. 28598
March 2021
JEL No. F30,F34,G12,G15,N10,N20

                                         ABSTRACT

How will sovereign debt markets evolve in the 21st century? We survey how the literature has
responded to the Eurozone debt crisis, placing "lessons learned" in historical perspective. The
crisis featured: (i) the return of debt problems to advanced economies; (ii) a bank-
sovereign "doom-loop" and the propagation of sovereign risk to households and firms;
(iii) roll-over problems and self-fulfilling crisis dynamics; (iv) severe debt distress without
outright sovereign defaults; (v) large-scale "sovereign bailouts" from abroad; and (vi) creditor
threats to litigate and hold out in a debt restructuring. Many of these characteristics were
already present in historical debt crises and are likely to remain relevant in the future. Looking
forward, our survey points to a growing role of sovereign-bank linkages, legal risks, domestic
debt and default, and of official creditors, due to new lenders such as China as well as the
increasing dominance of central banks in global debt markets. Questions of debt sustainability
and default will remain acute in both developing and advanced economies.


Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu

Christoph Trebesch
Kiel Institute for the World Economy
Research Area on International Finance
Kiellinie 66,
24105 Kiel,
Germany
and CEPR and CESifo
christoph.trebesch@ifw-kiel.de
1. Introduction

In 2020, as we enter the second decade of the 21st century, sovereign debt levels around the
world are reaching record highs. The Covid-19 pandemic and its economic effects have
triggered a global sovereign borrowing boom that is almost unparalleled in history. How will
governments deal with rising debt burdens? Why are creditors willing to lend to highly indebted
sovereigns and what happens if they suddenly stop doing so? Can we expect a new wave of
defaults, and, if so, what toll will they take on economies, both developing and developed?
These are highly topical questions, but all of them have antecedents in history. 1

In this survey, we look back to better understand the challenges that lie ahead. In particular, we
examine the large body of sovereign debt research that has emerged since the crash of 2007-9
and the subsequent eurozone debt crisis of 2010-12. Most previous surveys on the topic have
focused on sovereign debt problems of developing countries in the past decades, motivated by
defaults in Latin America, Africa, and Asia in the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s. 2 Our perspective is
global and long-run: we compare sovereign debt markets and crises in advanced economies to
those in emerging markets and throughout history, going back 200 years and more.

Our survey emphasizes advanced economy 3 debt problems, not just because many recent
influential contributions have this focus, but also because the collateral damage from the default
of a present-day rich, "financialized," and highly-integrated economy looks very different from
that in an emerging market. Simply put, a default by Spain or Italy can have different
consequences than a default by Mozambique, Venezuela, or Lebanon. That said, in a post-
pandemic world, high debt burdens and potential sovereign repayment problems will likely
remain a challenge in both advanced and emerging markets for the coming years or decades.

We are particularly interested in lessons from the most recent major debt crisis ­ in the eurozone
- and the many scholarly contributions written in response to it. What can we learn from what
happened in Europe between 2008 and 2013? Were the events a harbinger of what is to come
in other countries and regions? What features of the eurozone crisis were "new" and which ones
are likely to play a role in future debt crises?




1
  Early research on sovereign debt and default includes Clarke (1878), Manes (1918), Feis (1930), Winkler (1933)
and Borchard and Wynne (1951).
2
  For example, see Panizza, Sturzenegger, and Zettelmeyer (2009) and Aguiar and Amador (2014). Surveys have
also taken a longer-run historical perspective on defaults (Oosterlinck 2013).
3
  By "advanced economies," in general, we mean high-income, high-productivity, industrialized countries, many
of which also have developed financial markets (though the variation in financial development is greater the
farther we go back in time). Since our analysis is retrospective, a better term might be "leading economies,"
since measures such as GDP per capita can change considerably over longer sweeps of history. For simplicity, in
the empirical analysis, we focus on 20 of today's industrial economies: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.

                                                       1
More specifically, this survey is structured around eight core features of the eurozone crisis,
each of which receives its own section:

   ·   Debt problems return to advanced economies
   ·   Debt crises without default
   ·   The transmission of sovereign risk to firms and the macroeconomy
   ·   Bank-sovereign linkages and the emergence of "doom loops"
   ·   Roll-over risks: why multiple equilibria and bond maturity matter
   ·   The rise of domestic debt and default
   ·   The return of official lending (by sovereigns and central banks)
   ·   Growing legal risk in sovereign defaults and restructurings

Our goal is to highlight new insights from the literature on each of these features, placing them
in the context of both theory and history. The theoretical view helps us to discipline our reading
of events and of empirical results. The long-run view, in turn, helps to understand whether the
models developed in response to the eurozone debt crisis hold more generally. Where
appropriate, we supplement the discussion of the recent research with empirical "mini tests"
from history, so as to place the lessons learned in a broader perspective.

Section 2 sets the stage by exploring the re-emergence of sovereign debt problems in advanced
economies. The eurozone debt crisis reminds us of two recurrent features from history: (i) debt
crises happen relatively frequently and (ii) they happen in high-income or "advanced
economies" as well as in lower or middle-income economies (often referred to as emerging
markets). Indeed, history is replete with examples of defaults in the leading economies of the
time ­ Spain in early modern Europe, France in the wake of the Napoleonic wars, Argentina
during the Belle Epoque, and the U.S. when it abrogated the gold clause in the 1930s. In the
past decades, however, researchers focused almost exclusively on sovereign lending problems
in developing countries. This changed after 2009, when sovereign risk and repayment problems
suddenly became a central macroeconomic policy issue in Athens, Dublin, and Rome. To place
the crisis in perspective, we review the historical cases of advanced-economy default, such as
those during the Great Depression and WWII, and discuss the growing literature on "debt
overhangs" and debt sustainability in advanced economies.

Section 3 characterizes the phenomenon of "debt crises without default." According to
traditional metrics, such as the definitions used by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) or rating
agencies like Standard & Poor's, the eurozone crisis would not be classified as a "debt crisis."
The reason is that no eurozone country missed payments and only one country, Greece,
restructured its debt. It did so preemptively and without missing payments. Thus, despite a rapid
surge in sovereign bond yields in the eurozone periphery, there was no payment default. Such
an outcome is not without precedent. It is reminiscent of several recent emerging-market crises,
in which governments avoided default and instead serviced their debt in full, despite rapidly
increasing bond yields (e.g. Mexico in 1994/95, Brazil in 1998 and 2001, Turkey in 2001, and
the Philippines in 1998). Using 150 years of data, we document that "debt crises without

                                                2
default" are not new, but have become the new normal since the 1990s. In the past two decades,
only about 20% of episodes with severe debt distress ended up in a sovereign default.

Section 4 explores why sovereign debt crises are costly. Theoretical models typically assume
that defaults give rise to "output costs," implying a decline in GDP during default. Until
recently, however, the literature had been rather silent on the underlying microeconomic
reasons for these output costs. Moreover, the literature had difficulty explaining why GDP
declined so strongly in Greece, Portugal, or Spain in 2010-12 even though there was no payment
default in these countries. Recent theoretical and empirical contributions address both issues by
examining specific channels of how sovereign risk (a collapse in sovereign bond prices, rather
than an outright default) is transmitted to banks, households and firms, resulting in less
investment and lower welfare.

The feedback between distressed banks and fiscally-distressed governments is explored in more
depth in Section 5. Sovereign-bank linkages during the crisis have become known as "doom
loops," and these motivated an entirely new area of research. We first describe the literature
that examines how "doom loops" emerge and how they can amplify economic downturns. We
then draw on long-run data to explore the history of sovereign-bank "doom loops" over the past
200 years. We find that "doom loops" are by no means a new phenomenon, but they have
become much more prevalent. We document nine "doom loops" prior to World War II, and a
further 13 in emerging markets since the 1980s. We speculate that, in contrast to the past, policy
makers today perceive them as critical, because recent crises have occurred in highly
financialized economies, and because governments, banks, and their regulatory agencies have
become more intertwined.

Another notable feature of the eurozone crisis was the debate about "self-fulfilling" crises and
"multiple equilibria". Ireland and Portugal, for example, experienced problems in refinancing
existing debts, as bond yields surged rapidly. Some observers interpreted this as an
expectations-driven panic. Section 6 explores the recent theoretical advances of modeling
rollover risk, multiple equilibria, and self-fulfilling crises as well as a new generation of models
with long maturity bonds. We discuss how institutional constraints, such as Europe's monetary
union, could have played a role in tipping countries into "bad equilibria" and whether self-
fulfilling crises will be more prevalent the future.

The eurozone crisis primarily involved domestic sovereign bonds, in the sense that governments
had issued these bonds in their own currency (the euro), on domestic markets, and mostly using
local law contracts. The lines were blurred by the fact that the bondholders were both domestic
and foreign, and because member countries could not set their own monetary or exchange rate
policy in responding to the crisis. In spite of this, the crisis can be seen as part of a larger trend
towards a more domestic debt issuance, and perhaps as a consequence, more domestic debt
default. Section 7 examines the recent literature on the rise of domestic currency debt
worldwide and the motives for issuing debt at home or abroad.


                                                  3
Section 8 discusses the fact that the eurozone crisis involved large-scale "sovereign bailouts,"
i.e. government-to-government lending via the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), as well
as a heavy reliance on the European Central Bank (ECB) to alleviate debt distress and fiscal
pressures. We place these recent official-to-official debt flows into a historical perspective and
discuss the literature exploring the implications of these bailouts for private debt markets and
the domestic economy. We show that central banks have, again, become large-scale holders of
sovereign debt, at levels not seen since WWII. Overall, policy makers appear to have become
more averse to defaulting compared to the past, perhaps due to the increased risk of doom-
loops, cross-border crisis spillovers, and self-fulfilling crisis dynamics.

Relatedly, Section 9 examines why it has become harder to restructure sovereign debt and
negotiate debt relief with private creditors in an ad hoc manner. We take stock of the legal
environment under which sovereign debt now operates, and discuss research on the rise of
creditor litigation in London and New York as an increasingly important "enforcement
technology." We also focus on the "holdout problem" ­ when groups of creditors refuse to
participate in a negotiated restructuring, as happened for the English-law bonds in Greece's
2012 debt exchange. These developments appear to have strengthened the hands of creditors
and raised the cost of default for debtors.

2. The return of debt problems in advanced economies

The wave of defaults of the 1980s triggered a large body of work on sovereign lending in low-
and middle-income economies and default involving international banks. 4 During the 1990s
and 2000s, after the re-emergence of emerging market bond lending in the wake of the Brady
deals, the literature moved on to study sovereign bonds and bond defaults, again focusing on
periphery countries such as Argentina, Mexico, Russia, and Ecuador. Research on advanced-
country debt also flourished, but it largely abstracted from aspects of sovereign risk and
default. 5 Instead, the emphasis was on fiscal policy, optimal debt management, and deficit
spending (see e.g. Barro 1979, Alesina and Tabellini 1990, Bohn 1998, Alesina and Passalacqua
2016). The outbreak of the 2008 financial crises and a sovereign debt crisis involving high-
income countries in Europe was a striking development and served as motivation for
researchers to pivot and focus on default risk in richer countries. Ang and Longstaf (2013) and
Chernov, Schmid, and Schneider (forthcoming), for example, study default risk in the United
States, a country whose bonds are often regarded as "riskless."

2.1. "Advanced countries do not default"

The fact that few studies examined default risk in advanced or "leading" economies is
unsurprising. Since World War II, no advanced country had entered a debt crisis, in contrast to
the large number of defaults in the developing world. The view that advanced countries "do not

4
    See Eaton and Fernandez (1995) on the early literature and Tomz and Wright (2013) for an empirical survey.
5
    As stated in the introduction, by advanced countries we refer to industrialized economies. See Footnote 4.


                                                        4
default" gained currency after World War II (as described in Reinhart, Reinhart, and Rogoff
2015), and the notion even survived in the midst of the eurozone crisis ­ when the IMF issued
a policy paper entitled "Default in Today's Advanced Economies: Unnecessary, Undesirable,
and Unlikely" (Cottarelli et al. 2010). Public debt levels in advanced economies declined during
the 1960s and 1970s and, despite an increase in the 1980s and 1990s, were still in line with
historical averages (see Figure 2).

Advanced countries, ceteris paribus, were regarded as more resilient, owing to their more
diversified economies (e.g., less reliance on commodity exports), more developed institutions,
more resources to tax, and greater "state capacity." In line with this, Reinhart, Rogoff, and
Savastono (2003) showed that advanced countries can sustain higher levels of debt and are less
likely to default in the wake of adverse shocks. Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastono (2003) in part,
attribute this higher "debt tolerance" to better institutions for economic and crisis management
(in line with North and Weingast 1989 and Acemoglu et al 2003). 6 For example, some have
argued that powerful central banks, such as the ECB, are important pillars of crisis management
(e.g. Martin and Philippon 2017). It has also been argued that advanced countries benefit from
having traditionally issued most of their debt in domestic currency and under domestic law (see
Section 8). 7 Indeed, once domestic debt and default are accounted for, the advanced economies
appear somewhat less "debt tolerant" (Reinhart and Rogoff 2011b).

2.2. A brief history of advanced country defaults

Figure 1 puts recent experiences in a long-run perspective. Advanced-country default is not
new, but rather the norm, historically, as documented by Suter (1992), Reinhart and Rogoff
(2009) and Meyer, Reinhart, and Trebesch (2019). For example, prior to the 19th century, the
Spanish empire defaulted more than a dozen times, including in periods when it ruled large
parts of the world (Philip II was particularly notorious). The kings of France were also serial
defaulters between 1500 and 1800. In the 19th century, the first wave of advanced country
defaults occurred during the Napoleonic wars, when Austria, France, the Netherlands, Prussia,
and Sweden, among others, ceased payments on their external debts (see Figure 1). The
remainder of the 19th century was dominated by defaults in Latin America and other developing
countries, even though Spain, Portugal, and Austria defaulted repeatedly as well.

Advanced countries once again became the epicenter of international sovereign debt problems
after WWI, particularly in Europe, due to the large-scale bilateral official loans extended
between governments during and after the war. The so-called "war debt question" dominated
international headlines and international economic conferences throughout the 1920s and came
to an end, only in 1934. In that year, all main European debtor countries, except Finland,


6
  On the importance of institutions for sovereign risk and default, see Schultz and Weingast (2003), Van
Rijckeghem and Weder (2009), Kohlscheen (2007) and Trebesch (2019).
7
  Some also argue that advanced countries have more to lose from a default, mainly due to high costs to their
reputation (e.g. Phan and Wright 2019), which serves to constrain their behavior.

                                                        5
defaulted unilaterally on their debts towards the US and the UK (Moulton and Pasvolsky 1932,
Lloyd 1934, Reinhart and Trebesch 2016a, Hall et al. 2019).

During the interwar era, several advanced countries also defaulted on their debt to private
creditors (e.g. Eichengreen and Portes 1986, 1989), with the United States' abrogation of the
gold clause in 1933 and Germany's sovereign debt default receiving renewed attention recently
(Edwards, Longstaff, and Martin. 2015 and Edwards 2018; Galofré-Vilà, et al. 2019; Straumann
2019). Dozens of lesser-known restructurings and debt "conversions" were also arranged with
domestic creditors during the 1930s (Reinhart and Rogoff 2015, Meyer 2020). In addition, the
governments of Germany, Italy, and Japan were in default on their external debts during World
War II. These defaults ended with a series of restructurings in the late 1940s and 1950s, most
prominently in the London agreement of 1953, which settled Germany's debts to private and
official creditors. After this, defaults became a rarity in advanced economies.

Figure 1: Defaults in advanced and emerging economies, external private debt, 1800-2015




            Note: Data and sample of independent countries from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009).




2.3. Debt sustainability and debt overhang ­ a new literature

After 2008, advanced countries saw a strong increase in debt-to-GDP levels (Figure 2), which
nurtured concerns about aging populations and low growth (Cecchetti, Mohanty, and Zampolli
2010, Yared 2019).




                                                  6
                   Figure 2: Government debt as a percent of GDP: 1900-2011




            Note: Data and graph from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), unweighted country averages.

The return of advanced-economy debt problems motivated new research in two areas. The first
explores sovereign "debt overhang," or the implications of high debt levels for growth and
investment. 8 This work was sparked by an article of Reinhart and Rogoff (2010), which
documented a negative correlation between debt levels and growth, and argued that it was
particularly problematic when public debt rose above 90% of GDP. More than two dozen papers
have re-examined this issue, focusing on the choice of the debt thresholds, the potential
endogeneity of debt, the role of weighting and data coverage, and on heterogeneity across
countries and time. 9 Most of the follow-up studies also find a negative correlation between debt
and growth. However, there is no consensus about the importance of a 90% threshold and on
whether the relationship between these variables is causal (Checherita-Westphal and Rother
2012; Eberhardt and Presbitero 2015). A subsequent paper by Reinhart, Reinhart, and Rogoff
(2012) expands their original dataset and finds that advanced countries that enter a high-debt
spell (exceeding 90% of GDP) typically stay above that threshold for two decades or more. At
the same time, interest rates often remain low or decline during such spells, reminiscent of the
current situation in Japan or Southern Europe where high debt levels are part and parcel with
low sovereign bond yields.

A second research stream examines debt sustainability in advanced economies. In comparison
to earlier approaches (e.g. Blanchard 1990), the new literature introduces uncertainty, examines
non-linearities, and has a more quantitative focus. For example, Ghosh et al. (2013) build on
the "fiscal reaction function" approach of Bohn (1998) to estimate "fiscal space," defined as
the distance between a country's current debt level and its estimated "debt limit," when debt

8
  Theory work on the topic goes back to Cohen and Sachs (1986) and Krugman (1988). More recently, see
Aguiar, Amador, and Gopinath (2009).
9
  For examples, see Kumar and Woo (2010), Herndon, Ash, and Pollin (2014), Cecchetti, Mohanty, and Zampolli
(2011), and Panizza and Presbitero (2014).

                                                    7
solvency and repayment are no longer assured. The estimated debt limits differ notably across
23 advanced economies, ranging between 150 and 250% of GDP (see also Mendoza and Ostry
2008). Another example of work in this area is Collard, Habib, and Rochet (2015). They find a
large variation in sustainable debt limits across the OECD, with some countries close to hitting
their "maximum sustainable debt ratio." Another branch explores debt sustainability in the
setting of dynamic general equilibrium models (e.g. D'Erasmo, Mendoza, and Zhang (2016) or
Bi (2012). Many recent analyses of debt sustainability share a commonality in that they have a
non-linear relationship between debt levels and sovereign risk premia. Once public debt passes
a certain (country-specific) upper threshold, interest rates increase rapidly, so that debt suddenly
becomes unsustainable. This relates to the literature on self-fulfilling debt crises, which we
discuss in Section 6.

In addition, new contributions on debt sustainability have been motivated by the current low-
interest-rate environment. In his presidential lecture to the American Economic Association,
Blanchard (2019) argued that "public debt may have no fiscal cost" if interest rates (r) remain
below the rate of growth (g) for the time being. With close to zero interest rates, governments
can potentially borrow and roll over their debts without needing to increase taxes in the future.
However, Mehrotra and Sergeyev (2019) and Mauro and Zhou (2020) suggest that negative r-
g differentials are quite common over the past 200 years. Both papers also point to the large
uncertainty over future interest rates and shocks, including the possibility of abrupt bond yield
reversals and subsequent defaults.

3. Debt crises without default

The eurozone crisis is widely regarded as a sovereign debt crisis (e.g. Lane 2012, Brunnermeier
and Reis 2019). However, according to the prevalent definition of debt crises, it was not. As
discussed by Ams et al. (2019), most researchers identify a sovereign default as involving either
(i) missed payments (a legal default) and/or (ii) a debt restructuring at terms that are worse than
the original terms, implying creditor losses ("haircuts") and/or coercion imposed by the
sovereign (This is also the definition used by rating agencies, such as S&P. See also Reinhart
and Rogoff 2009).

The traditional definition thus fails to classify most eurozone crisis countries as being in crisis.
Only Greece and Cyprus met the criteria, and only for a single year each, due to their debt
restructurings in 2012 and 2013, respectively. 10 No other European government defaulted,
despite very high bond yields, very high credit default swap (CDS) premia, and a loss of market
access, most notably in Portugal and Ireland. Put differently, Europe went through a deep debt
crisis, but bondholders continued to receive payments in full and on time. In a similar vein,
several prominent emerging market crises, e.g. Mexico (1994/95), Thailand (1997/98), Brazil
(1999 and 2002), Turkey (2001), or Russia (2015) did not result in a default or restructuring of


10
  Even these two countries did not miss a single payment because the debt exchanges were arranged
preemptively (Asonuma and Trebesch 2016, Zettelmeyer, Trebesch, and Gulati 2013).

                                                     8
external debt. 11

We term these events as "sovereign debt crises without default." These are crises with high
sovereign bond yields and debt rollover problems, but no missed payments or legal default.
Pescatori and Sy (2007) argue that default events are no longer a reliable indicator of debt-
servicing difficulties. They therefore propose to broaden the definition of debt crises to include
episodes with yield spreads above 1000 basis points, which they refer to as a "psychological
barrier by market participants." Broner, Lorenzoni, and Schmukler (2013) and Aguiar et al.
(2016) follow a similar route, identifying debt crises as episodes with strong increases in bond
yields quarter-on-quarter or what some have called "spread crises" or "spread spikes"
(Krishnamurthy and Muir 2017).

How frequent are debt crises without default in advanced countries and emerging markets? And
are they really a recent phenomenon? To address these questions, we use the dataset of Meyer,
Reinhart, and Trebesch (2019), which covers historical foreign currency bonds, and combine it
with modern-era yield data from Thomson Eikon (domestic currency sovereign bonds from
advanced countries) and from JP Morgan EMBIG (emerging market foreign-currency bonds).
Spreads are computed by subtracting a proxy for "safe assets", i.e. the UK and US long-term
bond yield until WWII (using the Meyer, Reinhart, and Trebesch 2019 data), and the US and
German Bund bond yield in the modern (post-1995) period. 12 We then classify periods with
high and/or rapidly increasing bond yield spreads and match them with data on outright defaults
and restructurings from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Meyer et al. (2019). 13 The sample
starts in 1870, when bond yield spreads become available for more than 20 countries. 14

"Spread crises" are identified by combining the methodology by Pescatori and Sy (2007), who
focus on the widely used 1000 basis point threshold, and by Aguiar et al. (2016) and
Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017), who focus on rapid spread increases. More specifically, we
identify a crisis if either the spread surpasses 1000 basis points in a given quarter and/or if
spreads increase very rapidly, defined as a spread increase that is at least in the 99th percentile


11
   Over the past 20 years, the share of countries in default have decreased notably, despite two waves of debt
servicing problems in emerging markets (1998-2002 and around 2008), as well as in 2010-2012 in Europe.
Roughly 25 sovereign defaults and restructuring episodes have occurred since the 2000s in comparison to
approximately 100 such events in the 1980s alone (Meyer, Reinhart, and Trebesch 2019). In addition, about half
of the recent sovereign bond restructurings were preemptive in nature, defined as debt exchanges before
payments are missed (Asonuma and Trebesch 2016).
12
   In the post-1995 high-income sample, we use US yields to compute bond spreads for Australia, Canada, Japan,
New Zealand, Norway, Singapore and Switzerland, and German Bund yields for EU members, namely Austria,
Belgium, Czech Republic, Greece, Finland, France, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Sweden and Spain.
13
   Specifically, our sample includes the following 45 countries. Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Brazil, Canada, Switzerland, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech Rep. (only modern), Germany (only
historic), Denmark (only historic), Ecuador, Egypt, Spain, Estonia (only historic), Finland, France, Greece,
Grenada (only historic), Hungary, India (only historic), Ireland, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Norway, New Zealand,
Panama, Peru, Philippines (only modern), Poland, Portugal, Russia, Singapore, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey,
Ukraine (only modern), Uruguay, Venezuela, South Africa.
14
   We include all sovereigns with at least 10 years of bond yield data (min 20 years in the historical sample). The
years 1946-1994 are excluded, since there was no liquid market for emerging market sovereign bonds.

                                                        9
of quarterly spread increases. 15 The "spread crisis" ends if the spread falls below its pre-crisis
average. 16

With this approach we identify 97 "spread crises" between 1870 and 2014. Of these, 53 cases
(55%) coincide with an outright default, while 44 cases do not, and can thus be termed "debt
crises without default". Interestingly, however, the share of debt crises with default has been
declining notably since 1870. This can be seen in Figure 3, which plots the fraction of "spread
spikes" with and without default across eras. Before WW I, more than 80% of debt crises
involved a default. This share fell during the interwar years and even more so during WWII,
when half of the "spread spikes" saw a default. In the modern era, only about 25% of debt crises
involve an outright payment default.

         Figure 3: Sovereign debt crises with and without default (share of events in %)




Note: Debt crises or "spread spikes" are measured by high or rapidly increasing sovereign bond yield spreads (see
text for details). Defaults involve missed payments and/or restructuring with creditor losses.

As our results indicate, "debt crises without default" are by no means new, but they have
become increasingly common since the 1990s. Figure 4 illustrate this by plotting sovereign
bond yields spreads for selected cases. Historically, one of the rare examples of "debt crises
without default" is Argentina during the belle époque (fiscal crisis of 1876) as well as during

15
   The resulting threshold in the historical period (pre-WWII) is a quarter-on-quarter spread increase of 451 basis
points. In the modern (post-1995) period the threshold is 378 basis points. Of course, crisis definitions based on
"thresholds" are ex post and ad hoc, and require that the data are driven by an objective and invariant probability
distribution ­ something that may not hold over long sweeps of history as pointed out by Oosterlinck et. al.
(2015) and one reason why we allow our threshold to vary.
16
   To avoid excessively long crisis spells we add a one quarter standard deviation to the pre-crisis spread (using
country-specific standard deviations) and use that as exit threshold. Spread spikes that occur in the same year
(four or less quarters apart) are combined into one crisis spell.


                                                        10
the 1930s (Great Depression), shown in Panel A. In both episodes, the country avoided
defaulting despite severe distress.

Similarly, Panel B shows that Brazil, Mexico and Venezuela went through periods of severe
debt distress without defaulting in the 1990s and early 2000s, while Panel C focuses on the
eurozone crisis. Despite quickly increasing bond spreads in 2010 and 2011, neither Portugal
nor Ireland ended up defaulting.

                 Figure 4: Selected episodes of debt crises without default

            Panel A: Argentina 1870-1945: three debt crises but only one default




               Panel B: Latin America in the 1990s: only Argentina defaults




                                            11
                      Panel C: Eurozone debt crisis: only Greece defaults




The historical evidence thus suggests that the nature of sovereign debt crises has changed over
the past 200 years. The probability of outright default has decreased while yield spikes without
missed payments have become more frequent. Today, the large majority of debt distress spells
end benignly for creditors, in the sense that the bonds continue to be serviced in full. More
generally, Mauro, Sussman, and Yafeh (2002) find that the probability of sharp increases in
bond spreads has gone up compared to the 19th century, as has the co-movement of bond yields
across countries. Put differently, the "global factor" and contagion in sovereign risk pricing has
become more important in recent decades, while country-specific fundamentals have become
less so (see also González-Rozada and Yeyati 2008 and Longstaff et al. 2011).

4. The transmission of sovereign risk to firms and the macroeconomy

The eurozone debt crisis also re-shaped how the field thinks about the consequences of
sovereign risk and default. A new generation of sovereign debt models focuses on micro-level
effects, in particular the costs borne by firms and households when sovereigns face debt distress.
This body of work also draws attention to the central role of banks and financial markets for
propagating sovereign default risk, including the feedback effect between sovereign credit and
the financial sector, known as "doom loops." In this section we focus on the propagation of
sovereign risk to firms, households, and the macroeconomy. We then devote Section 5 to
sovereign-bank linkages.

One of the oldest puzzles regarding sovereign debt is why countries ever bother to pay back
their loans to foreign creditors, since, unlike for corporations, enforcement is cumbersome, and
no insolvency regime exists. Over the past four decades, the two main explanations as to what

                                               12
motivates countries to service their debts are "reputation" and "sanctions." According to the
first view, a default hurts the government's reputation and thus implies a loss of access to
international capital markets as well as higher borrowing costs (as in Eaton and Gersovitz
1981). In addition, defaults can trigger sanctions of diplomatic, legal or military nature, thereby
impairing a country's ability to trade in international goods and capital markets (as in Bulow
and Rogoff 1989a). There is some historical evidence for the operation of both of these
channels. However, the fact that sovereigns can typically borrow again after a default, often at
comparatively low rates, casts doubt on the notion that observed penalties or "pure reputational
effects" are sufficient to discipline borrowers.

Starting with Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) and Arellano (2008), a new strand of literature
developed quantitative models that could match a set of "stylized facts" on sovereign debt and
default (see Aguiar and Amador 2014 for a survey). For example, many of these models assume
that aggregate output falls by roughly 2% in response to default. This "output cost" assumption
helps to generate equilibrium levels of debt that are more in line with what is observed in the
data.

Subsequent empirical research appears to confirm the existence of sizable output costs
associated with default, typically in the range of 1-4 percentage points of real GDP per capita
growth in the first few years post-default (e.g. Borensztein and Panizza 2009, Furceri and
Zdzienicka 2012, Kuvshinov and Zimmermann 2019). 17 Moreover, there is growing evidence
that the characteristics of the debt crisis matter. Defaults involving high creditor losses or
"haircuts," long negotiation delays, and "coercive" government measures such as a unilateral
payment suspension are associated with higher output losses and increased subsequent
borrowing costs (Cruces and Trebesch 2013, Trebesch and Zabel 2017, Catão and Mano 2017,
Asonuma et al. 2019). 18

However, this literature does not explore the underlying reasons why sovereign defaults lead to
a decline in output, nor does it try to model the cost of sovereign risk in the absence of default,
as observed during the eurozone debt crisis. To grapple with these features, researchers have
been examining the microeconomic channels through which sovereign default risk can lead to
macroeconomic effects. For example, Mendoza and Yue (2012) develop a general equilibrium
default model in which firms rely on external finance to purchase imported production inputs
from abroad. Building on Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), both the government and domestic firms
are excluded from international capital markets after a sovereign default. In each period, the
sovereign weighs the cost of this market exclusion and lost output versus the benefit of not
servicing the debt. In equilibrium, if the sovereign chooses to default, firms cannot finance their
working capital from abroad, forcing them to shift to domestic inputs and other imperfect
substitutes, and resulting in efficiency losses and a decline in output. This transmission

17
   Levy Yeyati and Panizza (2011) show that most of the output contraction occurs in the quarters prior to a
sovereign credit event, suggesting that it is mostly the expectation of a default that drives the output losses and
not the actual breach of contracts.
18
   For a theoretical analysis of "hard" and "soft" default see Gordon and Guerron-Quintana (2019).

                                                         13
mechanism, from sovereign risk to corporate financing, explains why defaults are associated
with deep recessions in the model.

More recent studies draw on the eurozone debt crisis to unearth the mechanisms explaining the
decline in output. Corsetti et al. (2012) use a New-Keynesian model to show that sovereign risk
affects corporate borrowing conditions through a fiscal channel, as higher sovereign bond yields
result in a pessimistic shift in expectations about future tax hikes, social unrest or tariff
increases. The increased corporate funding costs then contribute to lower output and
macroeconomic instability. 19 Focusing on the case of Greece, Gourinchas, Philippon, and
Vayanos (2017) similarly show that a sovereign-bond yield shock leads to contractionary fiscal
policy, increasing the likelihood of loan defaults in the private sector and thereby resulting in
higher corporate borrowing costs, lower productive investment, and, in turn, lower output. In a
similar vein, Arellano, Bai and Bocola (2019) combine a micro-founded general equilibrium
model with a detailed firm- and bank-level empirical analysis. The model features
heterogeneous firms and banks, and shows that a large increase in sovereign bond yields also
affects corporate interest rates because banks that suffer losses on their government bond
holdings tighten lending standards and ration credit. 20 This pass-through of sovereign risk is
larger for firms with large borrowing needs and for those more exposed to banks that hold many
government bonds. These mechanisms are tested in a large cross-section of Italian banks and
firms, with evidence for both channels. The empirical results are then used to estimate the
model. They find that a 100-basis-point increase in sovereign bond yields increases corporate
borrowing rates by 70 basis points, and results in a 0.7% decline in output, mostly due to the
direct (firm borrowing) effect.

In the empirical literature, a large new body of work has emerged using novel datasets and
methods to identify causal effects of sovereign-default risk on firms and the aggregate economy.
The analysis by Hébert and Schreger (2017) is noteworthy since it is the first to make use of a
natural experiment to identify the cost of sovereign default risk. They use data from Argentina
to show that higher sovereign bond yields cause a decline in the stock price of Argentine firms. 21
Specifically, the analysis exploits plausibly exogenous variation in Argentina's sovereign risk
due to a series of New York court rulings in NML vs Argentina, which the media coined the
"sovereign debt trial of the century" (see Section 9). The key identification assumption is that
the judge's rulings contained relevant news that changed the probability of a sovereign default,
but did not affect domestic firms directly. They find that a 10-percentage point increase in
default probability reduces the market value of Argentine firms by six percentage points, on
average, with larger effects for exporters, financial firms, and foreign-owned corporations. A


19
   This relates to an earlier literature, which shows that sovereign bond spreads influence business cycles and
domestic borrowing costs in emerging markets (Neumeyer and Perri 2005 and Uribe and Yue 2006).
20
   Their mechanism is similar to Gennaioli, Martin, and Rossi (2014), Bocola (2016) and others, which are
presented in greater detail in the next section.
21
   In earlier work, Arteta and Hale (2008) and Das, Papaioannou, and Trebesch (2010) find that sovereign debt
crises are accompanied by a sizable drop in external borrowing by domestic firms. Esteves and Jalles (2016)
come to the same conclusion using historical data on emerging markets prior to WWI.

                                                       14
related natural experiment from the legal sphere is the bankruptcy of the city of Detroit, which
is used as an instrument by Chari, Leary and Phan (2020) to estimate the impact of bond yield
shocks on the domestic economy of Puerto Rico. They find that higher (quasi-sovereign) default
risk mostly affects employment in industries that are dependent on government demand.

Other recent papers study the impact of sovereign rating changes and/or declines in sovereign
bond prices on domestic corporations. Almeida et al. (forthcoming) exploit exogenous variation
in the link between sovereign ratings and bank ratings, which arises from rating agencies'
sovereign ceiling policies, and show that sovereign downgrades reduce firm investment and
financial leverage. Ferrando, Popov, and Udell (2017) use a unique ECB database of survey
information of more than 28,000 small and medium size enterprises (SMEs) in Europe to
examine the effects of sovereign distress on the provision of credit. Based on a difference-in-
differences methodology, they find that SMEs in countries experiencing sovereign distress face
quantity and price rationing by banks. Brutti and Sauré (2015) and Bahaj (2020) use narrative
approaches and high-frequency CDS data during the eurozone crisis to show how sovereign
risk propagated across borders, thus raising borrowing costs for the domestic private sector.

What these theoretical and empirical contributions have in common is that sovereign risks and
corporate risks are closely intertwined. Moreover, these studies focus on the transmission (or
"pass through") of sovereign risk, measured by an increase in sovereign bond yield spreads or
CDS premia. This, in turn, is closely linked to the channel of financial intermediation. In the
next section, we will therefore delve into the role of banks and the financial system as a link
between the public and the private sectors in episodes of sovereign distress.

5. Sovereign bank linkages: the (Re?)-emergence of doom loops

5.1. Defaults and their effects on the financial sector

The feedback between distressed banks and sovereigns featured prominently in the 2008 crisis
and the European debt crisis, so much so, that commentators coined several terms to describe
this interaction, including "doom loops," "diabolic loops," and "vicious cycles" (see e.g.
Brunnermeier et al. 2016). Fears of the consequences of a Greek default in 2011-2012 were
centered on sovereign-bank linkages, particularly as to whether the balance-sheet exposure to
Greek bonds could trigger bank failures and worsen the economic downturn in Greece and
Europe. In addition, the sovereign debt crises in Russia (1998) and Argentina (2001) suggested
that government defaults directly affect bank balance sheets. Using country-level data,
Borensztein and Panizza (2009) and Reinhart and Rogoff (2011a) were among the first to show
that sovereign defaults help to predict banking crises. In the wake of the Eurozone crisis, new
strands of empirical and theoretical research built on these insights to better understand the
mechanism behind the feedback loops as well as their economic costs.

Early theoretical contributions on the sovereign-bank nexus include Brutti (2011), Bolton and
Jeanne (2011), and Gennaioli, Martin, and Rossi (2014) (GMR). What these three models have

                                               15
in common is that bank holdings of sovereign bonds generate contagious spillovers when
default takes place. This creates costs akin to the default-induced output losses in Arellano
(2008), and reduces the incentives for sovereigns to default, even in the absence of direct
sanctions or reputational penalties.

Brutti (2011) proposed a model that explains the coincidence in timing of defaults and banking
crises in emerging market economies. A default can induce a liquidity crisis that reduces
domestic production and investment, especially if the private sector has incomplete access to
credit markets and is forced into holding government bonds directly (or indirectly through the
banking sector). Bolton and Jeanne (2011) focus, instead, on financially integrated economies,
such as in the eurozone. In their model, financial integration creates incentives for domestic
banks to diversify their holdings of government bonds across countries. This generates risk
diversification benefits ex ante, but results in costly spillovers in case a foreign government
defaults.

GMR (2014) show that lending by the banking sector can sharply decline in case of a sovereign
default, especially if banks hold large amounts of sovereign bonds. In the model, unlike in
earlier theoretical work, the central cost of default is the damage done to bank balance sheets.
This results in a decline in bank lending and, consequently, a drop in investment and output.
GMR apply their model to panel data between 1980 and 2005, and find that debt crises tended
to be followed by a decline in private credit, especially in financially developed economies and
when banks have significant government debt on their books. In follow-up research, GMR
(2018) expand their empirical analysis, using bank-level data across 191 countries and until
2012. They find that, on average, banks hold roughly 9% of their assets as government bonds.
In 20 instances of default, lending drops more by those banks that are heavily exposed to
government bonds. Sosa-Padilla (2018) builds a closely related model in which a government's
decision to default triggers a banking crisis through non-performing sovereign bonds, which in
turn leads to a decline in the provision of credit to the private sector and output losses. His
theoretical contribution is to endogenize the output cost of default. 22

These models help to rationalize the concerns about a sovereign payment default in a highly
financialized economies like Spain or Italy. What this literature does not explain, however, are
the potential sovereign-risk spillovers in countries that did not default. More recent work
therefore considers whether beliefs about the potential default are sufficient to disrupt financial
intermediation and stunt growth.




22
   Perez (2015) proposes a second channel through which a sovereign default can create output costs via the
banking system. In addition to the spillovers arising from banks' balance sheet exposure, his model contains a
"liquidity channel." When governments default, less public debt is issued and bonds have low returns. As a
result, banks shift from holding public debt to investing in lower productivity projects than they otherwise
would, which ties up capital and will, all else being equal, lead to a lower aggregate output. See also Engler and
Grosse Steffen (2016).

                                                        16
Bocola (2016) develops a model along these lines, where news that the government may default
in the future can have adverse effects for bank lending and economic growth. When the price
of the debt falls on secondary markets, the bank's net worth declines and bank funding costs
rise. Banks respond by reducing lending to the private sector, which results in less capital
expenditure and investment, which, in turn, can generate a recession. Bocola calls this the
conventional liquidity channel, but he also models a second channel, which he terms the risk
channel. The belief that a default will occur in the future can alter a bank's willingness to lend
to non-financial firms today. As banks become more cautious, they pass this along to their
private sector customers by raising rates on loans. Banks also perceive private sector lending
as riskier, resulting in sales of private-sector assets and lower bank net worth. The combination
of precaution and perceived greater risk thus induces banks to reduce their exposure to the
private sector, leading to a decline in lending and capital expenditure, a lower output. To
understand the relative contributions of these channels, Bocola (2016) structurally estimates the
model using data on the Italian debt crisis and shows that the risk channel accounted for 45%
of the "pass through" of sovereign risk to firms' borrowing costs. He also finds that Italian
output would have also been about 1% higher annually without this sovereign distress effect.
The paper thus provides an explanation as to why "debt crises without default" matter for the
real economy.

A closely-related empirical literature reinforces this point by showing how distress in European
sovereign bond markets spilled over into the domestic banking sector, ultimately causing a
credit crunch and higher firm borrowing costs. Acharya, Eisert, Eufinger, and Hirsch (2018),
for example, find that poorly capitalized banks holding sovereign bonds reduced their
syndicated lending by up to 50% at the height of the debt crisis. Similar results are reported by
Altavilla, Pagano and Simonelli (2017) using data for euro-area banks, and by Bofondi,
Carpinelli, and Sette (2018) and Bottero, Lenzu, and Mezzanotti (2020) using granular Italian
data at the loan-, bank- and firm-level.

5.2. Bank distress and spillovers to sovereigns

Given their interconnected nature, doom loops could also arise from problems in the banking
sector. If market participants expect distress in the banking sector and subsequent bank bailouts
by the government, they will price that risk into sovereign spreads, triggering a decline in bond
prices and, possibly, a rollover crisis. 23 This, in turn, will affect bank balance sheets, further
increasing the likelihood of a banking crises.

Acharya, Drechsler, and Schnabl (2014) develop a three-sector model to explore these feedback
loops. The model features a financial sector with high leverage and exposure to systematic risk
in the corporate sector. Financial firms face the possibility of bank runs, giving rise to
government bailouts. Specifically, governments will respond by issuing new sovereign bonds

23
   Historically, costly rescue packages have taken many forms, including bank nationalizations, capital
injections, guarantees for bank liabilities, toxic asset purchases, liquidity support from the central bank, deposit
freezes, and bank holidays (Laeven and Valencia 2013).

                                                         17
and transfer the proceeds to banks so that their supply of credit does not fall. The new bond
issuances, in turn, lead to debt dilution and higher sovereign credit risk, which then feeds back
to the financial sector by reducing the value of its holdings of government bonds as well as the
value of its government guarantees. Several testable predictions arise from this model, which
are confirmed in their empirical analysis with sovereign and bank CDS premia. First, the
announcement of a bailout initially reduces credit risk in the financial sector, but also increases
sovereign credit risk. Second, after the bailout, there is significantly more co-movement
between sovereign and bank credit risk, even after controlling for banks' own equity returns. In
sum, the paper shows that the bank bailouts where a "pyrrhic victory," with short-term
beneficial effects that ultimately haunted sovereigns across Europe. 24

Several other papers corroborate these findings. Mody and Sandri (2012), for example, trace
the origins of the European debt crisis to the bailout of Bear Stearns in early 2008, which raised
market expectations of costly government bank bailouts. The sovereign-bank feedback loop
intensified after the nationalization of Anglo Irish Bank in January 2009 and, in particular, with
the skyrocketing Greek bond yields in 2010. Relatedly, Acharya and Steffen (2015) show that
banks in the periphery of Europe increased their holdings of domestic sovereign bonds, rather
than decreasing them, as the eurozone crisis escalated, leading to a stronger feedback loop.
Moreover, Ang and Longstaff (2013) use CDS spread data from US states and eurozone
countries, finding that a significant portion of sovereign risk is linked to financial market
conditions rather than driven by macroeconomic fundamentals. This is in line with Morelli,
Ottonello and Perez (2019), which shows that, in 2008, after the Lehman collapse, emerging
market bonds held by more-distressed global banks were subjected to larger price declines.

5.3. Are sovereign-bank doom loops becoming more severe? A historical perspective

This subsection moves beyond the recent experience and explores historical precedents. Have
sovereign-bank linkages intensified in recent years, perhaps because the economy has become
more financialized as a whole (Jordà, Schularick and Taylor 2016)? Or has the issue of
sovereign-bank contagion merely resurfaced in recent years? Shedding light on this question
has implications for policy as well as for the external validity of the newer generation of
sovereign debt models with financial intermediation. In addition, the theoretical discussion
above raises an empirical question that history can help to answer: which typically comes first,
banking crises or sovereign debt crises? Here we provide additional evidence on these
questions.

There are good reasons to believe that banks and sovereigns have maintained close ties over the
past centuries. Many of the initial banks owed their very existence to sovereigns. States,
meanwhile, were often given privileged access to banking services. Indeed, before secondary
markets emerged, private bankers often lent to sovereigns to finance wars and secure borders.
There is also a long history of mutual assistance between banks and sovereigns. In wartime,

24
     For a related model, see Farhi and Tirole (2018).

                                                         18
banks aid sovereigns by absorbing new domestic debt issues. In turn, banks often receive
emergency funding (e.g., liquidity support by a central bank) or direct capital infusions from
states when in need (e.g. Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009). 25 And in peacetime, banks can aid
sovereigns by holding large amounts of bonds in their portfolios ­ to guarantee a market for
the sovereign bonds and to allow nations to rollover their debt ­ a form of financial repression
that was practiced after World War II (Reinhart and Sbrancia 2015).

Against this backdrop, we look for evidence of diabolic loops before the eurozone debt crisis.
Since financial crises are rare events, and because banking crises cum sovereign crises occur
even less frequently, we take a 200-year perspective. Our data and approach for identifying
doom loops builds on Mitchener (2014) and Maerean and Mitchener (2016). In a first step, we
draw on existing databases of historical crises to pinpoint twin sovereign-bank crises that were
coincident in timing ­ a necessary condition for the crises to be causally related. 26 We define a
"twin crisis" episode in year t when a banking crisis overlaps with a default during the period
[t- 3; t + 3]. By our definition, twin crises are thus a maximum of two years apart. Our data
exercise spans 70 countries from 1800-2008 ­ with the sample's start date determined by the
approximate date sovereign bonds became widely traded on secondary markets. 27

With a view to Section 3 on "debt crises without default", we also consider cases where
sovereign bond "spread spikes" coincide with banking crisis events. That is, we consider debt
crises even if there was no payment default, but merely debt distress as captured by rapidly
rising bond yields. To identify "spread spikes," we use monthly sovereign bond yields for all
countries that had banking crises during our sample period and for which we could gather
sovereign bond yield data. Our pre-WWI sample contains 53 countries; thereafter, our sample
consists of 42 countries. 28 To compute spreads, we subtract a proxy of the risk-free rate, using
the current yield on the UK consol for the period through 1913 and the U.S. long-term bond
thereafter. To allow for comparability of spreads across countries, we follow Krishnamurthy
and Muir (2017) and construct a normalized spread ­ the bond spread divided by the sample
average spread for a given country. Specifically, we define a spread crisis in year t if the annual
change in the normalized spread is higher than the threshold . , - ,-1 > .
The cutoff was selected after examining the distribution of spread innovations and is equal to

25
   An alternative view suggests that quickly backstopping and recapitalizing banks (as was done in the EMS crisis
of the early 1990s) may limit losses to tax revenue and output and thus short-circuit the doom loop (Corsetti et.al.
2020).
26
   Crisis dates and frequencies are based on Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), Annual Reports of the Corporation of
Foreign Bondholders, the Annual Reports of the Foreign Bondholders Protective Council, Mitchener and
Weidenmier (2008), Mitchener and Weidenmier (2010), and Bordo et al. (2001).
27
   At the beginning of the 19th century, wealthy households held the bulk of sovereign bonds, but banks became
increasingly important investors subsequently (Ferguson 2006). By 1883, the bonds of foreign governments
accounted for 23% of all securities quoted on the London Stock Exchange (Michie 1999, p.89, table 3), with
large investment houses dominating the issuance of these bonds (Michie, 1999; Fishlow 1985).
28
   The main data source for constructing pre-World War I bond spreads is the Investor's Monthly Manuel (IMM).
Additional bond quotations were hand collected from the newspaper Berliner Börsen-Zeitung (BBZ) and consist
of monthly prices of government securities quoted and traded on the Berlin stock exchange from 1870-1913. We
use the Global Financial Database for data thereafter.

                                                        19
the 90th percentile. 29 Using this approach, 177 spread crises can be found during 1870-1913
and 57 spread crises during 1920-1935. 30 Note that our threshold is much less strict than in
Section 3 on "debt crises without default," where we use the 99th percentile, because our aim
here is to capture as many potential events as possible. 31

Using the sample of spread crises, we search for overlapping banking crises, in a two-year
window before or after. Since coincidence in timing is insufficient for identifying linkages
between sovereigns and banks (i.e., yields may rise and banks may fail if economic shocks are
simply large), we follow Friedman and Schwartz (1963) Jalil (2015), Richardson (2007),
Wicker (1996) and other scholars who have used a "narrative approach" to identify financial
crises historically. We use a narrative approach to explore whether twin crises were, in fact,
more deeply related. That is, we draw on articles in newspapers and periodicals, memoirs of
bankers, businessmen, and policy makers, and reports of regulatory agencies to examine how
banking distress and sovereign bond spikes/defaults interacted. The result is a taxonomy of
historical sovereign-bank feedback events that can be compared to recent experience.

Evidence from realized defaults: The first two rows of Table 1 show the number of banking
and sovereign debt crises identified for five different periods: pre-1870, the first era of
globalization (1870-1913), the interwar period, the Bretton Woods era, and post-Bretton
Woods. There were 59 banking crises and 36 sovereign debt crises in the first era of
globalization, but only six were twin crises. Before 1870, the number of twin episodes was even
smaller, just two, while in the interwar period, there were 10 twin crises. The total number of
banking crises was quite small in the Bretton Woods period, leading to only one twin crisis
episode. The largest number of twin crises (23 events) is in the modern period until 2008.

Table 1 further reports information on the sequencing of the crises for the twin episodes. We
distinguish between simultaneous twin crises when: (i) the banking and debt distress occurred
in the same year (row 4); (ii) the debt crisis occurred prior to the banking crisis (debt-bank twin
crises shown in row 5); and when the financial turmoil started prior to the public default (bank-
debt crises shown in row 6). Across all sub-periods, banking crises have generally preceded
debt crises. This remains true in the most recent period: of the 23 twin crises since Bretton
Woods, 15 were characterized by the banking crisis occurring first. Our detailed historical
analysis is consistent with Reinhart and Rogoff (2011a) and Laeven and Valencia (2013), who
show that, in general, banking crises are significant predictors of debt crises. Other studies show
mixed results on this point. 32


29
   The 90th percentile is 0.18 for the first sample and 0.99 for the second sample period.
30
   During default, countries experienced more spread crises as spreads were more volatile and suffered larger
increases. For example, 78% of the spread crisis episodes take place in defaulting countries during 1870-1913.
31
   The country coverage and time periods in the wo data sets also differ slightly. When using definitions and data
from Section 3, we find a slightly different set of twin crises based on "spread spikes," but no additional cases of
"doom loops" once the narrative evidence is also considered.
32
   Borensztein and Panizza (2009) indicate the opposite pattern for approximately the same period, 1975-2000.
Using data from the 1980-2005 period, Gennaioli, Martin, and Rossi (2014) find more episodes where the

                                                        20
                            Table 1: Twin crises (bank & debt) since 1800

  Crisis type                    19th century Pre-WWI      Interwar Bretton Woods Post-BW
                                  (pre-1870) (1870-1913) (1919-1939) (1945-1973) (1974-2008)

  Total banking crises                37              59              51                3              117
  Total sovereign debt crises         39              36              30               20               60
  Twin crises (bank & debt)           2                6              10                1               23
  ........of these:
  simulatenous (same year)             1              1                2                0                6
  debt crisis first                    0              1                2                1                2
  bank crisis first                    1              4                6                0               15

   Note: The period covered is 1800-2010, where WWI and WWII are excluded.



Table 2 reports on the subset of twin crises with elements of a doom loop at work ­ meaning a
banking crisis that spilled over to the sovereign or vice versa (i.e., we rule out episodes that are
simply coincident in timing, but show no historical narrative evidence of a "connection."). 33

Based on our data and methodology, Peru, in 1875, is our first documented case of a doom loop.
The income obtained from guano, a fertilizer and major export of the country, was central for
servicing the external debt. In the early 1870s, exports of guano began to decline and fiscal
deficits grew; further, the income from nitrate sales, another important and growing export of
the country, was insufficient to fill the gap. Debt-servicing costs continued to grow faster than
revenues. After the Banco Nacional del Peru failed in 1875, the government allowed note-
issuing banks to increase emission if they in turn lent these paper notes to the government
(primarily to meet debt obligations) in order to prevent a widespread banking panic. Further,
the government intended to employ these banks as local consignees of nitrate production in a
drive to nationalize the nitrate industry and use the nationalization proceeds for debt repayment.
The nitrate producers balked at the government's nationalization program, which included land
for government-bond swaps. Facing insufficient revenues, the government then suspended
interest payments on its external debt in December 1875. 34




banking crisis started subsequent to the default. A comparable result is found in Balteanu and Erce (2018) for a
similar time period. The differences in findings may partly be explained by differences in methods, samples, and
crisis dating. For example, Bordo and Meissner (2016) document how different crises chronologies are among
leading authors.
33
   From the perspective of timing, Germany might also seem like a candidate during the interwar period. It had a
banking crisis in 1931 and defaulted on sovereign debt, beginning in 1932. However, its banking crisis appears
unrelated (Doerr, Gissler, Peydro, and Voth 2019), and its sovereign debt presents a unique challenge in terms of
analysis: it is reparations debt form WWI, the political dynamics of which may be entirely different from what is
discussed in this survey. For detailed accounts of individual episodes and more information on the precise
linkages between banks and sovereigns or vice versa, see Maerean and Mitchener (2016).
34
   See Marichal (1989), Marichal (2014) and Vizcarra (2009).

                                                       21
                            Table 2: "Doom Loops" prior to the eurozone crisis

                            Pre-WWI                Interwar           Post-Bretton Woods
                          (1870-1913)            (1920-1939)             (1974-2008)

                         Peru (1875)          Austria (1931)         Argentina (1980)
                         France (1882)        Greece (1931)          Mexico (1981)
                         Portugal (1890)      Romania (1931)         Philipppines (1981)
                         Argentina (1890)     Poland (1931)          Chile (1982)
                         Norway (1899)                               Algeria (1990)
                                                                     Venezuela (1993)
                                                                     Indonesia (1997)
                                                                     Ecuador (1998)
                                                                     Russia (1998)
                                                                     Turkey (2000)
                                                                     Argentina (2001)
                                                                     Uruguay (2002)
                                                                     Dominican Rep. (2003)

      Note: "Doom loops" are events where debt and banking crises overlap and in which historical narratives
      point toward close linkages between sovereign and banking sector distress. The two cases in italics are
      banking crises that overlapped with "spread crises," but in which there was no payment default.

A second twin crisis with elements of a doom loop arose during the well-known Baring Crisis
of 1890, which culminated in Argentina's default. In short, debt sustainability issues became
apparent when the Argentine government started violating its legal obligations and began
paying off gold liabilities with massively depreciated domestic currency. Shortly thereafter, the
investment house of Baring failed in floating a 25 million gold peso loan in London on
Argentina's behalf, and runs on the banks of issue, Banco Nacional and the Banco de la
Provincia de Buenos Aires, followed. Panicky depositors feared a "sudden stop" in the supply
of foreign capital, a situation that would put the government and banks (tacitly linked to the
government) at risk. Fearing a meltdown of its banking system, the government authorized new
paper notes to meet the heavy withdrawals of panicky depositors. But this intervention spooked
investors: sovereign bond yields spiked and foreign capital fled Latin America (Marichal,
1989). Argentina's fiscal position worsened, and the country defaulted on its external debt in
the same year.

In the spring of the same year, 1890, a third pre-WWI "doom loop" had begun in Portugal,
when the country had trouble placing new debt in Paris. A banking crisis followed in the fall of
1890, with the central bank providing critical support to the bank Montepio Geral. Despite
guarantees by the central bank to other banks and railways, capital quickly flowed out of
Portugal ­ even prior to the shock of the Baring Crisis, which only accelerated this trend.
Continuing problems in the banking system and current account deficits led the country to
abandon the gold standard and eventually to a partial default on its debt in the summer of 1892.

                                                     22
Four more twin crises with "doom loop" elements develop in the interwar years. These are
Austria, Greece, Poland, and Romania in 1931. In each of them, there was large-scale
government support of the banking sector ­ whether it was through a direct bailout, through
liability guarantees, or through bank nationalizations.

After World War II ended, we identify another 13 cases with "doom loop" features prior to the
Great Recession of 2008, all of which occurred in developing and emerging-market economies.
These cases can be grouped in two clusters and are well documented in the recent literature, in
particular in Caprio and Klingebiel (2003) and Laeven and Valencia (2013, 2018), as well as in
Das, Papaioannou and Trebesch (2012). The first cluster is during the debt crises of the 1980s
and early 1990s (see Cline 1995). The second occurs in the late 1990s and early 2000s, when
emerging markets were rattled by the Asian financial crisis, the Russian financial crisis, and the
defaults in Argentina, Uruguay and the Dominican Republic (see Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer
2006 for detailed accounts).

Additional evidence from "spread crises": Thus far, the methodology for identifying doom
loops only considers realized defaults. We now also look at banking crises that coincide with
"spread crises", i.e. rapid yield spread increases, using the methodology described above. We
find seven cases before WWI and 10 cases between 1920-1935. Since many factors besides
banking crises drive risk premia, we again rely on the narrative approach to discern whether
there is a connection between financial sector distress and sovereign debt distress. As it turns
out, mapping historical spread spikes onto the timing of banking crises reveals a number of
"false positives." For example, political factors (wars, coups d'tat, and border tensions) rather
than banking troubles drove spread spikes in Brazil (1890), Russia (1875), Chile (1898),
Uruguay (1898), and Italy (1935). In other instances, financial problems were mild, the dates
of banking crises did not align, or the historical record simply did not show any connection
between government debt policy and the banks. 35

For example, the Netherlands (1921), Argentina (1931), Belgium (1931), Finland (1931),
Sweden (1931), and Switzerland (1931) appear to be more promising candidates for doom
loops, but the narrative records reveal only weak evidence of a connection between banks and
sovereigns. 36 In several of the European cases, government rescue operations appear to have
brought about stability to weak commercial banking systems and led to a faster recovery from
the global depression of the 1930s (Eichengreen, 1992). 37 Moreover, markets do not seem to

35
   For example, Australia (1931) is an episode where the financial troubles were very mild (Fisher and Kent
1999), Bordo et al (2001), Taylor (2015). For the case of South Africa (1877) and Germany (1925), there seem
to be some dating errors by those who have previously classified them as banking crises. In India (1921), the
narrative evidence suggests that there was no feedback loop between the banks and the state.
36
   Hungary and Poland had banking crises in 1931 and defaulted on war loans in 1932, making them possibilities
as well. However, like the candidate spread-crisis countries listed here, scholars interpret the twin crises as only
loosely connected, with the banking crises emanating from the global shock of the failure of the Credit Anstalt in
Austria in 1931 (Eichengreen, 1992). And, unlike the countries listed in Table 2, for this period, there is little
evidence of a government bailout of banks.
37
   In Netherlands (1921) episode, Nederlandsche Bank offered assistance to the financial sector which was
considered successful and averted general runs on banks. In particular, the Netherlands Bank intervened in favor

                                                        23
have punished sovereigns for these bailouts: debt was rolled over and yields did not increase
appreciably after governments intervened to support banking systems. As a result, and in
contrast to the dynamics described in Acharya, Drechsler, and Schnabl (2014), no doom loop
emerged as a result of bank assistance programs.

Despite the many false positives, we nevertheless identify two additional doom loops during
"spread crises," namely France in 1882 and in Norway in 1899. In France, banks had lent
heavily to private entities in the Austro-Hungarian empire in the late 1870s and early 1880s,
but when that government refused to allow the Banque de Lyon to establish a new lending bank
in Trieste, the lending bubble burst. In response, investors dumped bank stock and commenced
a run on the Banque de Lyon. A panic at the Lyon Bourse soon ensued ­ leading to the collapse
of both the bank and the exchange. Fear spread to the Paris Bourse, where another prominent
investment bank, Société de l'Union Générale, had also set up multiple lending facilities in the
Austro-Hungarian empire. An emergency loan of roughly 80 million francs, authorized by the
government and initiated by the Banque de France, kept the Paris Bourse from collapsing as
well. (The Banque de France in turn had to borrow from the Bank of England to provide
liquidity to the commercial banking market). Government bond spreads reacted negatively to
these events.

In Norway in the late 19th century, rapid population growth in the capital Christiania (modern-
day Oslo), fueled a lending boom by the commercial banking sector. Six new banks were
established from 1897-1898, in addition to the eight already lending to fuel the real estate boom.
In June 1899, Discontobanken, a newly established bank, saw a large borrower default on loans,
leading to a run on the bank. The central bank of Norway provided direct support to the
distressed lender, but the loan proved to be insufficient and the central bank assumed the bank's
entire balance sheet. Norges Bank then found itself providing liquidity support to other
struggling banks with significant exposures to the real estate market, but also began
rediscounting bills more broadly to the entire banking sector. To backstop the central bank, the
government turned over nine million kroner to the Norges Bank. Sovereign spreads rose
dramatically during the crisis and the period of emergency lending, consistent with the
theoretical literature discussed above.

When we sum the cases based on realized defaults with the spread-spike cases of Norway and
France, we find nine instances of bank-sovereign "doom loops" prior to WWII and 13 episodes
in emerging markets prior to 2008. It is possible that alternative methodologies may reveal



of the mid-sized Bank-Associatie and Marx & Co. banks in 1922, and it also saved the extremely large
Rotterdamsche Bankvereenig later in 1924. In Argentina (1931), the state bank, Banco de Nacion aided the
private banks through rediscounts. In Belgium (1931), the National Bank offered support to several banks in
1932 and 1933 and, after some bank failures, the government stepped in and set up a company to mobilize
banks' frozen loans. In Finland (1931), the Bank of Finland aided four banks with credits on special terms. In
Sweden (1931), the Skandinaviska Kredit bank had to be supported by the Swedish National Debt Office. The
support loan totaled 200 million SEK. In the last episode from our list, Switzerland (1931), the Swiss Volksbank
and the Swiss Diskontbank were bailed out directly by the government.

                                                      24
additional cases; however, our reading of the long lens of history suggests that doom loops were
relatively rare events until more recently.

Why might that be the case? It could be that, in the past, banks had more limited exposure to
sovereign bonds on their balance sheets or that regulators today have unintentionally
encouraged banks to "bulk up" on sovereigns. It could also be that market participants reacted
differently to bailout announcements, or that expectations about their occurrence have changed.
The higher frequency more recently could also reflect rising "financialization" (i.e., the
increasing dependence on the financial sector for well-being and economic growth), making
government bailouts in crises more likely. Additional empirical and theoretical research will no
doubt help shed light on these potential explanations.

6. Rollover crises, multiple equilibria, and bond maturity

As the eurozone crisis unfolded, it became increasingly apparent that solvency risk and liquidity
risk were interacting. By the late 2000s, several eurozone economies faced challenges in
refinancing existing stocks of public debt or placing new issuances, either because the offered
rates were exceptionally high relative to previous borrowing or investors were unwilling to
purchase more debt when governments turned to public markets. Shocks to "fundamentals,"
such as rapidly rising budget deficits in Ireland and Spain and large upward debt revisions in
Greece in 2009, induced credit market participants to re-evaluate the ability of some
governments to repay their obligations in the future. This heightened credit risk changed their
willingness to refinance maturing debt and to demand greater compensation in the form of
higher rates. However, the higher rates created a dangerous feedback effect, pushing eurozone
economies closer to default. Commentators refer to these debt management problems as
"rollover" or refinancing risk.

What drives rollover crises? And why did debt distress and rollover problems hit sovereigns in
the eurozone while other advanced countries that also experienced weakening fundamentals
and growing debt burdens (such as the U.S., Japan, and England) were spared? This section
draws on a large volume of new theoretical research, in particular models emphasizing the self-
fulfilling nature of debt crises, to address these questions and related issues. 38 Since maturity is
a central factor in these models and for default-risk modeling, in general, we examine the
growing theoretical literature that features long-maturity sovereign bonds, and then explore
cycles and trends in bond maturity over the course of the past 150 years.

6.1. Advances in modeling rollover risk and self-fulfilling crises

Understanding whether crises are driven by investor expectations and beliefs has a long history,
with important contributions by Obstfeld (1996), Calvo (1988) and Cole and Kehoe (1996,

38
  Rollover risk in corporate debt markets received renewed theoretical attention in the wake of the crisis (e.g. He
and Xiong 2012). Disruptions in the financial sector compounded debt overhang and the rollover risk of firms,
and reduced corporate investment during the eurozone debt crisis (Kalemli-Özcan, Laeven, and Moreno, 2018).

                                                        25
2000). Models with self-fulfilling crises formalize some version of the following intuition: if
markets come to believe that a crisis or default is more likely, they will price that into the interest
rates of the sovereign, which in turn increases the likelihood that a country will default. 39 Unlike
earlier generations of sovereign debt models, Cole and Kehoe and Calvo show how the self-
fulfilling nature of debt crises can give rise to multiple equilibria. Recent theoretical advances
build on their pioneering work by examining the elements of sentiment-driven crises that
produce multiple equilibria, such as whether commitments to "good behavior" are rewarded by
markets and whether the maturity of the debt matters.

Several new papers in this genre, use the eurozone debt crisis as motivation for modeling self-
fulfilling crises. For example, Conesa and Kehoe (2015) argue that rising debt-to-GDP ratios
in the GIIPS countries were inconsistent with earlier-generation models, which showed that a
rational response to the possibility of a self-fulfilling debt crisis was to pay down debt. To
reconcile theory with recent events, Conesas and Kehoe (2015) develop a model showing that
a government can rationally risk a self-fulfilling debt crisis and "gamble for redemption" when
the economy is in a recession and recovery is uncertain. In such a situation, the government
weighs the benefits of issuing more debt (more consumption smoothing, less painful
adjustment) against the costs (that market participants will be more likely to engage in a
speculative attack). Lenders and the government both hope for a recovery so that the
government chooses not to cut spending and debt grows further. While rational, this "gamble
for redemption" can sow the seeds of an eventual default and for the crisis to be self-fulfilling.
The model helps to rationalize why crisis countries in the eurozone opted for debt accumulation
rather than a more painful adjustment. It also contrasts from Reinhart and Rogoff's (2009) view
based on eight centuries of historical observations, that governments and lenders often delude
themselves to lend and borrow more because they believe that "this time is different."

A related view is that the crisis countries were trapped in a "debt spiral," with increasing debt
levels pushing up interest rates and vice versa. Lorenzoni and Werning (2019) follow this line
of inquiry and construct a model with multiple-equilibria and limited commitment that
illustrates how debt dynamics were at the center of the observed rapid increase in interest rates
during the eurozone crisis. They define "slow moving" debt crises as a situation characterized
by rising interest rates that lead to greater debt accumulation which, in turn, induces a higher
probability of default. They also explore policy options to reduce the vulnerability to these types
of crises. When a fiscal rule is actively followed to combat rising deficits, the government's
commitment to repay can be sufficient to prevent a self-fulfilling crisis. However, debt
dynamics turn out to be quite sensitive to the stock of debt and other fundamentals: even when
the equilibrium is unique, their model delivers a tipping point at which debt, interest rates, and


39
   Empirically, it is difficult to identify "bail out" expectations from other influences that simultaneously affect
bond prices or yields. Bernal, Oosterlinck, Szafarz (2010) use quasi-natural experimental evidence from the 1918
Bolshevik repudiation of Russian bonds and segmented trading markets of these bonds to demonstrate that markets
price bailout expectations.


                                                        26
default probabilities will rise over time and eventually lead to default. Initial debt levels are
therefore crucial, pointing to the importance of keeping deficits in check. A further interesting
feature of their model is that a large share of short-term debt exposes governments to greater
refinancing risk, which can potentially amplify feedback effects. 40

Bocola and Dovis (2019) also focus on multiplicity and the role that debt maturity plays in self-
fulfilling crises. Their model seeks to understand whether the eurozone bond spread crisis was
driven by "fundamental risks," defined as growing default risk due to low output and high debt,
or by "non-fundamental risks," meaning lenders believe that debt will not be rolled over,
resulting in a self-fulfilling crisis. In their model, government decisions about debt maturity are
critical for understanding the nature of default risk. If rollover risk is important, then a
government has an incentive to lengthen the maturity of its bonds to reduce the payments that
are coming due. The alternative is to choose shorter maturities as a way to raise more resources
(the same trade-off features in other models with long maturity bonds discussed below). Thus,
in this framework, the observed maturity choice of governments reveals the nature of the crisis.
Going short suggests that fundamental risks are at work, while going long point towards
rollover risks. Based on this idea, they calibrate their model using Italian data and find that
rollover risk accounts for no more than 20 percent of Italy's spread spike during the eurozone
crisis. Most of the increase in interest rates appears to be explained, instead, by economic
fundamentals.

The models discussed thus far help to rationalize how the crisis could escalate so quickly in
peripheral Europe, yet they do not help to explain why it hit the eurozone, specifically. Several
authors make contributions along those lines by focusing on the institutional constraints of
monetary unions and political unions. De Grauwe (2011) argues that entering into a monetary
union (MU) and issuing debt is analogous to emerging-market economies issuing debt in
foreign currency: in both situations, it can lead to self-fulfilling debt crises. A country joining
a MU loses control over the currency in which it issues debt, so that it becomes more susceptible
to investors losing confidence in the country's bonds. Once in the "bad equilibrium" and facing
a recession, markets re-assess the prospects of default, potentially triggering both a liquidity
and solvency crisis. Relatedly, Aguiar et al. (2015) explore the interaction between fiscal and
monetary institutions in a monetary union and its implications for rollover crises. In their model,
countries joining a MU are incentivized to issue too much debt because monetary and fiscal
authorities can only imperfectly commit to inflation targets and repayment of debt, respectively.
This can give rise to coordination problems and rollover crises. Monetary unions naturally
respond to this externality by imposing institutional constraints on borrowing, i.e. debt limits.

Bianchi and Mondragon (2018) similarly focus on whether EMU membership increases the
likelihood that an economy is subjected to a rollover crisis. The paper adds downward nominal


40
  Gros's (2012) multiple equilibria model also has a "slow moving" component, where the government's
decision on the amount to pay to creditors emerges over time and is dependent on the cost creditors can impose
on the debtor as well as the cost of additional revenue.

                                                      27
wage rigidities and foreign currency debt to a Cole and Kehoe type model, and shows that, in
countries lacking monetary independence, a sudden change in investors' desire to rollover debt
can induce a recession. Due to the rollover crisis, the member state would need to tighten its
fiscal belt to meet its debt payments, making default a more attractive option ­ an outcome that
would rationalize investors' initial belief that the country would default. The authors calibrate
their model and find that, with fixed exchanges rates, rollover crises are seven times more likely
to happen. Using Spanish data from the 2000s, they find that Spain would have been insulated
from a rollover crisis, if it had exited the eurozone and had the ability to pursue monetary policy
for macroeconomic stabilization. In line with these findings, Corsetti et. al. (2014) demonstrate
how currency unions can spread distress among its constituent members. Using a new
Keynesian model, they demonstrate that the combination of a debt distressed member and pro-
cyclical fiscal policy throughout the union raises the likelihood that the entire MU experiences
a belief-driven deflationary downturn.

If debt crises are self-fulfilling, what are the implications for policy? Corsetti and Dedola (2016)
suggest that unconventional monetary policy can be an effective way to reduce the likelihood
of a self-fulfilling crisis. In their model, central banks can purchase a sufficient quantity of
sovereign debt (it can "turn on the printing press") such that it is not optimal for a government
to default on its debt. 41 A similar channel is explored in Roch and Uhlig (2016), who consider
the role of a "bailout agency" in reducing the likelihood of a debt crisis, more specifically those
crises driven by sunspots as in Cole and Kehoe (2000). They model an institution similar to the
ECB's outright monetary transactions (OMT) program, which was announced in 2012 with
potentially unlimited purchases of distressed members' government bonds. A key result from
the model is that their bailout agency would need to be willing to potentially purchase (nearly)
the entire amount of newly-issued debt to prevent a default.

A growing body of theoretical research thus points to rollover problems as an important element
in the eurozone debt crisis. That said, it is unclear whether the dynamics in Europe represent a
historical anomaly ­ possibly due to the institutional straight-jacket of the single currency area
- or whether self-fulfilling crises have become more prevalent, in general. An informed
assessment is complicated by the fact that, compared to the thriving work in theory, very little
empirical research on rollover crises or sentiment-driven defaults has emerged. 42 A first, yet
unsolved challenge is to measure rollover risk and tabulate rollover crises over long sample




41
   Between May 2010 and November 2011, the ECB purchased roughly 200 billion euros of sovereign bonds (4
percent of eurozone GDP), although it offset the potential for monetizing with sterilization policies (Lane, 2012).
See Bacchetta, Perazzi, and Can Wincoop (2018) for another study exploring whether monetary policy can be
used to ward off a self-fulfilling debt crisis.
42
   Among the few exceptions is De Grauwe and Ji (2013). They identify structural breaks and periods when
market sentiment diverged from fundamentals during the eurozone crisis, as captured by variables such as the
current account, the real effective exchange rate, debt-to-GDP, and debt-to-government revenue. Based on their
results, they argue that much of the rise in sovereign debt spreads in 2010-11 was unrelated to economic
fundamentals, consistent with self-fulfilling crisis dynamics.

                                                        28
periods, and to distinguish these from solvency crises or "fundamental-driven" defaults. 43
Further, there is scant evidence on the costs of rollover crises and little analysis of which
policies are most effective at reducing rollover risks, such as debt maturity management or
liquidity buffers (IMF, 2011). There is thus considerable scope for future research using both
modern and historical data.

6.2. Advances in Modeling Default Risk with Long Maturity Debt

The previous sub-section alludes to the importance of debt maturity in driving default risk, yield
spreads, and rollover crises. The theoretical literature of the past decade has recognized this and
moved away from models with one-period bonds towards models that incorporated longer
maturities instead. As shown by Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012) and Hatchondo and Martinez
(2009), accounting for long-term debt is an important step forward for matching models and
data, in particular with regard to bond spreads and default frequency. These models also allow
to examine the risk of debt dilution, a key concern in recent theoretical work and among
investors. Debt dilution arises when new debt is emitted before the existing debts have been
paid off, resulting in higher default risk for the existing debt holders. Chatterjee and Eyigungor
(2015) show that, without clear seniority or priority rules, debt dilution in today's debt market
makes borrowing more expensive, because governments cannot fully commit to limiting their
future debt issuance. Relatedly, Hatchondo, Martinez and Sosa-Padilla (2016) find that debt
dilution accounts for 78% of overall default risk for Spain between 1960-2013.

A central insight form this new line of literature is that maturity choice is endogenous and pro-
cyclical, with notable shifts occurring during periods of distress and rollover risk ­ such as
during the eurozone crisis. Using data from 11 countries Broner, Lorenzoni, and Schmukler
(2013) show that, during crises, emerging markets tend to borrow short term and the cost of
borrowing long-term increases. To explain this finding, they construct a model in which the
government chooses the optimal maturity structure, subject to rollover risks. Because longer-
term bonds incorporate news on the possibility of default over long horizons, their prices are
more volatile than short-term debt and risk-premiums will be higher in comparison. As a result,
when investors' risk aversion increases, the government will shift issuance toward short-term
debt.

Arellano and Ramanarayanan (2012) also explore the sovereign's time-varying maturity
structure, but focus on the hedging motives of the borrowers rather than the incentives of
lenders. When default risk is low, governments issue more long-term debt as a hedge against
fluctuations in spreads. On the other hand, when the likelihood of default is elevated, the
government prefers to issue debt that matures more quickly because the incentive to repay is
greater. Their model is able to match two stylized facts in the data. First, bond maturity shortens
in crisis periods, i.e. spells with increasing sovereign bond spreads. At the same time, the spread

43
  As a first step along these lines, Cohen and Villemot (2015) examine 97 countries from 1970-2004 and find
that roughly a tenth of all debt crises can be described as a self-fulfilling crisis, defined as an endogenous
weakening of a country's fundamentals.

                                                       29
on short-term bonds increases by more than that on long bonds. As a result, the yield curve will
invert as countries approach default. This stylized fact is confirmed in the study by Asonuma,
Niepelt and Ranciere (2017), which finds that the yield curve inversion also implies that creditor
losses (haircuts) in restructuring are typically higher on short-term bonds.

Aguiar et al. (2019) build a related model to address the puzzle of why sovereigns with elevated
default risk move toward issuing short-term bonds even though this seems to increase the
likelihood of rollover crises. Their answer is fiscal discipline, which forces governments to "go
the short route," i.e. to abstain from issuing long-term bonds in distress. In their model, the
sovereign takes the price of bonds, which depends on the total outstanding debt and thus on the
likelihood of default, as a given. When default risk is high, the cost of issuing long-term bonds
increases, generating fiscal losses and making it difficult to go long. One-period bonds thus
serve as a way for the bond market to discipline the borrower, given that it lacks the ability to
commit either to repayment or to future emissions. As a result, the government ends up
"preferring" short-term debt, as observed in the data from crisis periods. The central finding
from these studies, both in theory and data, is that sovereign bond maturity shortens during
periods of rising default risk ­ a point further corroborated by Perez (2017) and Bai, Kim and
Mihalache (2015).

So far, the literature has largely focused on emerging market data from the past three decades.
In contrast, there is little research on the impact of default risk for maturity choices in advanced
countries or when looking further back in history. Figure 5 shows sovereign bond maturity
cycles over the very long run, using data from Meyer, Reinhart and Trebesch (2019). The
average maturity is calculated for each year between 1860 and 2015, and includes sovereign
bonds denominated in US dollars or British pound sterling trading in the financial market
centers of London and New York.

The figure reveals two main stylized facts over the course of history. First, consistent with the
recent literature, average bond maturity tends to decline in periods of crises and distress. This
can be seen by the drop in the red (moving average) line in major financial crashes such as the
Panic of 1873, the Baring crisis of 1890, as well as after the Asian and Russian crises of
1997/98. The maturity decline is even more pronounced during the two world wars, especially
during WWI, when average maturity dropped from 45 years in 1914 to less than 15 years in
1919-2021. These periods are characterized by rising sovereign bond spreads, thus confirming
the maturity-shortening patterns observed in the modern data.




                                                30
                      Figure 5: Maturity cycles of sovereign bonds, 1860-2015




Note: Data from Meyer, Reinhart, and Trebesch (2019). The sample includes external sovereign bonds traded in
London and New York, which are denominated in US dollars or British pound sterling. In the historical sample
(i.e., until the mid-1970s), bonds of both advanced and emerging market economies are included. Since then, only
emerging market sovereign bonds are included (using JP Morgan's EMBI sample). The gap between 1975 and
1988 is the era of syndicated bank lending, when developing countries did not issue external sovereign bonds. The
red line shows five-year moving averages.

Second, the graph displays pronounced time trends. Bond maturity was considerably longer in
history, with average maturities exceeding 30 years prior to WWI and more than 20 years during
the interwar period. After WWII, average maturities declined further, to an average maturity of
less than 15 years. This change in bond duration matches Ellison and Scott's (2020) findings
for the UK. They show that, since the widespread issuance of perpetuities (i.e, the consol) pre-
WWI, the average maturity of British government debt has fallen considerably. Why has
maturity declined so markedly over the course of the past 150 years and what explains the
observed cycles in maturity choice beyond default risk and crises? These are puzzles that are
ripe for future research.

7. The rise of domestic debt and default

Another notable feature of the past two decades is the growing dominance of debt issued in
domestic currency and under local law. The distressed borrowers of the eurozone crisis, Greece,
Ireland, Italy and Spain, all issued debt under domestic law and in the common, domestic
currency, the euro. In addition, emerging markets saw a boom in domestic-debt issuance since
the early 2000s, a phenomenon that appears to coincide with a generalized process of
deleveraging and disinflation.


                                                      31
 Figure 6: The domestic bond boom ­ data on 100+ EME and developing country sovereigns




        Note: Data from the ongoing "One million bonds project" by Stoppok and Trebesch (2020).
        The graph shows amounts issued as external currency and domestic currency sovereign bonds
        for more than 100 developing and emerging market countries 1980-2016.

Figure 6 shows a strong increase in the share of domestic currency debt in total public debt
issuance over time. In the 1990s, Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2005) found only few
developing countries that borrowed long-term debt in their own currency, a phenomenon they
termed "original sin." According to this concept, many countries had no choice but to issue
long-term debt in foreign currency, exposing them to global shocks and exchange-rate risk.
Since then, however, many countries seem to have overcome this hurdle, with domestic debt
issuance hitting new records, in particular in the 2010s. 44 Foreign currency borrowing has not
disappeared, but now most emerging markets issue a significant amount of their government
debt in local currency. 45 In a longer-run perspective, this trend is reminiscent of the historical
experience, as many emerging markets issued debt domestically in the 19th century and during
the interwar years, with similar maturities as external debt (Reinhart and Rogoff 2009,
Mitchener and Weidenmier 2015).

In response to these changing trends, researchers have started to examine contractual features
of sovereign debt issuance more closely, including the currency denomination (as mentioned,




44
   Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999) defined "original sin" as a situation in which "the domestic currency is not
used to borrow abroad or to borrow long-term even domestically." Subsequent research has defined it as the
inability to borrow in domestic currency abroad. Here, we interpret the concept simply as limits to domestic
borrowing.
45
   Du and Schreger (2016) collect data for 14 developing countries and show that the average share of external
government debt issued in local currency is now roughly 60%. Ottonello and Perez (2019) sample of 18
countries suggests a somewhat lower figure, but still has the share of local currency debt growing from 10 to
39% over the past decade or so.

                                                      32
local or hard currency), but also where the bond was issued (marketplace and governing law),
and who holds the debt (investor residence and senior claimants).

One branch in this new literature explores the phenomenon of domestic default and
restructurings, which had received little attention earlier. 46 Reinhart and Rogoff (2011b) present
the "forgotten history of domestic debt" showing that, over a long sweep of history, domestic
borrowing and defaults are more common than previously known. They document what they
call de jure defaults, defined as missed payments or restructurings of domestic debt, as well as
de facto ones, e.g. arising from surprise inflation that erodes the value of outstanding domestic
debt. 47 They also show that many domestic defaults occur in tandem with external ones, but far
from all.

The boom in domestic debt issuance and the increasing number of domestic defaults also raises
thorny issues about the relative seniority of domestic versus external creditors during crises, as
examined in theory papers such as Guembel and Sussman (2009), Broner, Martin, and Ventura
(2010), Broner and Ventura (2016), or D'Erasmo and Mendoza (2018). Broner et al. (2014),
for example, suggest that domestic creditors are senior to external ones (meaning domestic debt
is less likely to be defaulted on), possibly because governments care more about the welfare of
domestic investors. Over the past 30 years, evidence on the claim that domestic creditors are
senior in debt crises situations is mixed, also because researchers have used different definitions
of what constitutes domestic debt, namely by currency, holder, and jurisdiction. Sturzenegger
and Zettelmeyer (2006), Jeanneret and Souissi (2016) and Erce and Mallucci (2018) show that,
in some emerging-market crises, domestic creditors were favored, while in other crises no
significant differences were detected. During the euro crisis, Brutti and Saure (2016) document
large-scale "debt repatriation," meaning that foreign investors sold their sovereign bonds to
residents, which they interpret as evidence that domestic holders were perceived as senior.
Historically, the picture is clearer: Meyer (2020) documents that domestic currency bonds faced
a significantly higher probability of default and higher haircuts than foreign currency bonds.
More work is needed to understand the determinants and consequences of domestic default and
the role that seniority and the political economy plays in this context.

Another strand of research in this area explores whether governments substantially benefit from
issuing domestic debt rather than external debt. One potential benefit is that domestic debt
allows more hedging against shocks because there is no currency-mismatch between
government revenue and debt repayment and because monetary and exchange-rate policy can
be adjusted to reduce the debt's real value, i.e., through inflation. In line with this, recent
empirical evidence on historical episodes (Bordo, Meissner, and Stuckler 2010) as well as on
more recent periods (Dell'Erba, Hausmann, and Panizza 2013, Catão and Milesi-Ferretti 2014)
shows that a higher ratio of external indebtedness is associated with a higher likelihood of debt

46
   As discussed above, related research explores domestic default in currency unions (Aguiar et al. 2015), and
their associated redenomination risks (e.g. De Santis 2019, Kriwoluzky, Müller, and Wolf 2019).
47
   Whether and how public debt can be inflated away is further studied by Aizenman and Marion (2011),
Hilscher, Raviy, and Reis (2014) and Krause and Moyen (2016).

                                                       33
distress and defaults. Moreover, Du and Schreger (2016) show that local currency sovereign
bonds are less risky than commonly thought. Using a dataset of domestic sovereign bonds in
14 emerging markets, they develop a methodology to measure local currency bond risks by
benchmarking against a synthetic domestic riskfree rate, yielding two important insights. First,
domestic-currency bonds are more insulated against global shocks than foreign-currency bonds,
meaning that they exhibit lower crosscountry correlations and are less driven by global risk
factors and global crises. Second, average risk premia on domestic bonds for EMEs are sizeable,
but in comparison, they are lower (not higher) than on external bonds. Both findings help to
explain the growing appeal of borrowing in local currency.

The resolution of debt distress and defaults is another reason why issuing domestic debt can be
advantageous for sovereigns. Legal scholars have long emphasized that domestic defaults are
easier to resolve, mainly because bonds issued under local law can be amended by an act of
parliament, as happened in Greece 2012 (Buchheit and Gulati 2018). 48 There is no such "local
law advantage" for debt issued in foreign jurisdictions, where creditors are protected by the rule
of law abroad and have more options for legal enforcement via courts (see Section 9 as well as
Chamon, Schumacher, and Trebesch et al. 2018 and Schumacher, Trebesch, and Enderlein
2018). Beyond the legal realm, governments can also exert "moral suasion" on their
domestically regulated banks and institutions, meaning they can pressure them into purchasing
domestic sovereign debt or into accepting a debt exchange offer. Recent research documents
that such "moral suasion" played an important role in the eurozone crisis and in earlier crises
involving domestic debt (Acharya and Rajan 2013, De Marco and Macchiavelli, 2016, Ongena,
Popov, and Van Horen 2019). This is consistent with Reinhart and Sbrancia (2015) and Reinhart
and Rogoff (2015), which suggest that debt conversions and other tools of "financial
repression" were used to resolve debt overhangs in advanced countries in the 19th and 20th
century (see also Chari, Dovis, and Kehoe 2020). Compared to domestic banks, it is much more
difficult for sovereigns to exert pressure on external creditors who have less skin in the game
and whose incentives often are unaligned (Reinhart and Trebesch 2015). This may be one of
the reasons why external debt crises tend to take much longer to resolve than domestic ones,
dragging on for years or even decades (Reinhart and Rogoff 2009). Put differently, "home bias"
in sovereign debt issuance can help when your home is in distress since domestic creditors may
be more prone to roll over debt and to share the burden of crisis resolution.

If domestic debt has obvious benefits, why, then, do countries continue to issue debt in foreign
currency and in foreign markets? A series of recent theory papers explores this question,
focusing on two potential explanations: inflation risk and policy credibility. The research
emphasizes that governments are unable to commit to monetary policy, exchange-rate policy,
and debt policy, making it hard for them to issue domestic bonds. Such commitments prove
particularly problematic for emerging market borrowers and commodity exporters that face

48
  Prior to the debt exchange of 2012, the Greek parliament passed a law that retroactively inserted collective
action clauses (CACs) into outstanding domestic law bonds, so that a majority of bondholders could vote on the
exchange of all outstanding Greek bonds, at a haircut above 50% (Zettelmeyer, Trebesch, and Gulati 2013).

                                                      34
frequent, negative terms-of-trade shocks (Drechsel and Tenreyro 2018). Indeed, maintaining
credible commitments has proven difficult for EMEs since at least the 19th century. Even when
developing countries committed to hard pegs during the classical gold standard era, frequent
commodity-price shocks led investors to price expected depreciation into domestically-issued
bonds of EMEs (Mitchener and Pina 2020).

An example of this line of research is Du, Pflueger, and Schreger (forthcoming), which uses a
New-Keynesian model to examine how the credibility of monetary policy and risk-averse
borrowers affects the currency composition of sovereign debt. They provide empirical evidence
that countries with more credible monetary policies are able to issue more domestic debt. Their
model offers an explanation: governments lacking credible commitments will pursue
"excessively countercyclical" inflation policies ex post, resulting in higher risk premia on local
currency debt and, thus, less domestic issuance. Ottonello and Perez (2019) also study the
currency composition of sovereign debt. In their model, domestic currency issuance provides a
means for governments to hedge against income shocks. Since exchange rates depreciate during
recessions, a greater share of debt issued in domestic currency will reduce the real debt burden
and attenuate some of the real shock. However, as in other models of this type, the perverse
incentives to inflate or depreciate away the debt are constrained by investors who bake it into
bond prices and yields ex ante. In equilibrium, the government must take this into account in
choosing the amount of home-currency debt it issues. Relatedly, Engel and Park (2018) show
in a model of a small, open economy that governments with more discipline in their monetary
policy are able to borrow more in local currency and thus can hedge shocks better. These
theoretical results are consistent with the evidence in Burger and Warnock (2006), which finds
that local currency bond markets are more developed in countries where institutions are more
developed and inflation is stable. And, it may also relate to events in Europe after 1999. Aguiar
et al. (2015) show that countries can gain inflation credibility by joining a currency union: this
may have fostered the domestic borrowing boom in the eurozone after 1999. Further, recent
research suggests that the issuance of domestic-currency debt has increased in the last 20 years,
especially for advanced economies with good fundamentals (including stable inflation and low
debt-GDP ratios). Interestingly, this trend appears to have been accelerated by the 2008 crisis
(Hale, Jones, Spiegel 2020).

The findings in this literature suggest that, with financial development, emerging market
countries will issue a significant amount of debt in their home currency and under local law
going forward. Consequently, it would not be surprising if we witness more domestic sovereign
defaults in the 21st century.

8. The return of official sovereign lending (by states and central banks)

As we have shown, many of the recent advances in research have focused on sovereign debt in
the form of bonds, typically contracted with commercial banks or investment banks. However,
there are other types of lending that have, once again, become an important source of
government financing, in particular official loans, including sovereign-to-sovereign lending.
                                               35
Considerably less is known about official sovereign lending, both empirically and theoretically.
In this section, we sketch historical and modern trends in official lending and summarize a small
emerging literature on the topic.

Figure 8 shows that international official lending (defined as loans extended by governments
and multilateral institutions to other governments) has been a regular part of the sovereign debt
landscape over the past 200 years, with particularly pronounced periods during financial crises
and wars. Official lending has shown a strong resurgence since the mid-2000s for at least three
reasons. First, sovereign bailouts, i.e. cross-border crisis lending, reached new heights between
2008 and 2012. Second, new sovereign lenders have emerged, partly filling the gap left by the
traditional 20th-century bilateral lenders, such as the US government. Most notably, the
government of China has become a major global creditor, extending large-scale loans to
developing countries around the world, often with strings attached (such as preferential access
to raw materials). Third, due to reserve accumulation by EMEs as well as large-scale domestic
bond purchase programs in advanced countries, central banks have become major holders of
sovereign debt. Relatedly, short-term lending flows between central banks of different countries
have surged in the form of central bank "swap lines."

8.1. Bailouts and international rescue lending: patterns, determinants, and consequences

Roubini and Setser (2004) and Barkbu, Eichengreen and Mody (2012) review the history of
rescue lending and sovereign bailouts over the past decades. One central insight is that both the
likelihood and size of sovereign bailouts have grown. The rescue packages arranged by the IMF
and regional institutions, such as the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), were larger than
anything we had seen since World War II, and easily surpassed the scale of rescue lending
during the 1980s debt crisis, the Asian crisis of 1997/98, the Mexican peso crisis of 1994, and
the Russian crisis of 1998. At the same time, the reliance on debt restructurings with private
creditors ("bail-ins") has declined. Ireland, Portugal and Spain received record amounts of
official support in 2010-2012; however, with the exception of Greece, private bondholders were
paid in full and on time and did not face a debt restructuring or "haircut." 49

Figure 7 shows the trend toward larger international bailouts. IMF program size has increased
notably over time, in particular in advanced countries and large emerging markets. Of the 20
largest IMF lending programs since WWII, almost all (17) occurred since 1998 (Reinhart and
Trebesch 2016b). Adding to this trend, the IMF recently arranged the largest program in history,
Argentina's 2018 USD 57 billion program. Moreover, since the start of the global pandemic,
more than 100 member countries have signed up for IMF emergency financing.

Cross-border lending by sovereigns and other official creditors, such as central banks, is also
an important feature of historical debt markets. Bordo and Schwartz (1999) show that "country
rescues," as they call them, occurred regularly since the 19th century, albeit they were smaller


49
     There was also a minor debt restructuring in Cyprus involving a subset of the debt and a low haircut.

                                                          36
and more ad hoc than today. In line with this, Horn, Reinhart and Trebesch (2020) find dozens
of events of international rescue-lending in response to financial crises, e.g. during the Baring
crisis of the early 1890s and the Panic of 1907. More generally, building on a newly-assembled
database, they find that total sovereign-to-sovereign lending is large, often exceeding total
private lending to sovereigns, particularly during disasters and wars, such as WWI and WWII.
Figure 8 shows that the record bailouts between 2008 and 2012 pale in comparison to the huge
cross-border official transfers during and after the world wars. The 1950s and 1960s also stand
out as an era of large-scale official flows, while private cross-border investments were impeded
by widespread capital controls and tight regulation of financial markets.

                    Figure 7: Sovereign bailouts: IMF programs, 1960-2013




                       Sources: IMF MONA, WDI, Reinhart and Trebesch (2016b)



Why are governments willing to extend international rescue loans to other governments and
what explains their size and direction? Relatedly, why do some of the largest bailouts occur
between neighboring countries, e.g. by the US towards Mexico or within a monetary union?
Tirole (2015) addresses these questions with a model of "country solidarity," in which the main
driver of rescue lending is the fear of adverse, cross-border spillovers. Rescue lending is largely
a function of economic self-interest, since assisting a crisis country reduces the potential for
collateral damage to the rescuer's economy. The existence of negative spillovers to nearby
economies has been well documented in historical debt crises (e.g. Mitchener and Weidenmier,
2008). By that same rationale, rescue lending will increase with the scale of economic and
financial integration between two countries. This helps to explain the large and spontaneous
"ex-post" bailouts arranged between the highly integrated eurozone economies in 2010-12. The
same basic mechanisms also influence the optimal "ex-ante" insurance contract. Tirole (2015)
shows that, in case of large asymmetries between countries, healthy economies have no


                                                37
incentives to enter a join-and-several liability contract ex-ante, e.g. via eurobonds. Instead, in a
setting like the eurozone, the optimal contract relies on market financing and a borrowing cap.

Gourinchas, Martin and Messer (2020) and Azzimotti and Quadrini (2018) also find that
international bailouts between integrated economies are "ex-post" efficient and welfare
improving since they reduce the crisis costs of both creditor and recipient country. The driving
force is the same: governments are willing to extend rescue loans to other governments in order
to reduce the economic externality caused by a default or "euro exit". Gourinchas, Martin and
Messer (2020) further show that the entire surplus of such bailouts goes to the fiscally strong
"northern" countries. This is because the creditor government has no incentive to give more
than the bare minimum transfer that keeps the debtor country from defaulting. As a result, in
equilibrium, the bailed-out country is indifferent between a default and a bailout, and is not
made better off by rescue lending. This result is consistent with Jeanne and Zettelmeyer (2001),
who find that the cost of international bailouts is largely borne by domestic taxpayers rather
than by the taxpayers from abroad.

         Figure 8: Official international lending, 1790­2015 (bilateral and multilateral)




Note: Data and graph from Horn, Reinhart, Trebesch (2020). Gross aggregate official lending commitments by
multilateral (in red) and by bilateral creditors (in blue) in percent of the main creditor's GDP. The data includes
commitments through grants and loans, but excludes official portfolio investments and central bank swap credit.

Using newly collected data, Horn, Reinhart and Trebesch (2020) and Schneider and Tobin
(2020) study the determinants of bilateral rescue lending empirically. Both papers confirm
theoretical priors: official lending during crises is significantly larger between countries that
have close trade and financial linkages, measured by trade and banking exposure. This finding



                                                        38
holds both in historical and modern data, and suggests that "country solidarity" is largely a
function of economic self-interest of the creditor government.

Having discussed why international bailouts occur, what are their consequences? Besides
reducing costly, cross-border spillovers, one potential effect of international bailouts is to lower
the likelihood of default and debt restructurings on private debts (Dellas and Niepelt 2016).
This may be one reason for the increasing prevalence of "debt crises without default" (Section
3), such as in Portugal in 2011/12, which avoided default largely due to the large-scale and
concessional ESM and IMF loans.

In line with this, Schlegl, Trebesch and Wright (2019) find that private creditors have become
increasingly senior compared to bilateral government-to-government creditors. Building on a
newly constructed database of haircuts and arrears towards official and private creditors, they
show that sovereigns favor foreign banks and bondholders when it comes to repayments. The
default probability is significantly higher for bilateral creditors, i.e. on debts owed to other
sovereigns. In addition, the size of haircuts suffered by bilateral official creditors is significantly
higher than that on private (bank and bond) debt.

International bailouts thus lower the expected losses of private creditors, which reduces
sovereign bond yields, as emphasized in Dell'Ariccia, Schnabel, and Zettelmeyer (2006), Roch
and Uhlig (2018) and Gourinchas, Martin, and Messer (2020). 50 The reduced borrowing costs
may, however, have the unintended effect of inducing overborrowing, especially by countries
with weak fundamentals. This, in turn, raises the probability of default in equilibrium, with
destabilizing effects on political and economic unions (Fink and Scholl 2016, Roch and Uhlig
2018). One possibility for addressing this type of debtor moral hazard is to agree to fiscal rules
(Dovis and Kirpalani 2020), or alternatively, to demand that the debtor country implement
reforms (Müller, Storesletten and Zilibotti 2019) and adhere to policy conditionality (Jeanne,
Ostry and Zettelmeyer 2008). 51

It may also matter how bailouts are implemented as suggested in the case of bank rescues by
Bianchi (2016). Broad-based or "systemic" bailouts are likely to cause fewer distortions in
comparison to "idiosyncratic bailouts," which are the result of country-specific decisions. The
optimal bailout strategy, however, has not been studied sufficiently in the case of sovereigns,
leaving a number of questions for researchers to explore in the future including: how many
policy conditions and reforms should be demanded as part of a bailout; whether long-term


50
  An alternative view is discussed in Steinkamp and Westermann (2014).
51
  The perverse incentive benefits of international financial bailouts and cooperation also matter in the context of
banking crises, which create increasingly large financial spillovers across borders. Fahri and Tirole (2018) find
that a government that expects to be bailed out by a foreign country may not sufficiently supervise its domestic
banking sector and will tolerate excessive holdings of its sovereign bonds in local banks. These distortions can
be reduced by combining a commitment for "solidarity" in cases of crisis with a strong centralized banking
supervision. Similarly, Niepmann and Schmidt-Eisenlohr (2013) find that the anticipation of rescue lending from
abroad creates incentives to free-ride, resulting in insufficient domestic bank bailouts. It is therefore welfare-
enhancing for countries to cooperate, either ex-ante or ex-post.

                                                        39
rescue loans are preferable to short- and medium-term credits, such as the typical three-year
IMF programs (e.g. Corsetti, Erce and Uy 2018); and, the risk sharing benefits of rescue lending
(multilateral, regional, or bilateral, see, e.g. Horn 2020).

8.2. New creditor powers and institutions

In contrast to research on the IMF or the ESM, there is little work analyzing official lending
and international bailouts initiated by emerging market governments, such as China, Saudi
Arabia, India or Russia, despite the fact that these nations play an increasingly important role
in today's global financial safety net. "South-to-south" lending flows have been steadily
increasing, including lending between emerging market governments or via new regional
financial arrangements, such as the Arab Monetary Fund and the Asian Infrastructure
Investment Bank (Scheubel and Stracca 2016).

China, in particular, has emerged as the largest official creditor to developing countries over
the past 20 years ­ even surpassing the total lending portfolio of the World Bank (Figure 9). As
discussed by Horn, Reinhart and Trebesch (2019), almost all of this lending is state-controlled,
meaning that the loans are extended by state-owned banks and other public entities. Moreover,
the usual push and pull drivers of international capital flows do not apply in the same way, as
China's lending is partly driven by non-commercial motives, such as access to raw materials
abroad or by (geo-)political aims.

         Figure 9: China has become the largest official creditor to developing countries




Note: This figure shows aggregate public debt to different official creditors for all 122 developing and emerging
market countries contained in the World Bank International Debt Statistics (excluding China). Debt to China is
estimated by Horn, Reinhart and Trebesch (2019). Debt to all 22 Paris Club governments is taken from the Paris
Club website (available since 2008). Debt to the IMF and the World Bank Group (IBRD plus IDA) is from the
World Bank's International Debt Statistics. Source: Horn, Reinhart and Trebesch (2019).


                                                      40
The rise of China as an international lender is reminiscent of Britain during the 19th century,
when London became the "banker to the world", comingling foreign policy and foreign
investment objectives (Feis 1930). It also parallels the rise of the United States as a global
creditor power in the first half of the 20th century, most famously via its "lend and lease"
programs and the Marshall plan during and after WWII, which involved large sums of bilateral
US lending around the world (Mikesell 1962).

8.3. Central banks have (again) become a large holder of sovereign debt

A further reason for the re-emergence of official finance is the increasingly dominant role of
central banks as sovereign-debt investors. Central-bank holdings of advanced-economy
sovereign debt rose from just 10% in 2004 to more than 30% by the end of 2019 (Arslanalp and
Tsuda 2012). The large-scale sovereign bond purchase programs of the past 15 years have
turned central banks into the single most important sovereign creditor. "Quantitative easing"
policies in the US, the UK, and Japan, as well as crisis-related bond purchase programs (e.g. by
the ECB), were implemented in several waves after 2008. As a result, sovereign bonds worth
trillions of US dollars moved from the balance sheets of private investors to those of central
banks (see D'Amico et al. 2012 and Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Vissing-Jorgensen 2018).
Another important driver for the growing creditor role of central banks has been the reserve
accumulation by emerging markets, a trend that accelerated after the Asian crisis of 1997-8 and
that resulted in large-scale purchases of US and eurozone sovereign bonds, most notably by the
People's Bank of China (see Gourinchas and Jeanne 2013 and Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan, and
Volosovych 2014). As a result of the global pandemic, central banks will only become more
influential for sovereign debt markets worldwide, given the further wave of bond buying that
has been announced since March 2020. In effect, during crises, central banks have turned into
"the buyer of last resort", with large effects on bond yields and government market access
(Acharya, Pierret and Steffen 2018).

Figure 10 shows that these developments are reminiscent of earlier periods, in particular the
interwar years and the decade around WWII. In those eras, advanced-economy central banks
were already playing the role of "buyer of last resort" ­ helping to finance the record sovereign
debt issuance by Great Britain, France, the US and other countriess (Ferguson, Schaab,
Schularick 2015). Starting with the Great Depression, the share of advanced-economy
government debt held by domestic central banks increased dramatically, reaching its apex
around 1945. Due to the crisis induced by the global pandemic, we are now quickly approaching
this previous historical peak. Thus, while private investors are retreating, official investors are
becoming an ever more important financier of governments worldwide.




                                                41
       Figure 10: Central bank holdings of governments debt (as % of GDP, 1870-2016)




         Note: Data on sovereign debt holdings by central banks by Ferguson, Schaab, Schularick (2015, and
         updated 2020). Countries included in the sample are Australia, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Italy,
         Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, US.


Alongside the increased central bank bond purchases at home, we are also witnessing a return
of central bank lending beyond domestic borders in the form of central-bank swap lines. In
particular, since 2008, the US Federal Reserve has developed a swap-line network with more
than a dozen foreign central banks, allowing participants to obtain short-term (dollar) liquidity.
Tooze (2018) and Bahaj and Reis (2018) show that the swap line drawings in 2008 and 2020
played a decisive role in reducing financial market distress and in lowering the cost of dollar
funding for banks and firms in recipient countries.

                     Figure 11: Central bank lending across borders, 1815-2015




Note: The graph shows a time series from Horn, Reinhart and Trebesch (2020) based on ongoing research on
cross-border central bank lending since 1815. The data includes central bank short-term credits to foreign central
banks as well as bilateral swap line drawings (after WWII), shown in percent of UK GDP until 1914 and in percent
of US GDP thereafter.

                                                       42
A little-known fact is that the volume of these cross-border emergency dollar loans was
substantial, surpassing USD 500 billion in 2008 and USD 400 billion in March 2020. Even less
well known is the increasing role of China's central bank as a creditor to foreign countries. As
of 2018, the People's Bank of China has signed swap agreements with more than 40 foreign
central banks and for drawing rights amounting to USD 550 billion in total (Horn, Reinhart and
Trebesch 2019). 52

This type of central bank coordination, however, is nothing new. On the contrary, credit lines
and short-term loans between central banks were widespread in the 19th century as well as
during the interwar gold standard system and after WWII (Eichengreen 1992, Flandreau 1997,
Eichengreen 2008). Moreover, swap lines by the US Federal Reserve were first extended on an
ad hoc basis in 1936 and became increasingly institutionalized beginning in the 1960s (Bordo,
Humpage and Schwartz, 2015). And yet, the scale of cross-border central bank lending in 2008
exceeded those periods. This is visible in Figure 11, which shows a time series of overseas
central bank lending in percent of British GDP (until 1914) and US GDP thereafter. The 2008
peak exceeds the previous one in 1930-31, when the central banks of Austria, Hungary,
Germany and Britain received large-scale rescue credits in the wake of a sudden stop in private
capital flows, domestic bank runs, and increasing pressure on the gold standard system.

In summary, recent evidence suggests that we are entering a new era in which official creditors
fundamentally shape sovereign debt markets worldwide ­ a partial reversal to the era of official
finance and financial repression of the 1950s. We are only starting to understand the
implications of these developments for governments and private investors alike.

9. Holdouts and legal risk in sovereign debt restructurings

A fundamental factor shaping sovereign debt markets is the "enforcement technology"
available to creditors in the event of a default. These range from legal sanctions, to "reputational
sanctions," and to punishments outside of the debt contracts (Bulow and Rogoff 1989ab;
Shleifer 2003; Bolton and Jeanne 2007; Aguiar and Amador 2014). Questions of enforcement
are so central because, unlike corporations, sovereigns have long been protected by the doctrine
of "sovereign immunity," which helped to shield public assets from being seized and liquidated.

In this subsection, we briefly discuss the evolution and characteristics of sovereign debt
enforcement over a long horizon, focusing our attention on the most recent developments. 53 In
particular, we highlight the increasing risks of disruptive holdouts and litigation strategies in
situations of default, which have strengthened creditor bargaining power in the past decade.




52
   According to their data, since 2013, Pakistan, Argentina, Mongolia, Russia, and Turkey have all made use of
their standing lines with the PBOC. For example, as of end-2018 China had extended USD 18.9 billion to
Argentina (3 % of GDP) and USD 1.75 billion to Mongolia (around 15 % of GDP).
53
   See Panizza, Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2009) for an earlier survey on the topic.

                                                      43
Given the evolving legal environment, restructuring external sovereign debt in an ad hoc
manner appears to have become more challenging.

9.1. Enforcement in history: banker collusion, market exclusion, and military threats

Enforcement technologies have taken different forms throughout history. Their exact form has
depended on the relative power of creditors versus debtors, the sources of lending (bankers,
markets, other states), and the likelihood of third-party involvement (e.g., international
agencies, such as the IMF). In early modern Europe, coalitions of direct lenders, not markets,
financed sovereigns and enforced repayment. Drelichman and Voth (2014) examine lending by
16th-century Genoese bankers to Philip II, the King of Spain. Philip II was a serial defaulter, so
bankers used collusion and lending moratoria to enforce repayment. Social and monetary
sanctions ensured compliance with their commitment not to lend when the sovereign defaulted.
According to the authors, this sustained lending to Philip II over many decades. 54

In the 19th century, a variety of sanctions were employed, often resulting in market exclusion,
i.e. a "financial embargo" of defaulting countries. First, market conventions at the time
prohibited sovereign defaulters to issue bonds on the London Stock Exchange (LSE). This was
an important deterrent to defaulting, since the LSE was the primary market for raising funds
until the end of the 19th century (Flandreau and Flores 2009, 2012). In addition, Flandreau,
Gaillard, and Panizza (2010) show evidence on reputational sanctions via "gatekeeping." That
is, the most reputed investment banks that placed sovereign debt in the 19th century would only
deal with sovereigns with a good repayment record, thus punishing defaulters. Military and
diplomatic threats were another main enforcement tool in sovereign debt markets of the 19th
century, such as the occupation of France after their defeat at Waterloo. 55 Mitchener and
Weidenmeier (2010) argue that such "supersanctions" were a credible and powerful
enforcement device from the mid-19th through the early 20th century. 56 Specifically, they show
that the threat of sending gunboats or placing countries under "fiscal house arrest" played a
substantial role for government decisions to repay, for crisis resolution, and for the evolution
of bond yields. 57 They find that 64% of sovereign defaulters experienced supersanctions.


54
   An alternative interpretation is offered by Alvaréz-Nogal and Chamley (2014, 2016), who argue that what
sustained Philip's borrowing was not the Genovese cartel, but the expectation that short-term debt would be
converted into long-term debt, with the latter being guaranteed by the revenues of the cities represented in the
Cortes or Spanish Parliament.
55
   In the wake of Waterloo and the signing of the Second Treaty of Paris in November 1815, France's public
finances were in shambles. Yet allies were demanding that France pay the costs of the Napoleonic War. In the
following ten years, France managed to triple its sovereign borrowing, borrowing at low interest rates that were
comparable to the British consol. How did it do so? According to Oosterlinck, Ureche-Rangau, and Vaslin
(2014), the threat of military intervention initially guaranteed repayment. Later on, France benefited from
reforms it enacted to improve the state of public finance, which reassured markets.
56
   Military sanctions had long been viewed as rare and isolated incidents although probabilities of intervention,
conditional on default, were not computed (Lindert and Morton 1989; Lipson 1985).
57
   See, also, the results in Esteves (2013), which emphasizes the role that committees of bondholders can potentially
play in regulating debt. A number of follow-up studies provide detailed accounts of the applications of
supersanctions during the 19th century. See, for example, Tuncer (2015) on Turkey and Maerean and Sharp (2018)
on Southeast Europe.

                                                        44
Similar to the story for the French after Waterlooo, Mitchener and Weidenmier (2005) find that
the threat of military intervention reassured bondholders and lowered the sovereign bond yields,
especially of Central American and Caribbean countries. This was due to a notable shift in US
foreign policy following the 1904 Roosevelt corollary to the Monroe doctrine, which implied
that the US government may intervene militarily in case of default, and actually intervened in
Santo Domingo in 1905 to show that the threat was credible. Tomz (2007) focuses on
understanding the role of reputation and reputational sanctions throughout history, arguing this
could have been an additional way of regulating debt during this period.

In the interwar years and in the decades following World War II, the ability of private creditors
to impose direct or indirect sanctions weakened. Eichengreen and Portes (1989, 1990) and
Eichengreen (1991) explain that no effective mechanism existed to exclude defaulting countries
from the main international bond market at the time: the New York Stock Exchange. They also
show that the involvement of creditor governments in sovereign-debt renegotiation became less
frequent and did not yield substantial benefits for private bondholders. Moreover, "the use of
military force for debt collection was basically a thing of the past" (Eichengreen and Portes
1989, p. 232). Since the 1990s, rating agencies took over the original role of issuing houses as
gatekeepers, but with less teeth (Flandreau, Gaillard and Packer 2011), while other direct
enforcement devices such as legal sanctions and creditor litigation played a limited role, at least
until the 1980s (Waibel 2011, Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer 2006).

9.2. Enforcement today: the erosion of sovereign immunity and the rise of creditor litigation

In the past 20 years, with the rise of holdout litigation, the threat of market exclusion and
creditor sanctions has once again gained prominence. Schumacher, Trebesch and Enderlein
(2015) document the gradual erosion of sovereign immunity, which was set in motion by the
passage of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976 in the U.S. The act adopted a stricter
doctrine of immunity for sovereigns, meaning that defaulting sovereigns were no longer
shielded against lawsuits in New York. A series of subsequent court decisions in London and
New York strengthened the hand of creditors and weakened the available legal defense options
of sovereigns.

The result was more lawsuits and legal threats, especially since the early 2000s when
specialized distressed debt funds entered the market. Figure 12 shows the increase in the
incidence of creditor lawsuits on sovereign debt issued in New York or London.

Legal disputes are now a regular consequence of defaults, changing the nature of debt
resolution. In the 2000s, half of all sovereign debt restructurings involved legal disputes with
creditors, with the cases often stretching on for many years. A typical strategy deployed by
distressed debt funds (sometimes called "vulture funds") is to buy up defaulted debt at a deep
discount, reject the government's debt restructuring offer, and litigate for full repayment via a
lawsuit in London or New York. In addition, litigious creditors often attempt to seize
government assets abroad, including commodity exports, central bank assets held in the US, or

                                                45
even presidential airplanes and dinosaur fossils on exhibition. Ultimately, the aim is to force
the sovereign into an out-of-court settlement with a handsome payout. Of course, the side effect
of this creditor activity can be deadweight losses for the debtor economy, disruption of
international trade, and delays in crisis resolution (Benjamin and Wright 2009, Pitchford and
Wright 2012).

        Figure 12: The incidence of sovereign creditor litigation 1970-2010




      Note: The bars show the number of outstanding creditor lawsuits against sovereigns in US
      and UK courts for each year between 1976 and 2010 (left axis). The black line reflects the
      total amount under litigation in 2005 US dollars excluding accrued interest or penalty interest
      (face value, right axis). Source: Schumacher, Trebesch and Enderlein (2018)

The recent success of holdout and litigation strategies was apparent after Argentina's 2005
restructuring, which resulted in large-scale holdouts and dozens of lawsuits filed in New York
and elsewhere. Most importantly, creditors to Argentina threatened to attach debt repayments
to other, non-litigious creditors, by invoking pari passu. According to New York courts, the
pari-passu clause implies that sovereign borrowers must pay all creditors "equally and without
preference," meaning that holdout creditors must be paid at the same rate as those creditors that
participated in a restructuring and accepted a haircut (for details see Gulati and Scott 2012,
Cruces and Samples 2016, Buchheit and Gulati 2017). The use of parri passu in sovereign debt
contracts dates back to the 1800s, although a minority of bonds issued then contained the clause,
and it took until the Elliot vs. Peru judgment in Brussels and the New York decision in 2012
regarding Argentine debt for courts to recognize the clause as meaning differential settlements
were not permissible (Chabot and Gulati, 2014). As a consequence of the legal dispute,
Argentina has been barred from issuing new external debt for almost 15 years. In 2016, a newly
elected government reached a $10 billion settlement with creditors holding out, many of whom
ended up making double-digit returns on their investment.

A further notable success of holdout creditors was Greece 2012, where almost half of the
holders of foreign-law Greek bonds refused to participate in the debt restructuring and were

                                                      46
fully repaid instead (see Figure 13). But Argentina and Greece are not outliers, as shown in
Schumacher, Trebesch and Enderlein (2018) and Fang, Schumacher and Trebesch (2020).
Legal threats and holdout tactics played a significant role in almost all recent debt crises,
including in Ukraine 2015 and in the ongoing defaults of Lebanon and Venezuela (see also
Buchheit and Gulati 2017).

        Figure 13: Holdouts in recent restructurings: Argentina 2005 and Greece 2012




        Note: Holdouts are those bonds not participating in the bond exchange offer.
        Source: Fang, Schumacher and Trebesch (2020).

Moreover, recent research shows that creditor litigation is costly ex-post. For example, creditor-
friendly judgments in the Argentina lawsuit caused a significant decline of Argentine bond and
stock prices (Ahmed and Alfaro 2017, Hebert and Schreger 2017). In addition, Schumacher,
Trebesch and Enderlein (2018) show that litigation is associated with a loss of market access
for debtor countries. Since the early 2000s, no sovereign was able to tap international bond
markets while at the same time facing the legal threat of asset seizures through foreign courts.
Relatedly, Buchheit, Gulati and Tirado (2013) argue that, during the euro crisis, concerns about
holdouts and litigation (the risk of "ending up like Argentina") increased the willingness of
policymakers to pay bondholders in full and instead arrange large-scale sovereign bailouts, e.g.
in Portugal or Ireland.

These trends suggest that sovereign debt is becoming more enforceable and that litigation is a
relevant cost of default. Foreign courts increasingly act as a third-party enforcement
mechanism, in the spirit of classic sovereign debt theory (e.g, Bulow and Rogoff, 1989b). They
can explicitly or implicitly impose an embargo on new borrowing or block debt repayments on
performing bonds. This interpretation helps to bridge two strands of the sovereign debt
literature, namely the "reputation view," suggesting that governments repay because of the
threat of exclusion from credit markets and output losses, and the "sanctions view," according



                                                    47
to which repayment occurs due to the threat of sanctions. The risk of litigation combines both
elements ­ a legal sanction resulting in lost market access.

Broner, Martin and Ventura (2010) add an additional perspective on enforcement power in
recent decades. Since foreign creditors can sell their bonds to domestic creditors, who have
electoral leeway over their governments, they argue that secondary markets act as an
enforcement device in modern democracies. Arguably, this political-economy channel worked
less well in the 19th century, with limited enfranchisement and relatively less sovereign debt
issued in domestic capital markets (in part due to less developed financial institutions).

How do the developments fit in a longer historical perspective? One way to interpret recent
trends is that enforcement technologies are returning to their long-run equilibrium after a few
decades of decline and stagnation. On the one hand, if the shift towards stronger creditor rights
persists, it could be beneficial for sovereign debt markets, as it may act as a disciplining device
that limits overborrowing and facilitates quicker restructurings (e.g. Shleifer 2003, Pitchford
and Wright 2012). That being said, it is far from clear whether the recent creditor successes will
prove long-lasting and robust, given UK and US court systems are based on case-law traditions
and continuously evolve. This puts creditors' most effective weapon, pari passu, at risk.

However, in the short and medium run, the risks of holdouts and creditor litigation is likely to
make the resolution of debt crises more difficult, maybe excessively so (Bolton and Jeanne
2007). This could prove a major challenge in the wake of the economic distress caused by the
global pandemic. Given this backdrop, there are several areas that call out for further research.
One is understanding the consequences of legal and holdout risks, both ex-ante (for borrowing
costs) and ex-post (as a cost of default and as a hurdle for crisis resolution). A second is delving
deeper into the process of holdout and litigation strategies, the creditors involved, and the
financial returns to holding out. A third is examining potential policy interventions that target
the "holdout problem," including analyzing relevant bond clauses, such as collective action
clauses (e.g. Carletti et al. 2020), but also regarding more statutory sovereign insolvency
frameworks (e.g. Gianviti et al. 2010, Bolton et al. 2020).

10. Conclusion

The Great Recession and the eurozone debt crisis inspired a wave of empirical and theoretical
research on sovereign debt, rivaling that produced after the Latin American debt crisis of the
1980s. It reinvigorated work on classic questions, such as the reasons for sovereign lending and
default, the costs of default, and debt workouts. Scholars have poured these "old wines" into
new bottles, often looking for underappreciated or overlooked elements, such as the
transmission of sovereign risk to firms and how that, in turn, affects investment and output. It
also spurred work on "new wines" or features of crises, perhaps most importantly sovereign-
bank "doom loops" and the increasing financialization of the global economy.




                                                48
As the eurozone debt crisis unfolded, much of it felt quite new, but in hindsight, our survey
reveals that many of its features bear a striking resemblance to earlier crises in emerging and
advanced economies. The parallels are particularly strong with Mexico's 1994-5 crisis. Both
episodes featured (i) roll-over problems and self-fulfilling crisis dynamics, (ii) severe debt
distress without default, (iii) sudden stops in private capital flows followed by large-scale rescue
lending (bailouts) from abroad, (iv) a shortening of bond maturities during distress, and (v)
contagion to other sovereign bond markets in the region. From today's perspective, there is
therefore much truth in the statement of former IMF director Camdessus that the so-called
Tequila crisis was "the first crisis of the 21st century." Indeed, our survey suggests these
features will more than likely be part of future crises as well.

Our survey also highlighted features that are idiosyncratic to the eurozone debt crisis, such as
the role of monetary unions for borrowing and default decisions, but also emerging trends that
happened to coincide in timing with it. For example, as more EME governments issue their debt
domestically, and the debt is often sold to domestic banks, domestic debt defaults and the
challenge of bank-sovereign linkages will likely matter in the coming decades in emerging
markets as well. It also appears that the risk of holdouts and increased litigation will not be
subsiding, as enforcement options for creditors are stronger than they have been in a very long
time. Finally, the renewed importance of official creditors and cross-border rescue lending,
including central bank "swap lines" and rising creditor powers such as China, is another
changing feature of the international landscape of sovereign debt.

The research trends of the past decade show that, in addition to important theoretical advances,
empirical methods have improved, drawing from applied microeconomics and increasingly
relying on state-of-the art research design for causal identification. There are also promising
developments that combine micro-based sovereign debt models with heterogeneous creditors
and firms that can be tested using large-scale, micro-level data. Looking ahead, more
opportunities will emerge from the development of rich new datasets with tens of thousands of
bonds and banks, or going back far in time.

Many questions and puzzles remain, suggesting some directions for future research. How will
advanced and developing country governments deal with the large public debt burdens going
forward, especially if interest rates were to increase again? How much more debt can the market
absorb given that the level of public indebtedness is already at historic highs? What are the
implications of the expanding central bank holdings and growing sovereign bailouts by official
creditors? In case of future turmoil, will self-fulfilling panics, rollover crises and bank-
sovereign "doom loops" become more pertinent? And, last but not least, how will the rise of
China and other emerging powers influence global debt markets in the decades to come?




                                                49
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson, and Yunyong Thaicharoen. 2003. "Institutional
     Causes, Macroeconomic Symptoms: Volatility, Crises and Growth." Journal of Monetary
     Economics 50 (1): 49­123.
Acharya, Viral V., and Raghuram G. Rajan. 2013. "Sovereign Debt, Government Myopia, and the
     Financial Sector." Review of Financial Studies 26 (6): 1526­60.
Acharya, Viral V., and Sascha Steffen. 2015. "The `Greatest' Carry Trade Ever? Understanding
     Eurozone Bank Risks." Journal of Financial Economics 115 (2): 215­36.
Acharya, Viral V., Diane Pierret, and Sascha Steffen. 2018. "Lender of Last Resort versus Buyer of
     Last Resort ­ Evidence from the European Sovereign Debt Crisis." Swiss Finance Institute
     Research Paper 18-35.
Acharya, Viral V., Tim Eisert, Christian Eufinger, and Christian Hirsch. 2018. "Real Effects of the
     Sovereign Debt Crisis in Europe: Evidence from Syndicated Loans." Review of Financial
     Studies 31 (8): 2855­96.
Acharya, Viral V., Itamar Drechsler, and Philipp Schnabl. 2014. "A Pyrrhic Victory? Bank Bailouts
     and Sovereign Credit Risk." Journal of Finance 69 (6): 2689­2739.
Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath. 2006. "Defaultable debt, interest rates and the current account,"
     Journal of International Economics 69 (1): 64-83.
Aguiar, Mark, and Manuel Amador. 2014. "Sovereign Debt." In Handbook of International
     Economics, edited by Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, 4:647­87. New
     York and North-Holland: Elsevier.
Aguiar, Mark, Manuel Amador, and Gita Gopinath. 2009. "Investment Cycles and Sovereign Debt
     Overhang." Review of Economic Studies 76 (1): 1­31.
Aguiar, Mark, Manuel Amador, Emmanuel Farhi, and Gita Gopinath. 2015. "Coordination and
     Crisis in Monetary Unions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (4): 1727­79.
Aguiar, Mark, Manuel Amador, Hugo Hopenhayn, and Iván Werning. 2019. "Take the Short Route:
     Equilibrium Default and Debt Maturity." Econometrica 87 (2): 423­62.
Aguiar, Mark, Satyajit Chatterjee, Harold L. Cole, and Zachary Stangebye. 2016. "Quantitative
     Models of Sovereign Debt Crises." In Handbook of Macroeconomics, edited by John B. Taylor
     and Harald Uhlig, 2:1697­1755. New York and North-Holland: Elsevier.
Ahmed, Faisal Z., and Laura Alfaro. 2017. "Market Reactions to Sovereign Litigation." Capital
     Markets Law Journal 12 (2): 141­63.
Aizenman, Joshua, and Nancy Marion. 2011. "Using Inflation to Erode the US Public Debt." Journal
     of Macroeconomics 33 (4): 524­41.
Alesina, Alberto, and Andrea Passalacqua. 2016. "The Political Economy of Government Debt." In
     Handbook of Macroeconomics, edited by John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig, 2599­2651. New
     York and North-Holland: Elsevier.
Alesina, Alberto, and Guido Tabellini. 1990. "A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deficits and Government
     Debt." Review of Economic Studies 57 (3): 403­14.
Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych. 2014. "Sovereigns, Upstream
     Capital Flows, and Global Imbalances." Journal of the European Economic Association 12 (5):
     1240­84.
Almeida, Heitor and Igor Cunha, Miguel Ferreira, and Felipe Restrepo. Forthcoming. "The Real
     Effects of Credit Ratings: The Sovereign Ceiling Channel". Journal of Finance.
Altavilla, Carlo, Marco Pagano, and Saverio Simonelli. 2017. "Bank Exposures and Sovereign Stress
     Transmission." Review of Finance 21 (6): 2103­39.
Álvarez-Nogal, Carlos, and Christophe Chamley. 2014. "Debt Policy under Constraints: Philip II,
     the Cortes, and Genoese Bankers." Economic History Review 67 (1): 192-213.


                                                  50
Álvarez-Nogal, Carlos, and Christophe Chamley. 2016. "Philip II Against the Cortes and the Credit
     Freeze of 1575-1577." Journal of Iberian and Latin American Economic History 34 (3): 351-
     82.
Ams, Julianne, Reza Baqir, Anna Gelpern, and Christoph Trebesch. 2019. "Sovereign Default". In
     Sovereign Debt: A Guide for Economists and Practitioners, edited by S. Ali Abbas, Alex
     Pienkowski, and Kenneth Rogoff, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ang, Andrew, and Francis A. Longstaff. 2013. "Systemic Sovereign Credit Risk: Lessons from the
     U.S. and Europe." Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (5): 493­510.
Arellano, Cristina. 2008. "Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies."
     American Economic Review 98 (3): 690­712.
Arellano, Cristina, and Ananth Ramanarayanan. 2012. "Default and the Maturity Structure in
     Sovereign Bonds." Journal of Political Economy 120 (2): 187­232.
Arellano, Cristina, Yan Bai, and Luigi Bocola. 2019. "Sovereign Default Risk and Firm
     Heterogeneity." NBER Working Paper 23314.
Arslanalp, Serkan, and Takahiro Tsuda. 2014. "Tracking Global Demand for Advanced Economy
     Sovereign Debt." IMF Economic Review 62 (3): 430­64.
Arteta, Carlos, and Galina Hale. 2008. "Sovereign Debt Crises and Credit to the Private Sector."
     Journal of International Economics 74 (1): 53­69.
Asonuma, Tamon, and Christoph Trebesch. 2016. "Sovereign Debt Restructurings: Preemptive or
     Post-Default." Journal of the European Economic Association 14 (1): 175­214.
Asonuma, Tamon, Dirk Niepelt, and Romain Ranciere. 2017. "Sovereign Bond Prices, Haircuts and
     Maturity." IMF Working Paper 17/119.
Asonuma, Tamon, Marcos d Chamon, Aitor Erce, and Akira Sasahara. 2019. "Costs of Sovereign
     Defaults: Restructuring Strategies, Bank Distress and the Capital Inflow-Credit Channel." IMF
     Working Paper 19/69.
Azzimonti, Marina, and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2018. "International Spillovers and `Ex-Ante' Efficient
     Bailouts." NBER Working Paper 25011.
Bacchetta, Philippe, Elena Perazzi, and Eric van Wincoop. 2018. "Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises: What
     Can Monetary Policy Do?" Journal of International Economics 110: 119­34.
Bahaj, Saleem. 2020. "Sovereign Spreads in the Euro Area: Cross Border Transmission and
     Macroeconomic Implications." Journal of Monetary Economics 110: 116­35.
Bahaj, Saleem, and Ricardo Reis. 2018. "Central Bank Swap Lines." CESifo Working Paper Series
     7124.
Bai, Yan, Seon Tae Kim, and Gabriel P. Mihalache. 2015. "The Maturity and Payment Schedule of
     Sovereign Debt." NBER Working Paper 20896.
Balteanu, Irina, and Aitor Erce. 2018. "Linking Bank Crises and Sovereign Defaults: Evidence from
     Emerging Markets." IMF Economic Review 66 (4): 617­64.
Barkbu, Bergljot, Barry Eichengreen, and Ashoka Mody. 2012. "Financial Crises and the
     Multilateral Response: What the Historical Record Shows." Journal of International
     Economics 88 (2): 422­35.
Barro, Robert J. 1979. "On the Determination of the Public Debt." Journal of Political Economy 87
     (5, Part 1): 940­71.
Benjamin, David, and Mark L. J. Wright. "Recovery Before Redemption? A Theory of Delays in
     Sovereign Debt Renegotiations." Unpublished.
Bernal, Oscar, Kim Oosterlinck, and Ariane Szafarz. 2010. "Observing Bailout Expectations during
     a Total Eclipse of the Sun." Journal of International Money and Finance 29: 1193­1205
Bi, Huixin. 2012. "Sovereign Default Risk Premia, Fiscal Limits, and Fiscal Policy." European
     Economic Review 56 (3): 389­410.
Bianchi, Javier. 2016. "Efficient Bailouts?" American Economic Review 106 (12): 3607­59.

                                                  51
Bianchi, Javier, and Jorge Mondragon. 2018. "Monetary Independence and Rollover Crises." NBER
     Working Paper 25340.
Blanchard, Olivier J. 1990. "Suggestions for a New Set of Fiscal Indicators." OECD Economics
     Department Working Papers 79.
Blanchard, Olivier J. 2019. "Public Debt and Low Interest Rates." American Economic Review 109
     (4): 1197-1229.
Bocola, Luigi, and Alessandro Dovis 2019. "Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises: A Quantitative Analysis,"
     American Economic Review, 109(12): 4343-4377.
Bocola, Luigi. 2016. "The Pass-Through of Sovereign Risk." Journal of Political Economy 124 (4):
     879­926.
Bofondi, Marcello, Luisa Carpinelli, and Enrico Sette. 2018. "Credit Supply During a Sovereign
     Debt Crisis." Journal of the European Economic Association 16 (3): 696­729.
Bohn, Henning. 1998. "The Behavior of U. S. Public Debt and Deficits." Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 113 (3): 949­63.
Bolton, Patrick, and Olivier Jeanne. 2007. "Structuring and Restructuring Sovereign Debt: The Role
     of a Bankruptcy Regime." Journal of Political Economy 115 (6): 901­24.
Bolton, Patrick, and Olivier Jeanne. 2011. "Sovereign Default Risk and Bank Fragility in Financially
     Integrated Economies." IMF Economic Review 59 (2): 162­94.
Bolton, Patrick et al. 2020. "Born Out of Necessity: A Debt Standstill for COVID-19." CEPR Policy
     Insight 103.
Borchard, Edwin, and William H. Wynne. 1951. State Insolvency and Foreign Bondholders.
     Washington, D.C.: Beard Books
Bordo, Michael D, Owen F. Humpage, and Anna J. Schwartz. 2015. "The Evolution of the Federal
     Reserve Swap Lines since 1962." IMF Economic Review 63 (2): 353­72.
Bordo, Michael D., and Anna J. Schwartz. 1999. "Under What Circumstances, Past and Present,
     Have International Rescues of Countries in Financial Distress Been Successful?" Journal of
     International Money and Finance 18 (4): 683­708.
Bordo, Michael D., and Christopher M. Meissner. 2016. "Fiscal and Financial Crises." NBER
     Working Paper 22059.
Bordo, Michael D., Christopher M. Meissner, and David Stuckler. 2010. "Foreign Currency Debt,
     Financial Crises and Economic Growth: A Long-Run View." Journal of International Money
     and Finance 29 (4): 642­65.
Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel, and Maria Soledad MartinezPeria. 2001.
     "Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?" Economic Policy 16 (32): 52­82.
Borensztein, Eduardo, and Ugo Panizza. 2009. "The Costs of Sovereign Default." IMF Staff Papers
     56 (4): 683­741.
Bottero, Margherita, Simone Lenzu, and Filippo Mezzanotti. 2020. "Sovereign Debt Exposure and
     the Bank Lending Channel: Impact on Credit Supply and the Real Economy." Journal of
     International Economics 126: 103328.
Broner, Fernando A., Guido Lorenzoni, and Sergio L. Schmukler. 2013. "Why Do Emerging
     Economies Borrow Short Term?" Journal of the European Economic Association 11 (1): 67­
     100.
Broner, Fernando, Aitor Erce, Alberto Martin, and Jaume Ventura. 2014. "Sovereign Debt Markets
     in Turbulent Times: Creditor Discrimination and Crowding-out Effects." Journal of Monetary
     Economics 61: 114­42.
Broner, Fernando, Alberto Martin, and Jaume Ventura. 2010. "Sovereign Risk and Secondary
     Markets." American Economic Review 100 (4): 1523­55.
Broner, Fernando, and Jaume Ventura. 2016. "Rethinking the Effects of Financial Globalization."
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3): 1497­1542.


                                                   52
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Luis Garicano, Philip R. Lane, Marco Pagano, Ricardo Reis, Tano Santos,
     David Thesmar, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Dimitri Vayanos. 2016. "The Sovereign-Bank
     Diabolic Loop and ESBies." American Economic Review 106 (5): 508­12.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Ricardo Reis. 2019. "A Crash Course on the Euro Crisis." NBER
     Working Paper 26229.
Brutti, Filippo. 2011. "Sovereign Defaults and Liquidity Crises." Journal of International
     Economics 84 (1): 65­72.
Brutti, Filippo, and Philip Sauré. 2015. "Transmission of Sovereign Risk in the Euro Crisis." Journal
     of International Economics 97 (2): 231­48.
Brutti, Filippo, and Philip Sauré. 2016. "Repatriation of Debt In The Euro Crisis." Journal of the
     European Economic Association 14 (1): 145­74.
Buchheit, Lee C., and G. Mitu Gulati. 2017. "Restructuring Sovereign Debt after NML v Argentina."
     Capital Markets Law Journal 12 (2): 224­38.
Buchheit, Lee C., G. Mitu Gulati, and Ignacio Tirado. 2013. "The Problem of Holdout Creditors in
     Eurozone Sovereign Debt Restructurings." Unpublished.
Buchheit, Lee C. and Mitu Gulati. 2018 "Use of the Local Law Advantage in the Restructuring of
     European Sovereign Bonds." Unpublished.
Bulow, Jeremy, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1989a. "Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?" American
     Economic Review 79 (1): 43­50.
Bulow, Jeremy, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1989b. "A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt."
     Journal of Political Economy 97 (1): 155­78.
Burger, John D., and Francis E. Warnock. 2006. "Local Currency Bond Markets." IMF Staff Papers
     53: 1­7.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1988. "Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations." American
     Economic Review 78 (4): 647­61.
Caprio, Gerard Jr., and Daniela Klingebiel. 2003. "Episodes of Systematic and Borderline Financial
     Crises." Unpublished.
Carletti, Elena, Paolo Colla, G. Mitu Gulati, and Steven Ongena. 2020. "The Price of Law: The Case
     of the Eurozone Collective Action Clauses." Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper 17-35.
Catão, Luis A. V., and Gian M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2014. "External Liabilities and Crises." Journal of
     International Economics 94 (1): 18­32.
Catão, Luis A. V., and Rui C. Mano. 2017. "Default Premium." Journal of International Economics
     107 (C): 91­110.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Madhusudan S. Mohanty, and Fabrizio Zampolli. 2010. "The Future of Public
     Debt: Prospects and Implications." BIS Working Paper 300.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Madhusudan S. Mohanty, and Fabrizio Zampolli. 2011. "The Real Effects of
     Debt." BIS Working Paper 352.
Chabot, Benjamin, and Mitu Gulati. 2014. "Santa Anna and His Black Eagle: The Origins of Pari
     Passu?" Capital Markets Law Journal 9 (3): 216­41.
Chamon, Marcos, Julian Schumacher, and Christoph Trebesch. 2018. "Foreign-Law Bonds: Can
     They Reduce Sovereign Borrowing Costs?" Journal of International Economics 114 (C): 164­
     79.
Chari, Anusha, Ryan Leary and Toan Phan 2018. "The Transmission of Quasi-Sovereign Default
     Risk: Evidence from Puerto Rico." Unpublished.
Chari, V. V., Alessandro Dovis, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2020. "On the Optimality of Financial
     Repression." Journal of Political Economy 128 (2): 710­39.
Chatterjee, Satyajit, and Burcu Eyigungor. 2012. "Maturity, Indebtedness, and Default Risk."
     American Economic Review 102 (6): 2674­99.
Chatterjee, Satyajit, and Burcu Eyigungor. 2015. "A Seniority Arrangement for Sovereign Debt."
     American Economic Review 105 (12): 3740­65.

                                                   53
Checherita-Westphal, Cristina, and Philipp Rother. 2012. "The Impact of High Government Debt on
     Economic Growth and Its Channels: An Empirical Investigation for the Euro Area." European
     Economic Review 56 (7): 1392­1405.
Chernov, Mikhail, Lukas Schmid, and Andres Schneider. forthcoming. "A Macrofinance View of
     U.S. Sovereign CDS Premiums." Journal of Finance.
Clarke, Hyde. 1878. "On the Debts of Sovereign and Quasi-Sovereign States, Owing by Foreign
     Countries." Journal of the Statistical Society of London 41: 299-347.
Cline, William R. 1995. International Debt Reexamined. Washington: Institute for International
     Economics
Cohen, Daniel, and Jeffrey Sachs. 1986. "Growth and External Debt under Risk of Debt
     Repudiation." European Economic Review 30 (3): 529­60.
Cohen, Daniel, and Sébastien Villemot. 2015. "Endogenous Debt Crises." Journal of International
     Money and Finance 51: 337­69.
Cole, Harold L., and Timothy J. Kehoe. 1996. "A Self-Fulfilling Model of Mexico's 1994-1995 Debt
     Crisis." Journal of International Economics 41 (3­4): 309­30.
Cole, Harold L., and Timothy J. Kehoe. 2000. "Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises." The Review of Economic
     Studies 67 (1): 91­116.
Collard, Fabrice, Michel Habib, and Jean-Charles Rochet. 2015. "Sovereign Debt Sustainability in
     Advanced Economies." Journal of the European Economic Association 13 (3): 381­420.
Conesa, Juan Carlos, and Timothy J. Kehoe. 2015. "Gambling for Redemption and Self-Fulfilling
     Debt Crises." NBER Working Paper 21026.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Aitor Erce, and Timothy Uy. 2018. "Debt Sustainability and the Terms of
     Official Support." Cambridge Working Papers in Economics 1864.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Luca Dedola. 2016. "The Mystery of the Printing Press: Monetary Policy
     and Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises." Journal of the European Economic Association 14 (6): 1329­
     71.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Barry Eichengreen, Galina Hale, and Eric Tallman. 2020. "The Euro Crisis in
     the Mirror of the EMS: How Tying Odysseus to the Mast Avoided the Sirens but Led Him to
     Charybdis." Open Economies Review 31: 219-236.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Keith Kuester, André Meier, and Gernot J. Müller. 2012. "Sovereign Risk,
     Fiscal Policy, and Macroeconomic Stability." Economic Journal 123 (566): 99­132.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Keith Kuester, André Meier, and Gernot J. Müller. 2014. "Sovereign Risk and
     Belief-Driven Fluctuations in the Euro Area." Journal of Monetary Economics 61: 53­73.
Cottarelli, Carlo, Paolo Mauro, Lorenzo Forni, and Jan Gottschalk. 2010. "Default in Today's
     Advanced Economies; Unnecessary, Undesirable, and Unlikely." IMF Staff Position Notes.
Cruces, Juan J., and Christoph Trebesch. 2013. "Sovereign Defaults: The Price of Haircuts."
     American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5 (3): 85­117.
Cruces, Juan J., and Tim R. Samples. 2016. "Settling Sovereign Debt's Trial of the Century." Emory
     International Law Review 31 (1).
D'Amico, Stefania, William English, David LópezSalido, and Edward Nelson. 2012. "The Federal
     Reserve's Largescale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects." Economic Journal
     122 (564): 415­46.
D'Erasmo, Pablo, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Jing Zhang. 2016. "What is a Sustainable Public Debt."
     In Handbook of Macroeconomics, John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig (eds.), vol. 2. North
     Holland, Amsterdam: 2493-2597.
D'Erasmo, Pablo, and Enrique G. Mendoza. 2018. "History Remembered: Optimal Sovereign
     Default on Domestic and External Debt." NBER Working Paper 25073.
Das, Udaibir S., Michael G. Papaioannou, and Christoph Trebesch. 2010. "Sovereign Default Risk
     and Private Sector Access to Capital in Emerging Markets." IMF Working Paper 10/10.


                                                  54
Das, Udaibir, Michael Papaioannou, and Christoph Trebesch. 2012. "Sovereign Debt Restructurings
     1950-2010; Literature Survey, Data, and Stylized Facts," IMF Working Paper 12/203.
De Grauwe, Paul. 2012. "The Governance of a Fragile Eurozone." Australian Economic Review 45
     (3): 255­68.
De Grauwe, Paul, and Yuemei Ji. 2013. "Self-Fulfilling Crises in the Eurozone: An Empirical Test."
     Journal of International Money and Finance 34: 15­36.
De Marco, Filippo, and Marco Macchiavelli. 2016. "The Political Origin of Home Bias: The Case
     of Europe." Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016­060.
De Santis, Roberto A. 2019. "Redenomination Risk." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 51 (8):
     2173­2206.
Dell'Ariccia, Giovanni, Isabel Schnabel, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer. 2006. "How Do Official Bailouts
     Affect the Risk of Investing in Emerging Markets?" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38
     (7): 1689­1714.
Dell'Erba, Salvatore, Ricardo Hausmann, and Ugo Panizza. 2013. "Debt Levels, Debt Composition,
     and Sovereign Spreads in Emerging and Advanced Economies." Oxford Review of Economic
     Policy 29 (3): 518­47.
Dellas, Harris, and Dirk Niepelt. 2016. "Sovereign Debt with Heterogeneous Creditors." Journal of
     International Economics 99: 16­26.
Doerr, Sebastian, Stefan Gissler, Jose-Luis Peydro, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2019. "From Finance
     to Fascism: The Real Effect of Germany's 1931 Banking Crisis." CEPR DP 12806.
Dovis, Alessandro, and Rishabh Kirpalani. 2020. "Fiscal Rules, Bailouts, and Reputation in Federal
     Governments." American Economic Review 110 (3): 860­88.
Drechsel, Thomas, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2018. "Commodity Booms and Busts in Emerging
     Economies." Journal of International Economics 112: 200­218.
Drelichman, Mauricio, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2014. Lending to the Borrower from Hell: Debt,
     Taxes, and Default in the Age of Philip II. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Du, Wenxin, and Jesse Schreger. 2016. "Local Currency Sovereign Risk," Journal of Finance 71(3):
     1027-70.
Du, Wenxin, and Jesse Schreger. 2016. "Sovereign Risk, Currency Risk, and Corporate Balance
     Sheets." Harvard Business School BGIE Unit Working Paper 17-024.
Du, Wenxin, Carolin E. Pflueger, and Jesse Schreger, forthcoming. "Sovereign Debt Portfolios,
     Bond Risks, and the Credibility of Monetary Policy." Journal of Finance, forthcoming
Eaton, Jonathan, and Mark Gersovitz. 1981. "Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and
     Empirical Analysis." The Review of Economic Studies 48 (2): 289­309.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Raquel Fernandez. 1995. "Sovereign Debt." In Handbook of International
     Economics, Volume 3, edited by Kenneth Rogoff and Gene M. Grossman, 2031-77, New York
     and North-Holland: Elsevier.
Eberhardt, Markus, and Andrea Presbitero. 2015. "Public Debt and Growth: Heterogeneity and Non-
     linearity." Journal of International Economics 97 (1): 44-58.
Edwards, Sebastian, Francis A. Longstaff, and Alvaro Garcia Marin. 2015. "The U.S. Debt
     Restructuring of 1933: Consequences and Lessons." NBER Working Paper 21694.
Edwards, Sebastian. 2018. American Default: The Untold Story of FDR, the Supreme Court, and the
     Battle over Gold. Princeton University Press.
Eichengreen, Barry J. 1991. "Historical Research on International Lending and Debt." Journal of
     Economic Perspectives 5 (2): 149-169.
Eichengreen, Barry J. 1992. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-
     1939. New York: Oxford University Press.
Eichengreen, Barry J. 2008. Globalizing Capital: A History of the International Monetary System.
     Princeton: Princeton University Press.


                                                  55
Eichengreen, Barry J., and Ricardo Hausmann. 1999. "Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility."
     NBER Working Paper 7418.
Eichengreen, Barry J., and Richard Portes. 1986. "Debt and Default in the 1930s: Causes and
     Consequences." European Economic Review 30 (3): 599­640.
Eichengreen, Barry J., and Richard Portes, 1989. "Dealing With Debt: The 1930s and the 1980s," In
     Dealing with the Debt Crisis, edited by Ishrat Husain and Ishac Diwan, 69-86. Washington,
     DC: The World Bank.
Eichengreen, Barry J., and Richard Portes. 1990. "The Interwar Debt Crisis and Its Aftermath,"
     World Bank Research Observer 5 (1): 69-94.
Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann, and Ugo Panizza. 2005. "The Mystery of Original Sin." In
     Other People's Money: Debt Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging-Market
     Economies, edited by Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann, 233­65. Chicago: University
     of Chicago Press.
Ellison, Martin, and Andrew Scott. 2020. "Managing the UK National Debt 1694­2018." American
     Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12 (3): 227-57.
Engel, Charles, and Jungjae Park. 2018. "Debauchery and Original Sin: The Currency Composition
     of Sovereign Debt." NBER Working Paper 24671.
Engler, Philipp, and Christoph Große Steffen. 2016. "Sovereign Risk, Interbank Freezes, and
     Aggregate Fluctuations." European Economic Review 87: 34­61.
Erce, Aitor, and Enrico Mallucci. 2018. "Selective Sovereign Defaults." International Finance
     Discussion Papers 1239.
Esteves, Rui, and João Tovar Jalles. 2016. "Like Father Like Sons? The Cost of Sovereign Defaults
     in Reduced Credit to the Private Sector." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 48 (7): 1515­
     45.
Fang, Chuck, Julian Schumacher, and Christoph Trebesch. 2020. "Restructuring Sovereign Bonds:
     Holdouts, Haircuts and the Effectiveness of CACs." ECB Working Paper 2366.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Jean Tirole. 2018. "Deadly Embrace: Sovereign and Financial Balance Sheets
     Doom Loops." Review of Economic Studies 85 (3): 1781­1823.
Feis, Herbert. 1930. Europe, the World's Banker, 1870-1914. New York: W. W. Norton & Co.
Ferguson, Niall. 2006. "Political Risk and the International Bond Market between the 1848
     Revolution and the Outbreak of the First World War." Economic History Review 59 (1): 70­
     112.
Ferguson, Niall, Andreas Schaab, and Moritz Schularick. 2015. "Central Bank Balance Sheets:
     Expansion and Reduction since 1900." CESifo Working Paper 5379.
Ferrando, Annalisa, Alexander Popov, and Gregory F. Udell. 2017. "Sovereign Stress and SMEs'
     Access to Finance: Evidence from the ECB's SAFE Survey." Journal of Banking & Finance
     81: 65­80.
Fink, Fabian, and Almuth Scholl. 2016. "A Quantitative Model of Sovereign Debt, Bailouts and
     Conditionality." Journal of International Economics 98 (C): 176­90.
Fisher, Chay, and Christopher Kent. 1999. "Two Depressions, One Banking Collapse." RBA
     Research Discussion Papers 1999-06.
Fishlow, Albert. 1985. "Lessons from the Past: Capital Markets during the 19th Century and the
     Interwar Period." International Organization 39 (3): 383­439.
Flandreau, Marc. 1997. "Central Bank Cooperation in Historical Perspective: A Sceptical View."
     The Economic History Review 50 (4): 735­63.
Flandreau, Marc, and Juan H. Flores. 2009. "Bonds and Brands: Foundations of Sovereign Debt
     Markets, 1820­1830." The Journal of Economic History 69 (3): 646­84.
Flandreau, Marc, and Juan H. Flores. 2012. "Bondholders versus Bond-Sellers? Investment Banks
     and Conditionality Lending in the London Market for Foreign Government Debt, 1815­1913."
     European Review of Economic History 16 (4): 356­83.

                                                 56
Flandreau, Marc, Norbert Gaillard, and Frank Packer. 2011. "To Err Is Human: US Rating Agencies
     and the Interwar Foreign Government Debt Crisis." European Review of Economic History 15
     (3): 495­538.
Flandreau, Marc, Norbert Gaillard, and Ugo Panizza. 2010. "Conflicts of Interest, Reputation, and
     the Interwar Debt Crisis: Banksters or Bad Luck?" CEPR Discussion Paper 7705.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867­
     1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Furceri, Davide, and Aleksandra Zdzienicka. 2012. "How Costly Are Debt Crises?" Journal of
     International Money and Finance 31 (4): 726­42.
Galofré-Vilà, Gregori, Christopher M. Meissner, Martin McKee, and David Stuckler. 2019. "The
     Economic Consequences of the 1953 London Debt Agreement." European Review of Economic
     History 23 (1): 1­29.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Alberto Martin, and Stefano Rossi. 2014. "Sovereign Default, Domestic Banks,
     and Financial Institutions." Journal of Finance 69 (2): 819­66.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Alberto Martin, and Stefano Rossi. 2018. "Banks, Government Bonds, and
     Default: What Do the Data Say?" Journal of Monetary Economics 98: 98­113.
Ghosh, Atish R., Jun I. Kim, Enrique G. Mendoza, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Mahvash S. Qureshi.
     2013. "Fiscal Fatigue, Fiscal Space and Debt Sustainability in Advanced Economies." The
     Economic Journal 123 (566): 4­30.
Gianviti, François, Anne O. Krueger, Jean Pisani-Ferry, André Sapir, and Jürgen von Hagen. 2010.
     A European Mechanism for Sovereign Debt Crisis Resolution: A Proposal. Bruegel Blueprint
     Series 10.
González-Rozada, Martín, and Eduardo Levy Yeyati. 2008. "Global Factors and Emerging Market
     Spreads." Economic Journal 118 (533): 1917­36.
Gordon, Grey, and Pablo Guerron-Quintana. 2019. "A Quantitative Theory of Hard and Soft
     Sovereign Defaults." Unpublished.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne. 2013. "Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The
     Allocation Puzzle." Review of Economic Studies 80 (4): 1484­1515.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Philippe Martin, and Todd E. Messer. 2020. "The Economics of
     Sovereign Debt, Bailouts and the Eurozone Crisis." NBER Working Paper 27403.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Thomas Philippon, and Dimitri Vayanos. 2017. "The Analytics of the
     Greek Crisis." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 31 (1): 1­81.
Gros, Daniel. 2012. "A Simple Model of Multiple Equilibria and Default." Unpublished.
Guembel, Alexander, and Oren Sussman. 2009. "Sovereign Debt without Default Penalties." Review
     of Economic Studies 76 (4): 1297­1320.
Gulati, Mitu, and Robert E. Scott. 2012. The Three and a Half Minute Transaction: Boilerplate and
     the Limits of Contract Design. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hale, Galina, Peter Jones, and Mark Spiegel. 2020. "The Rise in Home Currency Issuance" Journal
     of International Economics, Volume 122, January, DOI: 103256.
Hall, George, et al. 2019. Debts and Entanglements between the Wars, edited by Era Dabla-Norris.
     Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Hatchondo, Juan Carlos, and Leonardo Martinez. 2009. "Long-Duration Bonds and Sovereign
     Defaults." Journal of International Economics 79 (1): 117­25.
Hatchondo, Juan Carlos, Leonardo Martinez, and César Sosa-Padilla. 2016. "Debt Dilution and
     Sovereign Default Risk." Journal of Political Economy 124 (5): 1383­1422.
He, Zhiguo, and Wei Xiong. 2012. "Rollover Risk and Credit Risk." The Journal of Finance 67 (2):
     391­430.
Hébert, Benjamin, and Jesse Schreger. 2017. "The Costs of Sovereign Default: Evidence from
     Argentina." American Economic Review 107 (10): 3119­45.


                                                 57
Herndon, Thomas, Michael Ash, and Robert Pollin. 2014. "Does High Public Debt Consistently
      Stifle Economic Growth? A Critique of Reinhart and Rogoff." Cambridge Journal of
      Economics 38 (2): 257­79.
Hilscher, Jens, Alon Raviv, and Ricardo Reis. 2014. "Inflating Away the Public Debt? An Empirical
      Assessment." Working Paper 74, Brandeis University.
Horn, Sebastian. 2020. "Official Lending, Idiosyncratic Shocks and International Risk-Sharing."
      Dissertation Chapter, University of Munich.
Horn, Sebastian, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch. 2019. "China's Overseas Lending."
      NBER Working Paper 26050.
Horn, Sebastian, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch. 2020. "Coping with Disasters: Two
      Centuries of International Official Lending." NBER Working Paper 27343.
International Monetary Fund. 2011. "Managing Sovereign Debt and Debt Markets through a Crisis
      ­ Practical Insights and Policy Lessons." Report, Monetary and Capital Markets Department.
Jalil, Andrew J. 2015. "A New History of Banking Panics in the United States, 1825-1929:
      Construction and Implications." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (3): 295­
      330.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer. 2001. "International Bailouts, Moral Hazard and
      Conditionality." Economic Policy 16 (33): 408­32.
Jeanne, Olivier, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer. 2008. "A Theory of International
      Crisis Lending and IMF Conditionality." IMF Working Paper 08/236.
Jeanneret, Alexandre, and Slim Souissi. 2016. "Sovereign Defaults by Currency Denomination."
      Journal of International Money and Finance 60 (C): 197­222.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2016. "Macrofinancial History and the New
      Business Cycle Facts." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 31: 213­63.
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Luc Laeven, and David Moreno. 2018. "Debt Overhang, Rollover Risk,
      and Corporate Investment: Evidence from the European Crisis." NBER Working Paper 24555.
Kohlscheen, Emanuel. 2007. "Why Are There Serial Defaulters? Evidence from Constitutions."
      Journal of Law and Economics 50 (4): 713­30.
Krause, Michael U., and Stéphane Moyen. 2016. "Public Debt and Changing Inflation Targets."
      American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8 (4): 142­76.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Tyler Muir. 2017. "How Credit Cycles across a Financial Crisis."
      NBER Working Paper 23850.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, Stefan Nagel, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2018. "ECB Policies
      Involving Government Bond Purchases: Impact and Channels." Review of Finance 22 (1): 1­
      44.
Kriwoluzky, Alexander, Gernot J. Müller, and Martin Wolf. 2019. "Exit Expectations and Debt
      Crises in Currency Unions." Journal of International Economics 121: 103253.
Krugman, Paul. 1988. "Financing vs. Forgiving a Debt Overhang." Journal of Development
      Economics 29 (3): 253­68.
Kuvshinov, Dmitry, and Kaspar Zimmermann. 2019. "Sovereigns Going Bust: Estimating the Cost
      of Default." European Economic Review 119: 1­21.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. 2013. "Systemic Banking Crises Database." IMF Economic
      Review 61 (2): 225­70.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. 2018. "Systemic Banking Crises Revisited." IMF Working Paper
      18/206.
Lane, Philip R. 2012. "The European Sovereign Debt Crisis." Journal of Economic Perspectives 26
      (3): 49­68.
Lindert, Peter H., and Peter J. Morton. 1989. "How Sovereign Debt Has Worked." In Developing
      Country Debt and Economic Performance, Volume 1: The International Financial System,
      edited by Jeffrey D. Sachs, 39-106. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

                                                 58
Lipson, Charles. 1985. Standing Guard: Protecting Foreign Capital in the Nineteenth and Twentieth
    Centuries. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lloyd, Wildon. 1934. The European War Debts and Their Settlement. New York: Committee for the
    consideration of inter-governmental debts.
Longstaff, Francis A., Jun Pan, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Kenneth J. Singleton. 2011. "How Sovereign
    Is Sovereign Credit Risk?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3 (2): 75­103.
Lorenzoni, Guido, and Iván Werning. 2019. "Slow Moving Debt Crises." American Economic
    Review 109 (9): 3229­63.
Maerean, Andreea-Alexandra, and Kris James Mitchener. 2016. "How Important were Doom
    Loops?" Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Southern Denmark, Chapter 4.
Maerean, Andreea-Alexandra, and Paul Sharp. 2018. "Sovereign Debt and Supersanctions in
    Emerging Markets: Evidence from Four Southeast European Countries, 1878-1913."
    Unpublished. University of Southern Denmark.
Manes, Alfred. 1918. Staatsbankrotte: Wirtschaftliche und rechtliche Betrachtungen. Berlin: Karl
    Siegismund.
Marichal, Carlos. 1989. "A Century of Debt Crises in Latin America: From Independence to the
    Great Depression, 1820-1930." Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Marichal, Carlos. 2014. "Historical Reflections on the Causes of Financial Crises: Official
    Investigations, Past and Present, 1873­2011." Journal of the Spanish Economic History
    Association 10 (02): 81­91.
Martin, Philippe, and Thomas Philippon. 2017. "Inspecting the Mechanism: Leverage and the Great
    Recession in the Eurozone." American Economic Review 107 (7): 1904­37.
Mauro, Paolo, Nathan Sussman, and Yishay Yafeh. 2002. "Emerging Market Spreads: Then versus
    Now." Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (2): 695­733.
Mauro, Paulo, and Jing Thou. 2020. "r minus g negative: Can We Sleep More Soundly?" IMF
    Working Paper 20/52.
Mendoza, Enrique G., and Jonathan D. Ostry. 2008. "International Evidence on Fiscal Solvency: Is
    Fiscal Policy `Responsible'?" Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (6): 1081­93.
Mendoza, Enrique G., and Vivian Z. Yue. 2012. "A General Equilibrium Model of Sovereign
    Default and Business Cycles." Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (2): 889­946.
Mehrotra, Neil R., and Dmitriy Sergeyev. 2019. "Debt Sustainability in a Low Interest Rate World."
    Unpublished.
Meyer, Josefin. 2020. "Domestic vs. Foreign Debt: Discrimination in Sovereign Debt
    Restructurings." Unpublished.
Meyer, Josefin, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch. 2019. "Sovereign Bonds since
    Waterloo." NBER Working Paper 25543.
Michie, Ranald C. 1999. The London Stock Exchange: A History. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mikesell, Raymond. 1962. U.S. Private and Government Investment Abroad. Eugene: University of
    Oregon Press.
Mitchener, Kris James. 2014. "The Diabolic Loop: Precedents and Legacies". In Bearing the losses
    from bank and sovereign default in the Eurozone, edited by Franklin Allen, Elena Carletti,
    Joanna Gray, 165-180. Philadelphia: FIC Press.
Mitchener, Kris J., and Gonçalo Pina. 2020. "Pegxit Pressure." Journal of International Money and
    Finance 107: 102191.
Mitchener, Kris James, and Marc D. Weidenmier. 2005. "Empire, Public Goods, and the Roosevelt
    Corollary." Journal of Economic History 65 (3): 658­92.
Mitchener, Kris James, and Marc D. Weidenmier. 2008. "The Baring Crisis and the Great Latin
    American Meltdown of the 1890s." Journal of Economic History 68 (2): 462­500.
Mitchener, Kris James, and Marc D. Weidenmier. 2010. "Supersanctions and Sovereign Debt
    Repayment." Journal of International Money and Finance 29 (1): 19­36.

                                                  59
Mitchener, Kris James, and Marc D. Weidenmier. 2015. "Was the Classical Gold Standard Credible
     on the Periphery? Evidence from Currency Risk." Journal of Economic History 75 (2): 479­
     511.
Mody, Ashoka, and Damiano Sandri. 2012. "The Eurozone Crisis: How Banks and Sovereigns Came
     to Be Joined at the Hip." Economic Policy 27 (70): 199­230.
Morelli, Juan, Pablo Ottonello and Diego Perez. 2019. "Global Banks and Systemic Debt Crises".
     Unpublished.
Moulton, Harold G., and Leo Pasvolsky. 1932. "War Debts and World Prosperity." Washington,
     D.C.: Brookings Institution
Müller, Andreas, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2019. "Sovereign Debt and Structural
     Reforms." American Economic Review 109 (12): 4220­59.
Neumeyer, Pablo A., and Fabrizio Perri. 2005. "Business Cycles in Emerging Economies: The Role
     of Interest Rates." Journal of Monetary Economics 52 (2): 345­80.
Niepmann, Friederike, and Tim Schmidt-Eisenlohr. 2013. "Bank Bailouts, International Linkages,
     and Cooperation." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (4): 270­305.
North, Douglass C., and Barry R. Weingast. 1989. "Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution
     of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England".Journal of
     Economic History 49 (4): 803-832.
Obstfeld, Maurice. 1996. "Models of Currency Crises with Self-Fulfilling Features." European
     Economic Review 40 (3): 1037­47.
Ongena, Steven, Alexander Popov, and Neeltje Van Horen. 2019. "The Invisible Hand of the
     Government: Moral Suasion during the European Sovereign Debt Crisis." American Economic
     Journal: Macroeconomics 11 (4): 346­79.
Oosterlinck, Kim. 2013. "Sovereign debt defaults: insights from History." Oxford Review of
     Economic Policy 29 (4): 697-714.
Oosterlinck, Kim, Xavier De Scheemaekere, and Ariane Szafarz. 2015. "Identifying economic
     crises: insights from history." Financial History Review 22(1): 1­18.
Oosterlinck, Kim, Loredana Ureche-Rangau, and Jacques-Marie Vaslin. 2014. "Baring, Wellington
     and the Resurrection of French Public Finances Following Waterloo." Journal of Economic
     History 74 (4): 1072­1102.
Ottonello, Pablo and Diego Perez. 2019. "The Currency Composition of Sovereign Debt." American
     Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 11(3): 174-208.
Panizza, Ugo, and Andrea F. Presbitero. 2014. "Public Debt and Economic Growth: Is There a
     Causal Effect?" Journal of Macroeconomics 41: 21­41.
Panizza, Ugo, Federico Sturzenegger, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer. 2009. "The Economics and Law of
     Sovereign Debt and Default." Journal of Economic Literature 47 (3): 651­98.
Perez, Diego J. 2015. "Sovereign Debt, Domestic Banks and the Provision of Public Liquidity."
     Unpublished.
Perez, Diego J. 2017. "Sovereign Debt Maturity Structure under Asymmetric Information." Journal
     of International Economics 108: 243­59.
Pescatori, Andrea, and Amadou N. R. Sy. 2007. "Are Debt Crises Adequately Defined?" IMF Staff
     Papers 54 (2): 306­37.
Phan, Toàn, and Mark L.J. Wright. 2019. "Country Size, Reputation and Sovereign Debt."
     Unpublished.
Pitchford, Rohan, and Mark L. J. Wright. 2012. "Holdouts in Sovereign Debt Restructuring: A
     Theory of Negotiation in a Weak Contractual Environment." Review of Economic Studies 79
     (2): 812­37.
Reinhart, Carmen, Kenneth S. Rogoff, and Miguel A. Savastano. 2003. "Debt Intolerance."
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 34 (1): 1­74.


                                                  60
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of
     Financial Folly. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2010. "Growth in a Time of Debt." American
     Economic Review 100 (2): 573­78.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2011a. "From Financial Crash to Debt Crisis."
     American Economic Review 101 (5): 1676­1706.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2011b. "The Forgotten History of Domestic Debt."
     Economic Journal 121 (552): 319­50.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2015. "Financial and Sovereign Debt Crises; Some
     Lessons Learned and Those Forgotten." Journal of Banking and Financial Economics 2 (4): 5-
     17.
Reinhart, Carmen M., Vincent R. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2012. "Public Debt Overhangs:
     Advanced-Economy Episodes since 1800." Journal of Economic Perspectives 26 (3): 69­86.
Reinhart, Carmen M., Vincent R. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2015. "Dealing with Debt."
     Journal of International Economics 96: 43­55.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and M. Belen Sbrancia. 2015. "The Liquidation of Government Debt."
     Economic Policy 30 (82): 291­333.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Christoph Trebesch. 2015. "The Pitfalls of External Dependence: Greece,
     1829­2015." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2015(2): 307-328.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Christoph Trebesch. 2016a. "Sovereign Debt Relief and Its Aftermath."
     Journal of the European Economic Association 14 (1): 215­51.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Christoph Trebesch, 2016b. "The International Monetary Fund: 70 Years
     of Reinvention," Journal of Economic Perspectives 30(1): 3-28.
Richardson, Gary. 2007. "Categories and causes of bank distress duringthe great depression, 1929­
     1933: The illiquidity versus insolvency debate revisited". Explorations in Economic History
     44: 588-607.
Roch, Francisco, and Harald Uhlig. 2018. "The Dynamics of Sovereign Debt Crises and Bailouts."
     Journal of International Economics 114: 1­13.
Roubini, Nouriel, and Brad Setser. 2004. Bailouts or Bail-Ins? Responding to Financial Crises in
     Emerging Economies. Washington, DC.: Peterson Institute Press
Scheubel, Beatrice, and Livio Stracca. 2016. "What Do We Know About the Global Financial Safety
     Net? Rationale, Data, and Possible Evolution." ECB Occasional Paper 177.
Schlegl, Matthias, Christoph Trebesch, and Mark L. J. Wright. 2019. "The Seniority Structure of
     Sovereign Debt." NBER Working Paper 25793.
Schneider, Christina J., and Jennifer L. Tobin. 2020. "The Political Economy of Bilateral Bailouts."
     International Organization 74 (1): 1­29.
Schultz, Kenneth A., and Barry R. Weingast. 2003. "The Democratic Advantage: Institutional
     Foundations of Financial Power in International Competition." International Organization 57
     (1): 3­42.
Schumacher, Julian, Christoph Trebesch, and Henrik Enderlein. 2015. "What Explains Sovereign
     Debt Litigation?" Journal of Law and Economics 58 (3): 585­623.
Schumacher, Julian, Christoph Trebesch, and Henrik Enderlein. 2018. "Sovereign Defaults in
     Court." ECB Working Paper 2135. Forthcoming Journal of International Economics.
Shleifer, Andrei. 2003. "Will the Sovereign Debt Market Survive?" American Economic Review 93
     (2): 85­90.
Steinkamp, Sven, and Frank Westermann. 2014. "The Role of Creditor Seniority in Europe's
     Sovereign Debt Crisis." Economic Policy 29 (79): 495­552.
Stoppok, Lucie, and Christoph Trebesch. 2020. "Sovereign Debt Rollover Crises." Unpublished.
Straumann, Tobias. 2019. 1931: Debt, Crisis, and the Rise of Hitler. Oxford: Oxford University
     Press.

                                                   61
Sturzenegger, Federico, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer. 2006. Debt Defaults and Lessons from a Decade
     of Crises. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Suter, Christian. 1992. Debt Cycles In The World-Economy: Foreign Loans, Financial Crises, And
     Debt Settlement, 1820-1990. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Taylor, Alan M. 2015. "Credit, Financial Stability, and the Macroeconomy." Annual Review of
     Economics 7 (1): 309­39.
Tirole, Jean. 2015. "Country Solidarity in Sovereign Crises." American Economic Review 105 (8):
     2333­63.
Tomz, Michael, and Mark L. J. Wright. 2007. "Do Countries Default in `Bad Times'?" Journal of
     the European Economic Association 5 (2­3): 352­60.
Tomz, Michael, and Mark L.J. Wright. 2013. "Empirical Research on Sovereign Debt and Default."
     Annual Review of Economics 5 (1): 247­72.
Tooze, Adam. 2018. Crashed: How a Decade of Financial Crises Changed the World. London:
     Penguin.
Trebesch, Christoph. 2019. "Resolving Sovereign Debt Crises: The Role of Political Risk." Oxford
     Economic Papers 71 (2): 421­44.
Trebesch, Christoph, and Michael Zabel. 2017. "The Output Costs of Hard and Soft Sovereign
     Default." European Economic Review 92: 416­32.
Tuncer, Ali Coskun. 2015. Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control: The Middle East
     and the Balkans, 1870 ­ 1914. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Uribe, Martin, and Vivian Z. Yue. 2006. "Country Spreads and Emerging Countries: Who Drives
     Whom?" Journal of International Economics 69 (1): 6­36.
Van Rijckeghem, Caroline, and Beatrice Weder. 2009. "Political Institutions and Debt Crises."
     Public Choice 138 (3): 387­408.
Vizcarra, Catalina. 2009. "Guano, Credible Commitments, and Sovereign Debt Repayment in
     Nineteenth-Century Peru." Journal of Economic History 69 (2): 358­87.
Waibel, Michael. 2011. Sovereign Defaults before International Courts and Tribunals. Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press.
Wicker, Elmus. 1996. The Banking Panics of the Great Depression. New York: Cambridge
     University Press.
Winkler, Max. 1933. Foreign Bonds: An Autopsy. Philadelphia: Roland Swain.
Woo, Jaejoon, and Manmohan S. Kumar. 2015. "Public Debt and Growth." Economica 82 (328):
     705­39.
Yared, Pierre. 2019. "Rising Government Debt: Causes and Solutions for a Decades-Old Trend."
     Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (2): 115­40.
Zettelmeyer, Jeromin, Christoph Trebesch, and Mitu Gulati. 2013. "The Greek Debt Restructuring:
     An Autopsy." Economic Policy 28 (75): 513­63.




                                                 62
