                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 INDUSTRIALIZATION AND URBANIZATION IN NINETEENTH CENTURY AMERICA

                                       Jeremy Atack
                                      Robert A. Margo
                                        Paul Rhode

                                     Working Paper 28597
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28597


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




We are grateful to Hoyt Bleakley, Stephan Heblich, and two referees for helpful comments.
Jeremy Atack is Professor Emeritus of Economics, Vanderbilt University, and Research
Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Robert Margo is Professor of
Economics, Boston University, and Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Paul Rhode is Professor of Economics, University of Michigan, and Research
Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jeremy Atack, Robert A. Margo, and Paul Rhode. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Industrialization and Urbanization in Nineteenth Century America
Jeremy Atack, Robert A. Margo, and Paul Rhode
NBER Working Paper No. 28597
March 2021
JEL No. N61,N91

                                         ABSTRACT

During the nineteenth century the United States urbanized ­ the share of the population living in
urban areas increased ­ and industrialized ­ the share of the labor force in manufacturing
increased. Our survey of the literature and analyses of census data suggests that a key reason was
the development of a nationwide transportation system, especially the railroad. Coupled with
changes in manufacturing technology and organizational form, the "transportation revolution"
increased demand for manufacturing labor in urban locations. Labor supply responded and
because of agglomeration economies, population density and the size and number of urban places
increased. Although our focus is on the US experience, a causal role for transportation is likely
for other economies that experienced historical industrialization and urbanization.


Jeremy Atack                                    Paul Rhode
Department of Economics                         Economics Department
Vanderbilt University                           University of Michigan
VU Station B #351819                            205 Lorch Hall
2301 Vanderbilt Place                           611 Tappan St.
Nashville, TN 37235-1819                        Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER                                        and NBER
jeremy.atack@vanderbilt.edu                     pwrhode@umich.edu

Robert A. Margo
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
margora@bu.edu
1. Introduction



   The story of nineteenth century development in the United States is one of dynamic tension

between extensive growth as the country was settled by more people, bringing more land and

resources into production and the intensive growth from enhancing the productivity of specific

locations. Key elements in that intensive growth are the movement of population out of

agriculture and into other activities. These activities included not only trade (with its closely

associated exchange and movement of goods and people) which concentrated in marketplaces

but also and increasingly over the century, manufacturing. This paper seeks to clarify the

interaction of these forces with particular attention to the growth of population centers and their

increasing colocation with manufacturing. At its inception, America's first industrial revolution

was predominantly rural. It would become increasingly urban over the course of the nineteenth

century, not only as economic activity agglomerated around early nuclei but also because

changes in technology diminished the importance and value of certain initial conditions and

freed manufacturing to relocate to more centralized and concentrated locations. We document

the increasingly urban character of manufacturing over the century, and we sketch an economic

framework for its interpretation.

       In 1800 83 percent of the American labor force was engaged in agricultural production,

mostly for household consumption with any surplus of most crops directed towards local markets

(Carter et al., 2006, Ba814 and Ba817). There were some American products where the

principal market lay overseas, like tobacco and cotton, but these were the rare exception. Most

basic manufactured goods were also made in the home although some might be purchased from




                                                  2
local artisans. Household production was driven both by a lack of the necessary cash to buy in

the market and the distance to readily accessible marketplaces.

          Population densities in the United States were very low, especially when compared with

those in western Europe or the Far East. There were few towns and cities of any size. In 1800,

for example, the US population of 5.3 million was spread out across over 860,000 square miles

of territory, giving the country an average population density of 6.1 per square mile--barely over

the 1890 census threshold of "settled" (density > 6.0). 1 Moreover, the Louisiana Purchase of

1804 approximately doubled the land area of the US, adding so much sparsely populated

territory that despite the US population growing by 36 percent between 1800 and 1810, density

fell to just 4.3 persons per square mile (far short of one family) and did not surpass the 1800

level until sometime in the 1820s (Carter et al., 2006). Just 33 communities nationwide in 1800

would have met the conventional Census definition of "urban" ­ population of 2,500 or more ­

comprising 6.1 percent of the population. 2 Only two cities (Philadelphia and New York) where



1
    Figures on population density, urbanization rates, and the number and size of urban places

mentioned throughout the paper are from U.S. Census Bureau 1993; Gibson, 1998; or Carter et

al., 2006. The 1890 Census report (U.S. Department of the Interior Census Office., 1895)

categorized areas of under 2 persons per square mile as "unsettled"; those with between 2 and 6

as "frontier" and those over 6 as "settled." This classification was tremendously influential on

historians and has been used to date and mark the closing of the frontier (Turner, 1894).
2
    Included on the map in Figure 1 but not in the total of 33 urban places and cities are St. Louis

and New Orleans, both on the Mississippi River, but not part of the US proper in 1800 (they

became part of the US following the Louisiana purchase).


                                                   3
1.9 percent of the US population lived, were of any real size and would have met the population

cutoff to qualify as one of largest 100 cities as of 1900 (that is, a population of 38,000 or more,

see Gibson, 1998).

                                        Figure 1 about here

        Moreover, the location of the few urban places in 1800 reflected the primitive nature of

overland transportation, which was extremely limited and costly, even when it occurred on

"improved" surfaces like turnpikes or graded and paved roads in or near the few population

centers. Shipping goods by wagon over indifferent or bad roads ­ the vast majority -- cost as

much as 70 cents per ton-mile in 1816 (Taylor, 1951), ruling out all but the least bulky, most

valuable commodities. Personal travel overland was equally difficult, expensive, and time-

consuming. While a horse might carry a rider 20-30 miles in a day, horses were costly, and most

trips were made on foot. If a wagon were needed, a trip to and from market could easily take

several days (Rothenberg, 1981). Much transportation, therefore, of goods or people in the early

nineteenth century occurred along the Eastern seaboard or on navigable internal waterways.

Figure 1 maps the locations of urban places and geographic variation in population density in

1800.

        The few relatively large agglomerations on the coast ­ Boston or New York, for example

­ were located where "natural advantage" provided harbors with ocean access. Further inland,

water transportation had to stop where rivers draining to the Atlantic Ocean crossed the Eastern

"fall line," again creating points of agglomeration and concentrated settlement ­ so-called




                                                  4
"portage" sites (Bleakley and Lin, 2012). 3 However, as noted, the number of such places and the

share of the population living in them were very small at the start of the nineteenth century ­ the

vast majority of the population was rural, and sparsely settled at that.

        Over the nineteenth century, the American economy grew dramatically in the aggregate

and per capita coincident with a pronounced shift of labor out of agriculture (Gallman and

Rhode, 2019). By 1900, the share of the labor force in farming had decreased 43 percentage

points during the preceding century. And, as the labor force shifted out of agriculture, the nation

became more urban with almost 40 percent of the American population living in places of 2,500

population or more and average population density increased. Moreover, fully a quarter of the

population lived in the nation's 100 largest cities (population of 38,000 or more). These cities

are mapped in Figure 2, along with the geographic variation in population density:

                                             Figure 2 about here




3
    At the point where a navigable river crossed the fall line there were physical obstacles ­ falls,

rapids, boulders, and the like ­ that prevented further travel. Boatmen would have to disembark

and then have the boat moved further up the river to a safe place, which usually required

removing any goods to lighten the load. This created natural stopping places ­ portage sites ­ for

trade. See Bleakley and Lin (2012) for a full discussion. We have marked the eastern fall line on

Figures 1 and 2. Also visible in Figure 1 are cities like Albany, Hudson, and Schenectady that

were located on the Hudson River, which originates upstate and eventually drains into the

Atlantic Ocean at New York harbor.


                                                    5
Many cities were deep in the interior, far from either coast and the eastern fall line or, in the case

of the Midwest, the Great Lakes. Some had limited or no access to navigable waterways (for

example, Indianapolis or Salt Lake City).

    An important component of the shift of labor out of agriculture was into manufacturing.

When the nineteenth century began, the "Industrial Revolution" was well underway in Britain

but barely in its infancy in the United States (United States. Congress House., 1791). By 1900,

the United States was the world's leading producer of manufactures, with labor productivity

twice as high as that in Britain, the nation where industrialization had first taken hold

(Broadberry and Irwin, 2004, Table 3; Broadberry and Irwin, 2006). Critical to American

industrial ascendancy were radical changes in the nature of the manufacturing process and the

rise of the factory. Home manufactures declined precipitously, and many local artisans were

displaced by the factory system. Compared with artisan shops, factories employed more workers

per establishment and used machinery powered by an inanimate source to produce a large

volume of output that was sold in increasingly distant markets. Early in the nineteenth century

waterpower was the preferred inanimate source, but by the end of the period, steam power

predominated.

    To make this transition work, inputs had to be purchased and product shipped all over the

nation using a dramatically expanded and improved transportation network ­ the so-called

"Transportation Revolution" (Taylor, 1951). While the transportation revolution encompassed

significant improvements and expansion of water transportation, the most important innovation

was the development of a nationwide railway network. The diffusion of railways began in

earnest in the 1840s and was essentially complete by the end of the century, dramatically

increasing "market access" to manufacturing establishments (Taylor, 1951; Fogel, 1964; Atack,

                                                  6
2013; Donaldson and Hornbeck, 2016). It was associated with profound changes in the cost of

transportation both within and between modes. Wagon haulage experienced the smallest change

with per ton-mile rates perhaps halving to 15 cents where there were surfaced rather than dirt

roads. Water rates, which were already low relative to overland rates, declined perhaps 30

percent on downstream passage; 66 percent transatlantic and 85 percent upstream to fractions of

a cent per ton mile thanks in part to steam power. And, in railroading, productivity growth drove

down shipping rates by 80 percent to the point where shipping by rail was cost competitive with

rivers on a ton-mile basis but for much quicker and more direct delivery.

     Our basic explanation of the urbanization of manufacturing in nineteenth century America is

very simple ­the transportation revolution (especially the railroad) fueled the growth in the

number and size of urban places. Coupled with the changes in manufacturing production, this

incentivized establishments to urbanize. While it would be incorrect to say that such

agglomeration could occur almost anywhere, sources of natural advantage in the early nineteenth

century such as coastal access or portage, were much less important by 1900, as shown in Figure

2.

     Over the past several decades, American economic historians have assembled empirical

evidence that allows this explanation to be refined in ever greater detail. Some involves the

digitization and processing of published data from the various nineteenth century census

volumes, as well as archival evidence from the original manuscript census returns. It also

involves digitization and GIS processing of historical maps of various kinds, part of the ongoing

"big data" revolution in economic history. Similar efforts are underway for other countries

experiencing historical industrialization and urbanization. We mention these briefly in the




                                                 7
conclusion but focus mainly on research on the United States along with suggestions for

improvement and further analysis moving forward.

2. From Artisan Shop to Factory: Manufacturing in Nineteenth Century America

    At the start of the nineteenth century the American population was overwhelmingly rural

and agricultural. Because internal transportation costs were very high, it was prohibitively

expensive for most rural farm households to purchase manufactured goods from abroad. Instead,

rural farm households made much of what they needed at home, such as clothing or "homespun".

As Albert Gallatin, the US Secretary of the Treasury, observed "by far the greater part of goods

made of cotton, flax, or wool are manufactured in private families, mostly for their own use

...about two thirds of the clothing . . . worn and used by the inhabitants of the United States who

do not reside in cities, is the product of family manufactures" (Gallatin, 1810, 427).

    What rural families could not make for themselves they either did without or bought from

local artisans, who worked on their own or perhaps with a partner or an apprentice or two. The

capital requirements of those businesses were minimal ­ a building, some simple tools, and

"working capital" in the form of partially finished goods and raw materials.         Depending on

local demand, such enterprises might form the nucleus for agglomeration, but typically at a very

modest scale well below the standard census definition of "urban." For example, an early traveler

through Maine described the process as follows: "the place ... at which a village begins is either

a sea-harbour [sic] or other landing, where country produce is exchanged ... or it is a cataract on

a river ... capable of affording a mill seat. In such a situation, the first fabric that is raised is a

solitary sawmill ... a flour mill is erected near the sawmill. Sheep being brought upon the farms,

a carding machine and fulling mill follow ... the mills becoming every day more and more a



                                                    8
point of attraction, a blacksmith, a shoemaker, a taylor [sic] and various other artisans and

artificers successively assemble..." (Kendall, 1809, quoted in Hunter 1979).

    Two other features of the early artisan shop ­ hand labor and non-specialization -- are

important to note. To a first approximation, the artisan shop relied entirely on "hand labor' ­

that is, it was non-mechanized. Human muscle worked the tools of the trade--hammers, chisels,

knives, drills, and so on -- rather than inanimate power source. Artisan production was also

"non-specialized", first and foremost in the performance of production tasks ­that is, there was

little or no division of labor. This is obvious for sole proprietors ­ if the artisan worked alone

there could be no division of labor. Only as more workers were added ­ for example, an

apprentice ­ might some division of labor take place. Artisan shops also tended to be relatively

non-specialized in goods produced within their broad industrial category. Blacksmiths, who

could be found almost anywhere in early nineteenth century America, were the classic example

(Atack and Margo, 2019). They fashioned a huge array of products out of metal ­ pots, pans,

tools, horseshoes, rakes and other agricultural implements, for starters -- and repaired metal

objects that needed fixing. Although most farmers possessed some rudimentary blacksmithing

skills (like the knowledge to heat metal in order to bend it), more refined tools and objects were

best acquired from the village smithy or repaired there.

    Home production of manufactures declined sharply over the nineteenth century (Tryon,

1917) and production outside the home shifted from the hand labor of the artisan shop to the

"machine labor" of the factory. Visiting novelists such as Charles Dickens and Anthony and

Frances Milton Trollope took note (Trollope, 1832; Dickens, 1850; Trollope, 1863) and use of

the word "factory" grew fourfold over the century Patents on new and improved machinery

destined for the factory floor accelerated (Sokoloff, 1988; Khan, 2005; 2014). The transition was

                                                  9
so important that, in 1880, Carroll D. Wright penned a census monograph on the topic (United

States. Census Office. and United States. Census Office., 1883). And by the end of the century,

the Census Bureau essentially equated manufacturing with factory production and stopped

collecting data on hand trades (Atack and Margo, 2019).

    Compared with the artisan shop, factories were larger in the number of workers employed,

often dramatically so. Factories had more workers because they engaged in division of labor.

Indeed, by the late nineteenth century, the extent of division of labor was so complete that, in the

larger factories, a worker might be assigned only a single task in making a product (Atack et al.,

2016). This intense division of labor produced a vast increase in the diversity of occupational

titles that were included in the handwritten census surveys and eventually in the appearance of

occupational dictionaries to make sense of the distinctions (United States. Department of Labor.

Employment Service., 1939).

    Factories also differed from artisan shops in using more capital per worker and per unit of

output (Atack et al., 2004). Some of this can be attributed to differences in fixed capital such as

structures and in working capital. However, a key reason for the greater capital intensity in

factory production was the widespread use of machinery invented specifically to substitute for

human actions ­ for example, drilling or polishing ­ and powered by an inanimate source.

Initially, waterpower was the inanimate source but was displaced over the century by dramatic

increases in the use of steam power, until the very end when electricity started to become

available in some cities. This was compounded by the lack of suitable waterpower sites in

advantageous locations as settlement moved west.

    Waterpower has a long history stretching back to antiquity whereas steam as a viable source

was a more recent development, tracing its origins to the early eighteenth century in England for

                                                 10
simple tasks like pumping. The defining feature of waterpower is that it is site specific; the

establishment had to locate at the source to use it. Such waterpower sites varied widely in their

efficacy and in their accessibility to population and to markets (Leblanc, 1969) Some could

reliably support only a single establishment or were distant from input or product markets.

Others might be close to major population centers, abundant in water flow, and could support

multiple establishments. Once an establishment, or more likely several, settled at a particular

site, it could attract population and complementary services, leading to a rise in density and,

eventually, a town or city. Even where waterpower was thought to be abundant (as, for example,

at Lowell on the Merrimack) though, it was limited by natural forces--the flow and the fall

(United States. Census Office., 1885; Hunter, 1979). 4 Improved storage via reservoirs and

delivery systems of canals and dams might ameliorate these limitations but only in "lumps" and

with diseconomies of scale. Even so, nature still ultimately prevailed. 5 Moreover, as density




4
    It took the development of electrical generation at the end of the nineteenth century to make

any serious use of the nation's greatest hydro power, Niagara (See Hunter and Bryant, 1991,

especially pp. 254ff).
5
    Increased power could often be secured by changing wheel type--for example, from a

traditional waterwheel to a water turbine, with small (but perhaps important further marginal

improvements) through better turbine design (Hunter, 1979, chapters 7 and 8). But ultimately

stream flow and fall determined the waterpower potential. When this limit was reached,

supplementary power had to be used. This was usually from steam. For example, Swain (United

States. Census Office., 1885, 71-2) describes how Pepperell on the Saco River could only

reliably draw 2000hp on its contractual mill rights for 8 months of the year and so installed


                                                  11
rose, competition for the water itself increased to supply public water or for sanitation. By

contrast, the central feature of steam power is that the steam engine itself was manufactured

(often elsewhere) and could be placed (if not moved) virtually anywhere. Wherever the

establishment was, so too could be a steam engine. It was also readily expansible without

necessarily replacing everything. For example, additional boilers could provide more steam, or

an upgrade may allow for increased steam pressures. Indeed, in practical terms the only real

limit was the ability to deliver fuel. Initially, this was wood but increasingly and then

exclusively coal, a much more energy dense fuel. 6

       The shift from the hand labor of artisan shop to the machine labor of the factory led to

substantial increases in labor productivity in manufacturing. A lengthy literature in economic

history has examined these changes in productivity within a production function or growth

accounting framework using published or archival data from the various nineteenth century

federal censuses of manufacturing. A fair summary is that the literature supports quantitatively

significant roles for capital deepening in general and greater relative use of steam power in

particular; increases in the division of labor; and total factor productivity growth. However, the



1500hp of back-up steam power to supplement its waterpower for the balance of the year.

Similarly, mills at Lowell were increasingly forced to install some steam capacity even though

they all preferred to use their waterpower when it was available because its operating costs were

substantially lower--much of the capital costs thereof having long since been amortized.

6
    The power of steam comes not from the fuel but from the water that is converted to steam. A

given volume of water produces far more power as steam than by the force of gravity.



                                                   12
relative importance of these different sources of growth is subject to ongoing debate, largely

because of measurement problems with the census data (a selective list of references is Atack,

1977; Sokoloff, 1984a; Sokoloff, 1984b; Atack et al., 2004; Atack et al., 2008; Margo, 2015;

Atack and Margo, 2019).

    Without question, the most detailed and arguably most convincing evidence on the role of

machine labor is an unusual late nineteenth century federal document, the so-called "Hand and

Machine Labor" study conducted by the US Department of Labor in the mid-1890s (United

States. Department of Labor., 1899). This study, which compiled data at the production task

level for approximately 600+ highly specific manufactured goods (for example, circular saw

blades with a specific number of teeth), was motivated by Congressional concern over the

employment effects of machine production. For each good, agents for the Commissioner of

Labor collected data at the task level on making the product by hand labor (artisanal) methods

and on making the product by machine labor (factory) methods. These data included details

about the individual workers performing the task, the tools they used, whether inanimate power

was employed, and, crucially, the amount of time to complete the task, among many other pieces

of information. The HML staff also constructed a crosswalk allowing consistent comparisons to

be made between hand and machine labor at the production task level.

    Although the HML data have been known to economic historians for a long time, it is only

recently that advances in computing have allowed them to be digitized and organized in a way

that facilitates systematic analysis (Atack et al., 2019). Atack, Margo, and Rhode (2020) use the

HML production task data to measure the overall difference in productivity between hand and

machine labor and the role of inanimate power in explaining this difference. For tasks that were

the same between hand and machine labor except for the possible use of powered machinery in

                                                13
the latter, machine labor completed these approximately seven times more quickly than hand

labor. Approximately a third of the higher productivity of machine labor can be attributed to

greater use of inanimate power per se; the remainder, according to the authors, is due to several

sources, of which the much finer degree of division of labor under machine labor is likely the

most important factor (Atack et al., 2016). 7

       In theory, the processes of industrialization and urbanization in nineteenth century America

could have proceeded independently. In fact, they did not ­ as the country urbanized,

manufacturing became more urban. In recent decades American economic historians have

digitized published and archival census data, producing public-use data sets that contain much

useful information for studying nineteenth century urbanization and industrialization (Atack and

Bateman, 1999; Haines and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, 2010).

More recently, as we discuss in section 3, GIS software has provided the tools to digitally

process historical maps which can then be linked to census data to explore various hypotheses

(Atack, 2013). We use the census data in two ways.

       First, we document change over time through county level correlations between the urban

population share and the employment-to-population rate in manufacturing. We can compute

these correlations for most census years in the nineteenth century from the published census




7
    Unfortunately, an important limitation of the HML study is that it contains no information on

the location of the surveyed establishments within the United States ­ in particular, whether

these were rural or urban.


                                                  14
beginning in 1820. 8 The number of observations increases over time reflecting the expansion of

the land territory of the United States as well as the creation of new counties in old and new

areas. Table 1 reports these correlations with counties both equally weighted as well as by their

total population. Correlation levels are always higher if we weight counties by total population,

which, in effect, grants more importance to those parts of the country that were more densely

settled overall. However, regardless of the weighting scheme, the correlations are positive.

They are quite low early in the nineteenth century but there is a strong upward trend indicating

that, by the end of the century, counties that were urbanized were highly likely to be

industrialized.

                                            Table 1 about here

       While this correlation analysis tells us that counties that were more urbanized were more

industrialized by the end of the century, this is not the same as saying that manufacturing

establishments were becoming more urban. Here, we need data on the urban/rural status of

manufacturing establishments, which is not available over the entire period. To gain some

insight, we use the establishment samples from the original manuscript returns of the 1850-1880

federal censuses of manufacturing collected and digitized by Jeremy Atack, Fred Bateman, and

Thomas Weiss (Atack and Bateman, 1999). For simplicity we focus on the earliest (1850) and




8
    The first census of manufactures was conducted in 1810 but is thought to be so defective that it

has been little used by anyone though some information--presumably based upon the returns,

was summarized by Tench Coxe (Coxe, 1814). There was no census of manufactures in 1830

(see Wright, 1900).


                                                  15
latest (1880) of these to establish the trend. 9 We present estimates of percent urban which treat

establishments equally, as well as estimates weighted by measures of establishment size --

employment, capital invested, value of raw materials used, and value added (gross value of

outputs ­ value of raw materials). These estimates are shown in Panel A of Table 2.

                                             Table 2 about here

       In 1850, about a quarter of manufacturing establishments were in urban places. 10 This is

above the percentage of the population that was urban (15.4 percent), but still low in an absolute

sense. By 1880, the urban share had increased to 48 percent, just under half of all

establishments. When we weight by establishment size, the percent urban increases. In other

words, larger establishments were more likely to be urban in both years but even taking this into

account, manufacturing became substantially more urbanized between 1850 and 1880. For




9
    Other than 1820 (Sokoloff, 1982), 1850 through 1880 are the only years for which

establishment level data survive from the nineteenth century federal manufacturing censuses.

Data on urban manufacturing was reported separately starting with the 1880 census, but the

Atack-Bateman-Weiss samples are more flexible, allowing us, for example, to delete outliers

from the calculation (see the notes to Table 2).
10
     It is possible that the percent urban in manufacturing is overstated in these nineteenth century

censuses because of under-enumeration of rural establishments. Rural establishments were more

difficult to find in the first place, and more costly for census enumerators to visit. If this is the

case, we would expect relatively more under-enumeration earlier in the century than later, which

would imply that the upward trend in urbanization in Table 2 is biased downwards.


                                                   16
example, by 1880, just under three-quarters (73 percent) of manufacturing labor was urban,

compared with 41 percent in 1850.

    In Panel B of Table 2, we divide up urban establishments into three categories ­ urban

establishments that used hand labor (non-powered), those using steam power, and those using

waterpower. The figures shown in Panel B are the proportions in these categories and thus add

up to the overall percent urban. Between 1850 and 1880 the urban share of establishments grew

by 23 percentage points, and most of this growth ­ 16.3 percentage points, or about 71 percent ­

is accounted for by the increase in share of non-powered establishments that chose to locate in

urban places. However, the remaining 30 percent is accounted for entirely by the increase in the

share of establishments that were both urban and used steam power. Importantly, when we

weight by employment, the importance of growth in steam use is magnified ­ of the 32.4

percentage point increase in the urban share of manufacturing employment between 1850, 28

percentage points, or 86 percent is accounted for by steam powered establishments. By (strong)

contrast, urban waterpower establishments accounted for small fractions of all establishments

(1.6 percent) and employment (4.6 percent) in 1850; there was no change in the former, and a

decline in the latter, by 1880.

3. Explaining the Urbanization of Nineteenth Century American Manufacturing

    As the labor force shifted out of agriculture in the nineteenth century, the American

population became more urban and so did manufacturing. Why did manufacturing become more

urban? Boustan, Bunten, and Hearcy (in Cain et al., 2018, vol. 2, chapter 22), hereafter BBH,

suggest a simple model derived from Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982) that can serve as a broad

interpretive frame. More densely populated areas command higher land rents in equilibrium.

For workers to be willing to live in denser--more expensive--areas, nominal wages must be

                                               17
higher or amenities better than in the countryside. Because urban land and urban labor is more

expensive, for firms to be willing to locate in urban places, labor productivity must be higher or

some component of production costs other than labor and land less expensive. BBH are not able

to construct an urban rent premium series for the nineteenth century. However, they construct

urban and rural wage series, which show a substantial and growing urban wage premium over

the nineteenth century. 11 Because the manufacturing labor force became more urban over time,

t, the urban demand for manufacturing labor must have grown faster than supply, implying that

urban places were becoming more profitable locations to conduct manufacturing over time. 12

       Urban economists, of course, have long suggested a broad set of reasons why firms might

find it advantageous to locate in urban places ­ agglomeration economies. Thicker markets for

goods and factors of production, especially if the urban place is connected to a broader

transportation network, enhance market access and lower search costs associated with matching



11
     It is worth noting that the wage data that BBH use for the nineteenth century portion of the

series pertain to average wages at the establishment level in manufacturing. It is possible that the

increase in the urban wage premium could be due to compositional shifts rather than a growing

productivity gap. Further work on this issue would certainly be welcome.

12
     See Higgs (2011, ch. 3), and Kim (2006) for very similar arguments. The alternative

explanation, that denser areas became more attractive places to live because of improving

amenities, does not square with the abundant evidence on higher morbidity and mortality rates in

urban versus rural locations in the nineteenth century until possibly late in the century with

improvements in urban water and sewage systems; see, for example, BBH, Ferrie and Troesken

(2008), and Costa (2015).


                                                  18
factor supply to factor demand. Denser populations serve as conduits for the spread of new

ideas and innovations. The challenge is to link the generalities to concrete historical

manifestations and then sort out which were more important quantitatively in the American

case. 13

       As we noted previously, at the start of the nineteenth century urban areas, both small and

large, were places of commerce, not of production. Larger cities on the eastern seaboard, such as

Boston, Philadelphia, and New York, were port cities, with the bulk of the labor force engaged in

trade and related activities. The same was true in the interior for portage sites (Bleakley and Lin,

2012). As discussed above, manufacturing outside of the home early on was concentrated in

artisan shops which might, but did not need to be, located in a village or town. Moreover, some

industrial activities, such as flour milling, were overwhelmingly rural even late in the century--

in part because they satisfied local needs, or were part-time complementary activities, and their

power requirements of a few horsepower were easily satisfied by local waterpower sites. 14

       As the conventional story goes, the transition from hand to machine labor began in the

Northeast around 1820. The correlations in Table 1 show it was a predominantly rural affair at

the outset. Consider the iconic symbol of early industrialization, the New England textile mill.


13
     An alternative is a structural estimation of a dynamic spatial equilibrium model that builds in

agglomeration economies. Such a model has been estimated for English cities covering the

second half of the nineteenth century (see Hanlon and Miscio (2017)) but, to our knowledge, has

not been attempted for the United States.

14
     Just 10 percent of the flour mills in the 1880 establishment sample were located in urban areas,

compared 46 percent of establishments overall.


                                                   19
Such mills were among the very first factories in the United States, but they were initially

located in the countryside, not in the city. They drew their labor-- young women from area

farms--and provided marginal New England farmers with "a new source of profit and support

from the increased industry of his wife and daughters" (United States. Dept. of the Treasury. and

United States. Congress House., 1791). 15 Early industrialization in the Northeast could take

advantage of the generous availability of cheap waterpower in the region. But as population

moved from east to west, the availability of suitable sites declined precipitously (Atack et al.,

1980).

       Consider in the abstract, therefore, the decision problem faced by prospective manufacturer

to use waterpower in production. To do so requires locating at an existing site that can be

expanded or else developing a new usable site.     Whether this is beneficial depends on the

productivity gains associated with waterpower, compared with, on net, differences in production

costs associated with locating at the site versus remaining unpowered and locating somewhere

else, including perhaps in a city or town. Moreover, other margins, such as the number of



15
     Contemporaries even lauded how American factory locations differed from the "dark Satanic

mills" of industrializing Britain and the evils of urban living. As the American Society for the

Encouragement of Domestic Manufactures put it "We have... none of those great manufacturing

cities; nor do we wish for such. Our fabrics will not require to be situated near mines of coal, to

be worked by fire or steam, but rather on chosen sites, by the fall of waters and the running

stream, the seats of health and cheerfulness, where good instruction will secure the morals of the

young, and good regulations will promote, in all, order, cleanliness, and the exercise of the civil

duties" (American Society for the Encouragement of Domestic Manufactures., 1817, 14).


                                                 20
workers (and therefore the extent of division of labor) are choice variables as well. As Panel B

of Table 2 show, the fraction of manufacturing establishments that both used waterpower and

were urban was quite small in 1850.

       What changed? One prominent hypothesis is that the development of cheap, reliable steam

engines freed manufacturing to mechanize and urbanize. The basic idea, a very old one, is that

the steam engine lifted a key locational constraint associated with waterpower. 16 Manufacturing

establishments that utilized waterpower had to locate near a suitable site. They had no choice.

Moreover, even if the site could support multiple establishments, there were significant limits to

its scalability. By contrast, an establishment that utilized steam power was "footloose" ­

theoretically, it could locate anywhere, although proximity to the fuel source (coal) lowered user

costs which favored locating near transportation. 17 Technical progress in machinery meant that

more establishments demanded more power and could benefit from using steam, encouraging a

feedback mechanism between steam and urbanization. 18 The time series patterns shown in Panel



16
     See Alfred Chandler (1972).
17
     The principal benefit of coal is energy density--BTUs per pound or volume. However,

whereas wood in early America was available almost everywhere, coal was to be found in just a

few locations and so had to be shipped relatively long distances. Supplying this coal was a major

driving force behind improvements in transportation. Some canals (such as the Chesapeake and

Ohio and the Delaware and Raritan) and railroads (such as the Reading), for example, focused on

bringing coal to consumers.
18
     Use of steam power in US manufacturing was not common until the second half of the

nineteenth century. The first systematic survey of steam power in the United States was


                                                21
B of Table 2 would seem consistent with this story ­ establishments that used steam power and

which were urban increased their share of total establishments and total employment, and of

urban establishments and urban employment, between 1850 and 1880.

    A small literature in American economic history has developed in recent years to evaluate

the role of the steam engine in nineteenth century urbanization in general and that of

manufacturing specifically. Initially, this literature favored the hypothesis that the development

of steam power promoted urbanization, but a critical backlash emerged downplaying the role of

steam in favor of a role for immigration. In our view, the literature asks good questions, but the

empirical analysis is dated and in need of fresh work. Accordingly, we provide some additional

regression evidence (see below) that should be viewed cautiously but suggests to us that, once

the transportation revolution is considered steam may have more explanatory power than

previously thought and therefore is worthy of closer scrutiny in future work.

    The modern literature begins with a well-known paper by Rosenberg and Trajtenberg

(2004), hereafter RT, who focus on a particular version of the steam engine, the Corliss (named

after its inventor). The Corliss engine was more efficient than its predecessors (that is, used less

coal per hour of horsepower) and it could be built to larger horsepower sizes, which meant more

workers could be accommodated per machine and a greater division of labor therefore

accomplished (Atack et al., 2008). RT collected data from a late 1860s Congressional document



conducted in 1838. It estimated there were 1,860 stationary engines with a total capacity of just

over 36.3 thousand horsepower (U.S Congress. House, 1839, 371). In Britain, the horsepower

capacity of stationary steam engines was already 165 thousand by 1830 (see Crafts, 2004a,

especially 526; Also Crafts, 2004b).


                                                 22
that identified a subset of purchasers of Corliss engines (Corliss, 1870). The purchasers are

assigned to their counties of residence, which generates a partial measure of the stock of the

Corliss engines. The empirical analysis is restricted to counties in 11 northeastern states, for

which waterpower sites were in sufficient supply to be a viable alternative to steam. They also

assemble data for the same counties on watermills in use in manufacturing; these data pertain to

1880 because RT claimed to be unable to find similar data for 1870. In their first set of

regressions (RT, Table 1), the measures of the stock of Corliss engines (as of 1869) and

watermills (as of 1880) are regressed on county level variables as of 1850, plus state fixed

effects. OLS and Poisson regression are used. Their key finding is that the stock of Corliss

engines in 1869 is positively and significantly related to county population in 1850, but no such

pattern is evident for watermills.

    Next, RT (in their Table 2) regress the county growth rate in population from 1870 to 1900

on the initial stock of Corliss engines (as of 1869), watermills (as of 1880), other county level

covariates, plus state fixed effects. They find a positive and significant coefficient of the initial

stock of Corliss engines, but no such effect for watermills. The steam coefficient, they claim, is

robust to variations in the regression specification, including lagged growth rates in county

population or the level of population (that is, convergence) in 1870. RT also report 2SLS

coefficients from instrumental variables regressions in which the initial stock of Corliss

regressions is predicted from their Table 1 regressions (in effect, first stage regressions). They




                                                  23
continue to find positive and significant effects of Corliss engines on county population

growth. 19

       In a comment on RT, Abrams, Li, and Mulligan (Abrams et al., 2008, hereafter ALM) argue

that RT's findings on the role of steam power are not robust. ALM show that plausible and

relatively minor variations in the sample of counties changes the magnitude and statistical

significance of the 2SLS coefficient of the stock of Corliss engines on county population

growth. 20 ALM also show that adding a dummy variable for large port cities (for example, New

York, Philadelphia) to RT's Table 1 regressions predicting the stock of Corliss engines produces

a significant positive coefficient and further erodes the magnitude and significance of the 2SLS

Corliss coefficient.

       In our view, neither RT's original paper or the ALM comment satisfactorily address

endogeneity or robustness issues. In RT's case, the argument why the righthand side variables in

their Table 1 are valid instruments for the IV analysis in Table 2 amounts to the variables are

pre-determined. ALM's inclusion of a port city dummy shows that these cities did seem to

attract more Corliss engines, but for the variable to be a valid instrument, it would need to be



19
     RT also provide background information on the Corliss petitioners in the 1869 congressional

document, and on what the engines were used for. They note, for example, that Corliss engines

were used to power urban waterworks, providing another connection between steam power and

urbanization.
20
     ALM also point out that watermill data do exist for manufacturing in 1870 (RT claim

otherwise); however, RT's results are not substantively changed by substituting the 1870

watermill data for 1880.


                                                 24
excludable, which ALM do not justify (and does not seem plausible to us). A limitation with

both RT and ALM is the asymmetric treatment of watermills ­ both assume watermills to be

exogenous. But, if steam power is a choice variable on the part of establishments, which it

certainly was, so too was waterpower.

    Like ALM, Kim (2005) is skeptical of Rosenberg and Trajtenberg's claim that the steam

engine was a positive force for urbanization. Kim focuses on the likelihood that a manufacturing

establishment located in an urban area, using the 1850-80 establishment samples (Atack and

Bateman, 1999). His baseline analyses are a set of logit regressions by census year. The key

independent variables in the regression are dummies for whether the establishment used steam or

waterpower, which are interacted with dummies for factory status (employment greater than 15

workers). Kim also controls for the gender and age mix of employment and county and industry

(three-digit SIC codes) fixed effects. Establishments are weighted by employment prior to

estimation. With these controls Kim finds that steam powered establishments were less likely to

locate in urban areas relative to non-powered unless they also met the definition of a factory;

however, the same is true of water-powered establishments. Overall, Kim interprets his

regressions as providing very little in the way of direct support of the hypothesis that the

diffusion of steam led to urban growth; however, shifts in the distribution of employment from

water to steam do suggest a positive but small "shift-share" role. In our view, however, what

Kim's regressions show is that the shift of manufacturing establishments towards urban areas

included non-powered as well as steam-powered establishments, a pattern that is evident in Panel

B of our Table 2. Because Kim's regressions are OLS ­ or equivalently, Kim does not develop

an identification strategy for the choice of power type, factory status, and their interaction ­ they




                                                 25
do not provide sufficient reason, in our view, to reject diffusion of steam power as a key causal

factor.

       Returning momentarily to our literature review, another hypothesis invokes a role for

foreign immigration. The United States attracted a steady flow of immigrants, primarily from

Europe, during the nineteenth century but especially after 1850 and again late in the century.

Immigrants disproportionately settled in cities, fueling urban growth, and expanding the pool of

available labor therein, because immigrants had higher labor force participation than natives.

The influx of immigrants, so the argument goes, lowered the relative price of labor in cities,

encouraging manufacturing establishments to relocate and engage in greater division of labor,

thereby expanding on average in size (measured by employment). Table 3, which we

constructed using the complete count federal censuses for 1870-1900, is suggestive; it shows that

immigrants were more urban than the general population where they were more likely to work in

manufacturing. 21

                                            Table 3 about here

Kim (2007) attempts econometrically to assesses the role of immigration using the 1880

establishment level data from Atack and Bateman (1999). His key independent variable is the


21
     See also Sequeira, Nunn, and Qian (2020), hereafter SNQ. The main focus of the SNQ paper

is on the long run effects of nineteenth century immigration to the US (e.g. 1880 ­ 2000) but the

authors also note that immigrants were more likely to settle in urban places and that immigration

expanded (and sometimes altered the skill mix of) the local labor pool. They also emphasize the

importance of the railroad as the main way that immigrants traveled around the country, deciding

where to settle.


                                                 26
foreign-born share in the county in which the establishment is located which he instruments for

using the foreign-born share in the county in 1850, growth in the foreign-born share between

1850 and 1860, and distance to the eastern seaboard and a dummy for the availability of water

transportation. His dependent variables are a dummy for factory status, the log of establishment

employment, the average (nominal) wage of the establishment, and labor productivity (value

added per worker). The IV estimates show positive and significant effects of the percent foreign

born in the county on all variables. To take advantage of the productivity gains associated with

division of labor, Kim concludes, manufacturers had strong incentives, especially after the Civil

War, to locate in urban areas, where they could find this immigrant labor pool, thereby

economizing on search and matching costs. Over time prospective immigrants became aware of

this tendency, increasing the likelihood of their settling in cities where the jobs were. But, as

with Kim (2005), whether one is convinced by the empirical analysis turns on the identification

strategy; it is unclear a priori whether one should accept the exclusion restriction, for example,

for distance to the eastern seaboard or the water transportation dummy.

    One factor that is either missing from or not well integrated in the literature just reviewed is

an explicit consideration of the transportation revolution (Taylor, 1951). Starting in the 1820s

with canals (for example, the Erie Canal) and then accelerating with the arrival of the railroad in

the 1840s, the transportation revolution linked the hinterland to existing major (and minor)

population centers including the established ports; facilitated westward expansion, regional

growth, and regional specialization; and expanded access to raw materials. The famous study by

Fogel (Fogel, 1964; see also Fishlow, 1965) demonstrated that the social savings of the railroad ­

the reduction in transportation costs compared with the next best alternative -- was relatively




                                                 27
modest, but this mainly reflects the geography of the United States, with its comparatively dense

network of inland waterways and a lengthy coastline with direct access to ocean shipping.

       In recent years, American economic historians have been revisiting the economic impact of

the transportation revolution, based on econometric analyses of county level variation derived

from GIS processing of nineteenth century maps (Atack, 2013). This includes treatment effects

of the railroad on urbanization and local population growth. 22 Thus far, the direct evidence for

the former is limited to a study of the American Midwest in the 1850s by Atack, Bateman,

Haines and Margo (2010a), hereafter ABHM, who use GIS processing of historical maps to

create a county-level dummy variable for rail access (=1 if a there was railroad within the county

boundaries, zero otherwise). Their analysis focuses on 278 counties in 7 Midwestern states for

which county boundaries were fixed between 1850 and 1860. None of the counties in their

sample had rail access in 1850, but access grew substantially between 1850 and 1860. ABHM

began with difference-in-difference (DID) estimates of the effect of gaining rail access by 1860

on the proportion of the county population living in urban places and on population density.

From DID they proceeded to an instrumental variables strategy that predicted rail access based

on a "straight line" IV derived from 60 cartographic/geologic surveys authorized by Congress

and conducted between 1824 and 1838 for possible transportation improvements. 23 Both DID



22
     For causal evidence on the effects of transportation improvements in the twentieth century on

urban growth, see Duranton and Turner (2012).
23
     Specifically, ABHM locate the geographic starting and endpoints of the surveys and draw

straight lines between them. If a county lies on the straight line, the "Congressional Survey" IV

= 1, 0 otherwise. The survey IV has a strong first stage (see Atack et al., 2010a).


                                                  28
and 2SLS estimates show a significantly positive and relatively larger effect of gaining rail

access on the urban population share, but a more modest, albeit positive, impact on population

density. 24 At present, it is unknown whether the particular identification strategy used by

ABHM can be adapted for other parts of the United States as these gained rail access over the

nineteenth century or whether alternative strategies are needed. 25

       Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016), hereafter DH, is another recent study that explores the

economic effects of the railroad using geographic variation. The main variable of interest in DH

is land values in agriculture and how these responded to increases in "market access" prompted

by the diffusion of the railroad. 26 DH's measure of the treatment effect of the railroad,

therefore, is quite different from ABHM who use a dummy variable for whether a railroad exists



24
     ABHM's point estimates from the 2SLS regressions are larger in magnitude than the OLS DID

estimates but, because of the size of the 2SLS standard errors, are not significantly different from

OLS.
25
     One possibility is the straight line IV used by Perlman (2017). This is a straight line IV which

is based on the location of urban places in 1830, which pre-date the diffusion of the railroad.

Perlman's IV covers a broader geographic area than the analogous straight-line variable used in

the ABHM paper and thus may be more broadly useful in future work.
26
     The basic idea in DH is that market access is that all counties are linked geographically via

available transportation. Through a complex programming application of GIS software, DH

compute the least cost way of transport from one county to another in 1870 and 1890; if, between

1870 and 1890 rail access is introduced into the least cost route at any point, this enhances

market access.


                                                   29
in the county. DH's main finding is that the expansion of market access arising from railroad

diffusion between 1870 and 1890 significantly raised agricultural land values; important for this

paper, they also estimate a significant positive effect of increases in market access on the local

county population; because their regression sample holds county boundaries fixed by design, this

is equivalent to increases in population density. DH do not, however, investigate directly if

railroad-induced increases in market access lead to increased urbanization per se, so this remains

an open question for future research.

    These limitations aside, the ABHM and DT results can be rationalized in terms of our

framework by recognizing that the diffusion of the railroad did not increase access at every point

along the network but rather where the train stopped ­ to pick up or drop off freight or

passengers (or both). The stops became natural points of agglomeration. Pre-existing villages

and towns grew once they were connected to the network. Manufacturing establishments

moved there to have ready access to the growing network through which they could obtain raw

materials more cheaply and reliably as well as sell their goods to a broader market. There may

also be a role for the transportation revolution in fostering another traditional agglomeration

economy associated with urbanization ­ readier access to innovations and new ideas. It has long

been known that patenting was more common in urban areas (Higgs, 1971, ch. 3). Perlman

(2017) finds that improvements in market access (in the DH sense) increased patenting rates and

that much of this increase can be explained by agglomeration (that is, population density). That

said, for most urban places, pure agglomeration economies were highly localized, and so most

places were still quite small in population size, even by 1900 (Hodgson 2018). But for others, the

economies were more substantial, so the number and size of cities increased, to the point where,




                                                 30
as we noted previously, a quarter of the population resided in the nation's 100 largest cities by

1900.

       Did the transportation revolution impact the changes in manufacturing production discussed

earlier? Here as elsewhere, the literature has been limited so far but suggestive. Atack, Haines,

and Margo (2011) use the 1850-80 establishment samples to show that increasing rail access led

to increases in share of establishments meeting the consensus definition of a factory (16 or more

employees), which they interpret, a la Adam Smith, that the transportation revolution fostered

division of labor. However, they do not explore whether the changes in factory status in

response to increased transportation access varied between urban and rural establishments, or

with the use of inanimate power. To encourage further work along these lines, Table 4 presents

difference-in-difference (DID) estimates of rail access using the 1850 and 1880 samples. The

dependent variables are dummies for different combinations of factory, urban, and power status

­ for example, the likelihood that an establishment was a steam-powered factory located in an

urban area. The regressions include a dummy variable for rail access, a year dummy for 1880,

the interaction between the two (the coefficient of this variable is the DID estimate), and fixed

effects for three-digit industry code and county. 27 We present results for equally weighted

observations and weighted by employment.



27
     The measure of rail access in Table 4 is whether or the entire land area of the county is within

10 miles of a railroad, or a 20-mile roundtrip, which is generally viewed as the maximum

distance that could be traveled by wagon in a day. This is a much more exacting measure of rail

access than used by ABHM, who only measured if a railroad crossed into a county's boundaries.

As can be seen from Table 4, the spread of the railway network is still strongly evident; when the


                                                   31
                                             Table 4 about here

       As can be seen, gaining rail access is positively and significantly associated with increases

in the share of establishments that were small and non-powered (that is, artisan shops) and for

steam powered establishments regardless of size, but no effects for non-powered factories or

establishments using waterpower. 28 When we weight the data by employment, we see a large

positive and significant effect for steam-powered factories, but no effects for the other types of

establishments.

       We see the results in Table 4 as suggestive evidence that the transportation revolution did

alter the overall urban-rural mix by increasing the frequency of steam powered establishments in

general and, evidently, pushing smaller, non-powered firms to favor denser areas. That said,

when we weight by employment, the strongest effect was to encourage the shift towards machine

labor in its classic form ­ the steam powered factory. No attempt has been made to find an

instrumental variable for rail access in Table 4, as this goes well beyond the strategy adopted in



data are weighted by employment, nearly half (49.6 percent) of establishments were located in

such counties in 1880, compared with 16.7 percent in 1850.
28
     Hornbeck and Rotemberg (2019) use county-industry level data from the 1860-1900

manufacturing censuses to estimate the impact of increased market access on manufacturing

productivity and average firm characteristics. They find a positive effect on the number of

establishments, but not average establishment size (measured by workers/firm). This may reflect

changes in composition ­ for example, an increase in small, non-powered establishments and in

steam powered factories, as we find in Table 4 ­ which cannot be addressed using county level

aggregates.


                                                   32
Atack, Bateman, Haines, and Margo (2010b). It is an open question, therefore, whether, for

example, the substantive patterns in Table 4 with respect to railroad access are causal.

4. Concluding Remarks


    America industrialized over the course of the nineteenth century. Initially, industrialization

was not an urban affair, but over time, manufacturing and urbanization became tightly

connected, as the nature of manufacturing shifted from the hand labor of the artisan shop to the

machine labor of the factory. We have related this change to the transportation revolution, the

growing use of steam power, and other key historical changes of that epoch. Our argument is

that the tighter connection was largely demand driven ­ establishments became more urban

because urban locations were more profitable, despite a higher cost of land and labor. To explain

the increased manufacturing demand for urban locations, economic historians have previously

hypothesized causal roles for the steam engine and immigration ­ the former allowed

establishments using inanimate power to locate almost anywhere, unlike waterpower, and the

latter, by expanding the pool of less skilled labor, lowered the cost of increases in the division of

labor. We have privileged the role for the transportation revolution, particularly the railroad,

which encouraged urbanization and, importantly, expanding market access for both outputs and

inputs, such as coal that was complementary to the diffusion of steam power.

    Although the focus of this paper has been on the American experience in the nineteenth

century, our explanation is likely relevant to other historical industrial revolutions because the

improvements in transportation, the diffusion of steam power and, more broadly, the

urbanization of manufacturing, occurred outside the United States to varying degrees. There are

now numerous studies of the impact of historical railway development outside of the United


                                                 33
States. A fair summary of this literature is that railway development promoted historical urban

growth and industrialization almost everywhere in Europe and in Japan; see, for example,

Kotavaara, Antikainen, and Rusanen (2011); Tang (2014); Berger and Enlo (2017); Hornung

(2015); Bogart, You, Alvarez, Satchell, and Shaw-Taylor (2020); and Berger (2019). Evidence

on steam power analogous to our results in Table 4 is scantier but in a recent paper, Yamasaki

(2017) finds strong causal (IV) evidence that the diffusion of rail accelerated the shift to urban

manufacturing in Japan in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, particularly for larger,

steam-powered establishments. Comparing and contrasting the American experience of

historical urbanization-cum-industrialization with those in other countries is, in our view, a

fruitful area for further research.

        Over the twentieth century new forces emerged that decoupled manufacturing and cities.

The spread of automobiles, trucks, and good roads, the adoption of electrical power, and the

mechanization of farming are thought to have encouraged the decentralization of manufacturing

activity. By the 1970s, the correlation of manufacturing employment and urbanization--which

Table 1 documented rose sharply between 1820 and 1900 ­ had returned to its 1820 levels.

Understanding and integrating these changes into a coherent narrative over the full sweep of the

nineteenth and twentieth centuries, is yet another important topic for future research.




                                                 34
Table 1: County-Level Correlations: Urbanization and Manufacturing Employment to Population
Ratios, 1820-1900
 Year           Percent in      Percent in        Percent in     Percent in      Number of

                Places 2,500    Places 25,000     Places 2,500   Places 25,000   Counties

                or more         or more           or more        or more in

                population      population        population     population

                Unweighted                        Weighted by Pop

 1820           0.283           0.172             0.450          0.328            761

 1840           0.357           0.147             0.575          0.371           1,240

 1850           0.420           0.266             0.717          0.545           1,620

 1860           0.341           0.202             0.655          0.477           1,773

 1870           0.361           0.322             0.703          0.574           2,290

 1880           0.671           0.490             0.810          0.712           2,567

 1890           0.706           0.522             0.856          0.778           2,638

 1900           0.681           0.465             0.814          0.709           2,779

Source: Correlations are computed from county level data from (Haines and ICPSR, 2010), see

text.




                                             35
Table 2: Percent Urban in Manufacturing, 1850 and 1880: Evidence from the Atack-Bateman

Manufacturing Establishment Samples

Panel A: Percent Urban (Places of Population 2,500 or more)


 Weighted by     Equal            Employment      Capital          Value of Raw Value Added

                                                                   Materials

 1850            24.9%            40.9%           46.2%            49.5%           42.5%

 1880            47.9             73.3            70.7             75.1            73.8

Source: Atack and Bateman (1999). An observation (establishment) is considered urban if it is

reported in the census to be located in an identifiable urban place of population 2,500 or more

when enumerated. We use the Atack-Bateman national samples; 1880 sample is reweighted to

correct for under-representation of so-called "special agent" industries (see, for example, Atack,

Bateman, and Margo (2008). To be included in the table, establishments had to report positive

values of gross outputs, inputs, employment, raw materials, and value added (= value of gross

outputs ­ value of raw materials). In 1850 employment is the sum of male and female workers;

in 1880, employment is the sum of adult male, adult female, and child workers. Establishments

with extremely high or low imputed rates of return to capital invested or extremely high reported

labor input are assumed to be outliers, and are dropped from the calculation; see Atack Bateman,

and Margo (2008). N (establishments) = 5,037 in 1850 and 7,196 in 1880.




                                                36
Table 2 (continued)

B. Percent Urban, by Type of Power


             Urban = Urban      Urban =1 & Urban = 1 & Urban = 1 & Urban = 1 &
             1&       =1 &      Waterpower Hand Labor Steam Power Waterpower
             Hand     Steam     =1              =1            =1              =1
             Labor = Power =
             1        1
 Weight      Equal    Equal     Equal           Employment Employment Employment
 1850        20.8%    2.5%      1.6%            27.1%         9.2%            4.6%
 1880        37.1     9.2       1.6             32.3          37.2            3.8
Source: See Panel A. Urban & Hand Labor = 1 if establishment was urban and reported no use

of steam or waterpower. Urban & Steam Power =1 if establishment was urban and reported use

of steam power and no use of waterpower. Urban & Waterpower = 1 if establishment was urban

and reported use of waterpower (this includes establishments using both water and steam power).




                                              37
Table 3: The Nexus of Immigration, Manufacturing, and Urban Employment, 1870-1900

                                   1870       1880       1900
 Total Labor Force           12,412,105 17,984,764 24,457,404
          Manufacturing
                 Percent            10.7         12.0        11.6
           Urban Percent            28.0         29.1        37.8
               Immigrant
                 Percent            22.8         20.7        19.5


 All Manufacturing            1,327,673     2,152,150   2,841,683
          Urban Percent            63.1          60.2        71.3
              Immigrant
                 Percent            38.0         33.6        32.3

 All Urban                    3,476,493     5,238,320   9,234,847
             Manufacturing
                   Percent          24.1         24.7        22.0
                Immigrant
                   Percent          43.4         36.7        31.0

 All Immigrants               2,835,950     3,730,597   4,776,229
          Manufacturing
                Percent             17.8         19.4        19.2
          Urban Percent             53.3         51.6        59.9


 Urban & Manufacturing          837,405     1,294,899   2,027,440
            Immigrant
               Percent              45.5         39.1        36.7

 Urban & Immigrant            1,510,467     1,924,850   2,863,202
          Manufacturing
                Percent             25.2         26.3        26.0

 Immigration &
 Manufacturing             503,959      724,039      917,826
           Urban Percent       75.6        69.9          80.9
Sources: computed from IPUMS complete count census data for 1870, 1880, and 1900 (Ruggles

et al., 2020). 1890 data are unavailable.




                                               38
Table 4: Difference-in-Difference Estimates: Effects of Gaining Rail Access Between 1850 and

1880 on Different Types of Manufacturing Establishments


 Dependent        Sample    Sample     DID           Sample         Sample          DID
 variable         Mean,     Mean,      Coefficient   Mean, 1850     Mean, 1880      coefficient
                  1850      1880
 Establishment    Equal     Equal   Equal          Employment Employment
 Weight                                                                           Employment
 Non-powered 0.173        0.285       0.153*       0.116           0.088           0.011
 & non-factory                       (0.078)                                      (0.032)
 & urban=1
 Non-powered 0.024        0.034       0.011        0.134           0.138           -0.006
 & factory &                         (0.012)                                      (0.060)
 urban=1
 Steam           0.011    0.038       0.037*       0.013           0.019           0.007
 powered &                           (0.011)                                      (0.00)
 non-factory &
 urban=1
 Steam           0.010    0.045       0.059*       0.090           0.407           0.224*
 powered &                           (0.025)                                      (0.081)
 factory &
 urban= 1
 Water           0.012    0.010       0.015        0.008           0.003           0.009
 powered &                           (0.013)                                      (0.005)
 non-factory &
 urban=1
 Water           0.002    0.005      -0.004        0.029           0.022          -0.03
 powered &                           (0.013)                                      (0.046)
 factory &
 urban=1
 Rail Access = 0.083      0.355                    0.167           0.496
 1
Source: Atack and Bateman (1999). In this table we use the state samples for 1850 and 1880 as

these have more observations than the national samples used in Table 2. Independent variables

are dummies for rail access, year = 1880, rail access x year = 1880, 3-digit industry code, and

county. Rail access = 1 if 100 percent of the county area was within 10 miles of a railroad, 0

otherwise. Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the county level. DID

coefficient: coefficient of rail access x year = 1880. Factory =1 if 16 or more workers are

                                                39
employed at the establishment. To be included in the regressions, establishments must meet the

sample screens in Table 2 (for example, positive value added). 1880 observations are reweighted

to correct for under-representation of special agent industries; see Atack, Bateman, and Margo

(2008). N (establishments) = 7,380 in 1850 and 12,403 in 1880.




                                               40
41
42
                                         Bibliography

Abrams, B. A., Li, J. and Mulligan, J. G. (2008). "Did Corliss Steam Engines Fuel Urban

Growth in the Late Nineteenth Century? Less Sanguine Results." The Journal of Economic

History 68(4): 1172-1176.


American Society for the Encouragement of Domestic Manufactures. (1817). Address of the

American society for the encouragement of domestic manufactures, to the people of the United

States (New-York: Van Winkle, Wiley & co., printers).


Atack, J. (1977). "Returns to Scale in Antebellum United States Manufacturing." Explorations in

Economic History 14(4): 337-359.


Atack, J. (2013). "On the Use of Geographic Information Systems in Economic History: The

American Transportation Revolution Revisited." Journal of Economic History 73(2): 313-338.


Atack, J. and Bateman, F. (1999). "Nineteenth Century American Industrial Development

Through the Eyes of the Census of Manufactures: A New Resource for Historical Research."

Historical Methods 32(4): 177-188.


Atack, J., Bateman, F., Haines, M. and Margo, R. A. (2010a). "Did Railroads Induce or Follow

Economic Growth? Urbanization and Population Growth in the American Midwest, 1850-1860."

Social Science History 34(2): 171-197.


Atack, J., Bateman, F. and Margo, R. A. (2004). "Skill Intensity and Rising Wage Dispersion in

Nineteenth-Century American Manufacturing." Journal of Economic History 64(1): 172-192.




                                              43
Atack, J., Bateman, F. and Margo, R. A. (2008). "Steam Power, Establishment Size, and Labor

Productivity in Nineteenth Century American Manufacturing." Explorations in Economic

History 45(April): 185-198.


Atack, J., Bateman, F. and Weiss, T. (1980). "The Regional Diffusion and Adoption of the Steam

Engine in American Manufacturing." Journal of Economic History 40(2): 281-308.


Atack, J., Haines, M. and Margo, R. A. (2011). "Railroads and the Rise of the Factory: Evidence

for the United States, 1850-1870." Economic Evolution and Revolutions in Historical Time. P.

Rhode, J. Rosenbloom and D. Weiman. (Palo Alto: Stanford University Press): 162-179.


Atack, J., Haines, M. R. and Margo, R. A. (2010b). "Railroads and the Rise of the Factory:

Evidence for the United States, 1850-1870." Economic Evolution and Revolutions in Historical

Time. P. Rhode, J. Rosenbloom and D. Weiman. (Palo Alto: Stanford University Press): 162-

179.


Atack, J. and Margo, R. A. (2019). "Gallman revisited: blacksmithing and American

manufacturing, 1850­1870." Cliometrica 13(1): 1-23.


Atack, J., Margo, R. A. and Rhode, P. (2016). The Division of Labor and Economies of Scale in

Late Nineteenth Century Manufacturing: New Evidence. Boston, Boston University.


Atack, J., Margo, R. A. and Rhode, P. W. (2019). ""Automation" of Manufacturing in the Late

Nineteenth Century: The Hand and Machine Labor Study." Journal of Economic Perspectives

33(2): 51-70.




                                               44
Atack, J., Margo, R. A. and Rhode, P. W. (2020). `Mechanization Takes Command': Inanimate

Power and Labor Productivity in Late Nineteeth Century American Manufacturing. NBER

Working Paper NBER.


Berger, T. (2019). "Railroads and Rural Industrialization: evidence from a Historical Project

Experiment." Exploration in Economic History 74.


Berger, T. and Enlo, K. (2017). "Locomotives of Local Growth: The Short and Long-Term

Impact of Railroads in Sweden." Journal of Urban Economics 98: 124-138.


Bleakley, H. and Lin, J. (2012). "Portage and Path Dependence." The Quarterly Journal of

Economics 127(2): 587-644.


Bogart, D., You, X., Alvarez, E., Satchell, M. and Shaw-Taylor, L. (2020). Railways,

divergence, and structural change in 19th century England and Wales, University of California,

Irvine.


Broadberry, S. N. and Irwin, D. A. (2004). Labor productivity in the United States and the

United Kingdom during the nineteenth century. NBER working paper series,. Cambridge, Mass.,

National Bureau of Economic Research: 37 p.


Broadberry, S. N. and Irwin, D. A. (2006). "Labor Productivity in the United States and the

United Kingdom during the Nineteenth Century." Explorations in Economic History. 43(2): 257-

279.


Cain, L. P., Fishback, P. V. M. and Rhode, P. W. (2018). The Oxford handbook of American

economic history).



                                               45
Carter, S. B., Gartner, S. S., Haines, M. R., Olmstead, A. L., Sutch, R., Wright, G. and Cain, L.

P., Eds. (2006). Historical Statistics of the United States Millennial Edition Online. (New York,

NY: Cambridge University Press).


Chandler, A. D. (1972). "Anthracite Coal and the Beginnings of the Industrial Revolution in the

United States." The Business History Review 46(2): 141-181.


Corliss, G. H. (1870). In the Matter of the Petition of George H. Corliss for an Extension of His

letters Patent for Improvements in Steam Engines (Providence: Providence Press Company).


Costa, D. L. (2015). "Health and the Economy in the United States, from 1750 to the Present."

Journal of Economic Literature 53(3): 503-570.


Coxe, T. (1814). A statement of the arts and manufactures of the United States of America, for

the year 1810 (Philadelphia, PA: A. Cornman.).


Crafts, N. (2004a). "Productivity Growth in the Industrial Revolution: A New Growth

Accounting Perspective." The Journal of Economic History 64(2): 521-535.


Crafts, N. (2004b). "Steam as a General Purpose Technology: A Growth Accounting

Perspective." Economic Journal. 114(495): 338-351.


Dickens, C. (1850). American notes for general circulation (London: Chapman and Hall).


Donaldson, D. and Hornbeck, R. (2016). "Railroads and American Economic Growth: A

"Market Access" Approach." Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(2): 799-858.


Duranton, G. and Turner, M. A. (2012). "Urban Growth and Transportation." The Review of

Economic Studies 79(4): 1407-1440.

                                                46
Ferrie, J. and Troesken, W. (2008). "Water and Chicago's Mortality Transition, 1850-1925."

Explorations in Economic History 45(1): 1-16.


Fishlow, A. (1965). American railroads and the transformation of the antebellum economy

(Cambridge,: Harvard University Press).


Fogel, R. W. (1964). Railroads and American economic growth: essays in econometric history

(Baltimore,: Johns Hopkins Press).


Gallatin, A. (1810). American State Papers: Fin 325. D. o. Treasury. ASP010: 425-439.


Gallman, R. E. and Rhode, P. W. (2019). Capital in the nineteenth century (Chicago ; London:

The University of Chicago Press).


Gibson, C. (1998). Population of the 100 largest cities and other urban places in the United

States: 1790 to 1990. Population Division Working Paper. Washington, DC US Bureau of the

Census. Population Division.


Haines, M. R. and ICPSR (2010). Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The

United States, 1790-2002. Ann Arbor MI, Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social

Research


Haines, M. R. and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (2010).

Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002 (Ann

Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR)).


Hanlon, W. W. and Miscio, A. (2017). "Agglomeration: A Long Run Panel Data Approach."

Journal of Urban Economics 99(May): 1-14.


                                                47
Higgs, R. (1971). The transformation of the American economy, 1865-1914; an essay in

interpretation (New York,: Wiley).


Hornbeck, R. and Rotemberg, M. (2019). Railroads, Reallocation, and the Rise of American

Manufacturing. NBER Working Paper


Hornung, E. (2015). "Railroads and Growth in Prussia." Journal of the European Economic

Association 13(4): 699-736.


Hunter, L. C. (1979). A history of industrial power in the United States, 1780-1930: Water

Power (Charlottesville: Published for the Eleutherian Mills-Hagley Foundation by the University

Press of Virginia).


Hunter, L. C. and Bryant, L. (1991). A history of industrial power in the United States, 1780-

1930. Volume Three: The Transmission of Power (Cambridge MA: MIT).


Kendall, E. A. (1809). Travels through the northern parts of the United States, in the year 1807

and 1808 (New York,: I. Riley).


Khan, B. Z. (2005). The democratization of invention : patents and copyrights in American

economic development, 1790-1920 (New York: Cambridge University Press).


Khan, B. Z. (2014). Of Time and Space Technological Spillovers among Patents and Unpatented

Innovations during Early U.S. Industrialization. Cambridge, Mass., National Bureau of

Economic Research.


Kim, S. (2005). "Industrialization and Urbanization: Did the Steam Engine Contribute to the

Growth of Cities in the United States?" Explorations in Economic History 42: 586-598.


                                                48
Kim, S. (2006). "Division of labor and the rise of cities: evidence from US industrialization,

1850­1880." Journal of Economic Geography 6(4): 469-491.


Kim, S. (2007). "Immigration, Industrial Revolution and Urban Growth in the United States,

1820-1920: Factor Endowments, Technology and Geography." National Bureau of Economic

Research Working Paper Series No. 12900.


Kotavaara, O., Antikainen, H. and Rusanen, J. (2011). "Urbanization and Transportation in

Finland, 1880-1970." The Journal of Interdisciplinary History 42(1): 89-109.


Leblanc, R. G. (1969). Location of manufacturing in New England in the 19th century

([Hanover, N.H.]).


Margo, R. A. (2015). "Economies of Scale in Nineteenth Century American Manufacturing: A

Solution to the Entrepreneurial Labr Input Problem." Enterprising America: Businesses, Banks,

and Credit Markets in Historical Perspective. W. J. Collins and R. A. Margo. (Chicago:

University of Chicago Press): 215-244.


Perlman, E. R. (2017). "Dense Enough to be Brilliant: Patents, Urbanization, and Transportation

in Nineteenth Century America". Washington DC, Center for Economic Studies, US Census

Bureau.


Roback, J. (1982). "Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life." Journal of Political Economy 90(6):

1257-1278.




                                                49
Rosen, S. (1979). " Wages-based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life." Current issues in urban

economics. P. M. Mieszkowski and M. R. Straszheim. (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University

Press.


Rosenberg, N. and Trajtenberg, M. (2004). "A General Purpose Technology at Work: The

Corliss Steam Engine in the Late Nineteenth-Century United States." Journal of Economic

History. 64: 61-99.


Rothenberg, W. B. (1981). "The Market and Massachusetts Farmers, 1750-1855." The Journal of

Economic History 41(2): 283-314.


Ruggles, S., Flood, S., Goeken, R., Grover, J., Meyer, E., Pacas, J. and Sobek, M. (2020).

IPUMS USA: Version 10.0 [dataset]. U. o. M. IPUMS. Minneapolis.


Sequeira, S., Nunn, N. and Qian, N. (2020). "Immigrants and the Making of America." The

Review of Economic Studies 87(1): 382-419.


Sokoloff, K. L. (1982). "Industrialization and the growth of the manufacturing sector in the

Northeast, 1820-1850." (PhD: Harvard University).


Sokoloff, K. L. (1984a). "Investment in Fixed and Working Capital during Early

Industrialization: Evidence from U.S. Manufacturing Firms." Journal of Economic History

44(2): 545-556.


Sokoloff, K. L. (1984b). "Was the Transition from the Artisanal Shop to the Nonmechanized

Factory Associated with Gains in Efficiency? Evidence from the U.S. Manufacturing Censuses

of 1820 and 1850." Explorations in Economic History. 21(4): 351-382.



                                               50
Sokoloff, K. L. (1988). "Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence from Patent

Records, 1790-1846." Journal of Economic History 48(4): 813-850.


Tang, J. P. (2014). "Railroad Expansion and Industrialization: Evidence from Meiji Japan." The

Journal of Economic History 74(3): 863-886.


Taylor, G. R. (1951). The transportation revolution 1815-1860 (Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe).


Trollope, A. (1863). North America (Philadelphia,: Lippincott).


Trollope, F. M. (1832). Domestic manners of the Americans (London: Printed for Whittaker,

Treacher & Co.).


Tryon, R. M. (1917). Household manufactures in the United States, 1640-1860 (Chicago:

University of Chicago Press).


Turner, F. J. (1894). The significance of the frontier in American history (Madison,: State

Historical Society of Wisconsin).


U.S Congress. House (1839). Report on the Steam Engines in the Unites States. House Doc. no.

21. Washington DC.


U.S. Department of the Interior Census Office. (1895). Report on Population of the United States

at the Eleventh Census: 1890 (Washington DC: GPO).


United States. Census Office. (1885). Reports on the water-power of the United States.

Washington, [s.n.].




                                                51
United States. Census Office. and United States. Census Office. (1883). Report on the

manufactures of the United States at the tenth census (June 1, 1880), embracing general

statistics and monographs on power used in manufactures. The factory system. Interchangeable

mechanism. Hardware, cutlery, etc. Iron and steel. Silk manufacture. Cotton manufacture.

Woolen manufacture. Chemical products and salt. Glass manufacture (Washington: [s.n.]).


United States. Congress House. (1791). Report of the secretary of the Treasury of the United

States, on the subject of manufactures. Presented to the House of Representatives, December 5,

1791 ([Philadelphia]: Printed by Childs and Swaine.).


United States. Department of Labor. (1899). Hand and Machine Labor (Thirteenth Annual

Report). (Washington DC: GPO).


United States. Department of Labor. Employment Service. (1939). Dictionary of occupational

titles. Washington DC, U.S. Government Printing Office: 2 v. (xxxvii, 1404 p.).


United States. Dept. of the Treasury. and United States. Congress House. (1791). Report of the

secretary of the Treasury of the United States, on the subject of manufactures. Presented to the

House of Representatives, December 5, 1791 ([Philadelphia]: Printed by Childs and Swaine.).


Wright, C. D. (1900). History and Growth of the United States Census (Washington DC: GPO).


Yamasaki, J. (2017). Railroads, Technology Adoption, and Modern Economic Development:

Evidence from Japan. Osaka, Japan, The Institute for Social and Economic Research, University

of Osaka.




                                                52
