                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ADAPTATION TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE:
 AGRICULTURE AND THE UNEXPECTED INCIDENCE OF THE ACID RAIN PROGRAM

                                      Nicholas J. Sanders
                                         Alan Barreca

                                      Working Paper 28591
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28591


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




Both authors thank the numerous seminar participants at Tulane University, Rice University,
University of Houston, University of Chicago, Resources For the Future, and the World Congress
of Environmental and Resources Economists, as well as several anonymous referees. Nicholas
Sanders thanks the Property and Environment Research Center for helpful comments and funding
as part of the Lone Mountain Fellowship. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Nicholas J. Sanders and Alan Barreca. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Adaptation to Environmental Change: Agriculture and the Unexpected Incidence of the Acid
Rain Program
Nicholas J. Sanders and Alan Barreca
NBER Working Paper No. 28591
March 2021
JEL No. Q15,Q53

                                         ABSTRACT

The Acid Rain Program (ARP) cut sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions from power plants in the
United States, with considerable benefits. We show this also reduced ambient sulfate levels,
which lowered agriculture productivity through decreased soil sulfur. Using plant-level SO2
emissions and an atmospheric transport model, we estimate the relationship between airborne
sulfate levels and yields for corn and soybean. We estimate crop revenue losses for these two
crops around $1-1.5 billion per year, with accompanying decreases in land value. Back of the
envelope calculations of the costs to replace lost sulfur suggest producer responses were limited
and suboptimal.


Nicholas J. Sanders
Cornell University
Kennedy Hall, Room 422
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
njsanders@cornell.edu

Alan Barreca
University of California at Los Angeles
Institute of the Environment & Sustainability
206 Tilton HallLa Kretz Hall, Suite 300
Box 951496
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1496
and NBER
abarreca@ioes.ucla.edu
     "[. . . ] changes in sulfur emission management, primarily due to the Federal
     Clean Air Act, have significantly reduced the amount of sulfur released into the
     atmosphere. While a good thing for the environment in general, these stricter
     laws have created some severe shortages of sulfur for farmers already struggling
     to grow crops on marginal lands."
                     ("Sulfur deficiency cutting yields in sandy Southeast soils, 2012")

   In 1995, the Acid Rain Program (ARP) regulated sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions from
coal power plants across the Midwest and Eastern United States (US). Environmental Pro-
tection Agency (EPA) reports credit the ARP and associated reductions in "acid rain" with
protecting forests, lakes, and rivers from dangerously high soil and water acidity (Clean Air
Markets Division, 2006), and reduced mortality (Barreca, Neidell and Sanders, 2017). A
recent hypothesis among the agricultural science community suggests the ARP fundamen-
tally altered a decades-old contribution to agricultural inputs, reducing beneficial regional
sulfur deposition. Burning coal increases atmospheric sulfur flows, and sulfur is a key nutri-
ent in the cultivation of modern high-yield crops. We present evidence that reducing sulfur
pollution from power plants removed a source of nutrients for crops, presenting a rare case
where pollution removal itself imposed a negative externality on a sector of the economy.
The worldwide magnitude of coal-fired plants and the importance of agriculture for societal
welfare make this an important finding.
   Our study makes two contributions to the environmental policy and agricultural literature
at large. First, we test the causal link between ambient sulfur pollution and agricultural
output in a large-scale, real world application using a quasi-experimental framework. While
prior randomized experiments tested the importance of sulfur as a nutrient in controlled
settings, various factors make it difficult to use results from these experiments to infer a
priori effects of SO2 emissions and the ARP across the U.S. For example, soil drainage and
rainfall rates both alter the returns to ambient sulfur. Simple cross-sectional or time series
correlations between ambient sulfur pollution and agricultural output in the real world could
be biased by confounders, like climatic conditions or business cycles. The end effect of an

                                              1
atmospheric change is also uncertain unless one can predict the responses of producers --
research shows agricultural producers do not always optimally adapt to changes in sulfur
needs (Weil and Mughogho, 2000; Harou et al., 2019). Our empirical approach exploits the
installation of sulfur control technologies at ARP-regulated plants, with treatment intensity
determined by an atmospheric transport model, to test for changes in county agricultural
yields over time.
   Second, we examine the adaptability of agriculture in the face of a structural shift in
environmental conditions. Agents can adjust in response to a changing environment lead-
ing to smaller long-run costs.1 Economic concerns over climate change makes forecasting
the scope for adaptation in different settings a critical direction for research (Schlenker and
Roberts, 2009; Feng, Oppenheimer and Schlenker, 2012; Fisher et al., 2012; Deschenes and
Greenstone, 2007), but applied studies using structural shocks remain limited. Some ex-
amples include Hornbeck (2012) showing farmers were slow to adapt to new soil conditions
after the 1930's Dust Bowl, and Burke and Emerick (2016) examining gradual temperature
shifts over 20 years. The sulfur-agriculture link is an important case in adaptation since soil
sulfur levels are costly to monitor at the individual farm level and agricultural yields vary
significantly from year to year, making it difficult to identify sulfur deficiencies.
   Our empirical approach uses a continuous difference-in-differences strategy comparing
within-county changes in agricultural yields based on exposure to changes in ARP-regulated
plants. The height of coal plant smoke stacks means SO2 pollution travels large distances.
We construct treatment intensity based on an atmospheric transport model, power plant
SO2 output, and ARP-driven technological upgrades to coal plants intended to reduce sulfur
emissions. To quantify impacts on crop agriculture, we examine annual yields for corn and
soybean, the two largest crops in the US by acreage and revenues and the crops with the most
   1
     For example, Barreca et al. (2013) show long-run technological innovation greatly reduced the health
costs of extreme temperatures.




                                                   2
widely-available longitudinal data. As a measure of financial losses net of crop substitution or
other such unobservable adjustment, we investigate impacts on farm income, crop revenues,
and land value directly, as well as collections on crop insurance as a potential offsets to losses.
   Our regression results indicate ARP-associated air improvements decreased receipts for
corn and soybean by $1-1.5 billion a year, and decreased agricultural land values by an
average of 7%, or approximately $1.4 billion. These additional social welfare costs are small
compare to the $120 billion in estimated annual benefits of the program, most of which
accrue to human health (Chestnut and Mills, 2005), and the ARP remains a large social
net positive. But these costs represent a substantial share of overall program costs, which
the EPA had formerly estimated at approximately $3 billion per year.2 This shows SO2-
abatement policies have unusual and previously undocumented distributional impacts on
agriculture. Anecdotal evidence suggests this spillover is not unique to US agriculture. SO2
levels in China decreased by 75% from 2007 to 2017 (Li et al., 2017). At the same time,
sulfur deficiencies in China became more of a concern within the industry.3 Future policy
programs designed to reduce ambient sulfur should consider these additional spillovers into
the agricultural sector.
   We provide evidence yield decreases and financial losses from sulfur shortages persist al-
most 20 years after the ARP. We cannot rule out that our results are net of some adaptation;
but back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest producers are adapting at a suboptimal level.
Based on sulfur usage by crop type and average fertilizer prices, we estimate the cost to fully
replace lost sulfur via fertilizer would be $40-60 million for corn and soybean, a relatively
small adaptation cost compared to the losses in yields. Using literature from agricultural
   2
       Acid Rain Program Benefits Exceed Expectations, www.epa.gov/capandtrade/documents/benefits.
pdf.
   3
    Taken from The Sulfur Institute (TSI) report for the Fertilizer Industry Round Ta-
ble (FIRT), Agricultural Demand for Sulphur -- The Challenges, The Future, downloaded
from http://www.firt.org/sites/default/files/TFI\%20FIRT\%20Outlook\%20-\%20Agricultural\
%20Demand\%20for\%20Sulphur\%20-\%20TSI.pdf and accessed on May 4, 2018.




                                                 3
extension centers and field publications, we show suggestive evidence that the industry re-
mained unaware of the ARP's impact on yields for a decade.4 The slow pace of adaptation
was likely driven by complications in sulfur testing at individual producer level. Aggregated
information available to regional extension centers helped the industry better understand
the proper response. This case highlights the important role of centralized institutions in
consolidating information when signals of productivity are noisy.


1       The Acid Rain Program

Acid rain concerns in the 1970s spurred the Acid Deposition Act of 1980, a 10-year program
to monitor ambient SO2, precipitation acidity, and sulfur deposition. Lessons from the Acid
Deposition Act led to the Acid Rain Program, a provision of the Clean Air Act Amendments
of 1990. The ARP had two phases. Phase I began in 1995, regulating the 110 US power
plants with the highest SO2 emissions. In 2000, Phase II further constrained emissions and
added over 900 additional plants to the program. Both phases used an SO2-emission cap
and trade system, and all plants were subject to regulation regardless of age. We focus
on Phase I in our analysis since firms could bank permits from year to year and smooth
emissions across Phase II, but not Phase I. As a result, there is relatively little change in
SO2 emissions at the start of Phase II (Siikam¨
                                              aki et al., 2012; Ellerman et al., 2000).
    The EPA distributed SO2 allowances to 263 power generation units at the 110 plants
based on baseline (1985-1987) "heat input" (Stavins, 1998).5 "Heat input" is the heat used
to produce a given amount of electricity, expressed in British Thermal Units (BTUs), and
the EPA calculates the value by multiplying the quantity of fuel burned by the heat rate of
the fuel. The generation units chosen all corresponded to an average annual emissions rate of
over 2.5 pounds of SO2 per million BTUs, and permits granted were designed to get plants
    4
     David, Gentry and Mitchell (2016) notes decreased sulfate levels in samples taken from agricultural
watersheds from lowered sulfur deposition potentially from the ARP, which also supports this finding.
   5
     Additional allowances were available under special provisions. See Stavins (1998) and Joskow and
Schmalensee (1998) for details on the political economy of the SO2 trading program.


                                                   4
to reduce average emissions to 2.5 pounds of SO2 per million BTUs (Carlson et al., 2000).
Regulated plants report emissions to the EPA each year, ideally holding permits for each
ton of SO2 produced. Plants can bank unused permits, and sell or transfer permits across
years. For plants polluting in excess of held permits, the EPA assigns a fine adjusted for
inflation (initially $2,000) per ton of overage and, in addition, requires eventual accounting
for overages by purchasing sufficient permits at market price.6 The EPA reports the ARP
achieved close to full compliance, with large decreases in wet sulfate deposition (sulfates
transferred through rain, snow, and fog) and ambient sulfur dioxide. Much of the reduction
came from a transition to sulfur scrubbers, shutting off older and less efficient boilers, and
adoption of low-sulfur coal (Siikam¨
                                   aki et al., 2012).
    We primarily consider the role of the ARP in SO2 emissions in this paper, but the ARP-
induced changes in other pollutants that could also shift crop yields. The ARP regulated
nitrogen oxides (NOx) to a lesser degree, and despite no specific ozone (O3) controls, NOx
reductions may alter the O3 formation process. NOx can alter soil acidity and nitrogen
levels (EPA, 1999). O3 can negatively affect yields by directly damaging plants: two recent
papers directly consider the role of ground level O3 is damage to corn and soybean yields,
Boone, Schlenker and Siikam¨
                           aki (2013) and McGrath et al. (2015). The ARP had smaller
effects on these other correlated pollutants -- the majority of NOx emissions in the United
States are from transportation, so the relative effect of the ARP on NOx (and subsequent
O3) levels is smaller than the effect on SO2. Regardless, in later analysis we control for such
alternate pollutants, and show that the weight of the change in crop yields falls on shifts in
ambient sulfur. The following section presents the scientific baseline for this finding.
   6
      The EPA gave plants a 60-day grace period to buy additional permits from other firms needed to avoid
the fines. Over much of the program, the nominal cost of an SO2 permit fluctuated between $100 and $200
per ton. Costs increased in 2004, with price peaking over $1,200 per ton, as firms began banking additional
permits in anticipation of the Clean Air Interstate Rule, which took effect in 2005. A series of lawsuits
threatening the Clean Air Interstate Rule and additional policies caused prices to fall rapidly in 2006, with
prices below $1 in 2012. See Schmalensee and Stavins (2013) for in-depth discussion of SO2 markets.




                                                     5
2    Airborne SO2, Sulfates, and Agriculture

Sulfur pollution reductions from the ARP could affect agricultural output through pure
sulfur (S) and three sulfur compounds: SO2, sulfuric acid (H2SO4), and sulfate (SO4). SO2
is a byproduct of fossil fuel combustion emitted from power plant smokestacks. Sulfuric acid,
sometimes called hydrogen sulfate (H2SO4), is the main determinant of "acid rain," forming
when SO2 combines with oxygen (forming SO3) and water (H2O) in the troposphere. Sulfate
(SO4) is a residual from dilution of H2SO4 in water, and a common byproduct of H2SO4
deposition. Sulfur (S) is the base chemical element.
    These all have potentially disparate impacts on crop output, making the a priori effect of
airborne SO2 reduction ambiguous.7 SO2 and H2SO4 may damage leaves, and H2SO4 may
raise soil acidity. However, soil acidity in itself is less of a concern with field crops than in
forest areas, given regular fertilizer use helps "buffer" the detrimental effects.8 Conversely,
ground-level S and SO4 plays a fundamental role in crop growth. Field crops consume soil
sulfur as part of the germination process, and extreme cases of insufficient soil sulfur levels
at key points in the growth process cause yield reductions up to 75%.9
     7
       For an extensive review of the agricultural science literature on the role of sulfur, see EPA (2008).
Experimental research under controlled field conditions found direct exposure to H2SO4 on field crops caused
little damage. Irving and Miller (1981) tested differential effects from sulfur deposition via exposure to
H2SO4 versus exposure to airborne gaseous SO2. When administered alone, gaseous SO2 accelerated aging
and increased leaf fall in soybean. Exposure to acid rain alone did not significantly impact soybean yields,
but did improve seed growth, which the authors hypothesized was due to the beneficial effect of additional
sulfur and nitrogen absorption. Exposure to gaseous SO2 and acid rain simultaneously had no net effect.
     8
       articles.chicagotribune.com/1987-12-28/news/8704060486_1_acid-rain-soybeans-crops.
See also the EPA discussion of acid rain and soil damages, available online at http://www3.epa.gov/
acidrain/effects/forests.html, accessed February 18, 2016.
     9
       From an article published in the Southeast Farm Press in August of 2012 ("Sulfur deficiency cutting
yields in sandy Southeast soils"), "Yield losses from sulfur deficiency, especially in corn, can be catastrophic,
if the problem isn't addressed quickly. Research has shown that for each day sulfur is deficient, past the first
21 days after corn emerges from the soil, there is a loss of 1-2 bushels per day. If sulfur is deficient when
corn is in the silking stage, yields could be reduced by as much as 75 percent."




                                                       6
3        Data

Our crop data are from two sources: crop data are from the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), and land value and expenditure data are from the bi-decadal Census of
Agriculture (COA), taken in years ending in 2 and 7. With our primary sample, we include
three COAs before the ARP (1982, 1987, and 1992) and three after (1997, 2002, and 2007).
We end our primary sample in 2007 to minimize confounding from the Clean Air Interstate
Rule, which took effect in 2006, and biofuel subsidies, which began in 2007.10 Crop data
include all years between 1982 and 2007, not just COA years. Following Schlenker and
Roberts (2009), we focus on counties east of the 100-degree meridian since this area covers
almost all corn- and soybean-growing counties, and Phase I did not regulate plants west of
the 100th degree. We only include counties for which we have a non-missing county/year
observation for 1982 and 2007. In cases with missing data between those years, we use linear
imputation, and include a regression where we add a fixed effect indicator for imputed years.
As a further robustness check, we also consider the persistence of effects through 2017.
     There are several years with droughts that had drastically different effects across regions.
As these shocks could correlate with geography and thus potentially with treatment exposure
(see Appendix B), we run several robustness checks where we (1) include more flexible region-
by-time fixed effects and (2) split the sample years into drought and non-drought years. We
also explore standard errors that allow for various degrees of geographic correlation to address
potential for regionally common shocks.
     Crop yield data : Crop data come from surveys conducted by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) National Agricultural Statistical Service (NASS). We construct log
county-level yields per acre using yield in bushels divided by planted acres.11 Given the
    10
      The Clean Air Interstate Rule introduced additional regulator consideration to address downwind states,
which may shift the importance of general plant proximity. Biofuels subsidies could incentivize farmers to
expand corn and soybean planting to more marginal lands, which could pull down mean yield per acre -- if
regions near treated plants have different acreage availability, this could correlate with ARP treatment.
   11
      We have also run results using yield per acre as reported in the data, which is yield per harvested acre.


                                                      7
NASS survey is voluntary, some county/year cells have missing data. Conversations with
NASS data specialists at the USDA indicate they mask some yearly data when there are too
few farmers reporting, causing privacy concerns, or when neighboring counties have privacy
concerns.
    Weather : In the chance local weather fluctuations correlate with both the timing of the
ARP and location of regulated plants, we control for temperature and rainfall using data
from the PRISM climate group.12 As in Schlenker and Roberts (2009), we focus on weather
during the optimal growing season (March-August). We control for the number of days the
maximum temperature falls in 3 degree Celsius bins and the number of days the minimum
temperature falls in 3 degree bins.13 We also control for a quadratic in cumulative rainfall
over the growing season.
    Coal plant data : We obtain a list of all ARP power plants from EPA Air Markets Program
Data. Prior to the ARP, plant-level SO2 emissions are available every 5 years, in years ending
in 0 or 5 (1980, 1985, 1990). These data include boiler-level information on SO2 output,
which we use to construct our atmospheric concentration measures. The data also list the
specific year of installation for any sulfur reduction technology.14 It is this final piece of
information that we use to construct our measure for ARP-related ambient airborne sulfate
levels.15
    Pollution data : We use two sources of pollution data. Our primary method uses EPA
daily monitor-level pollution data to test effects on SO2, O3, and NO2, reported in ppb or
ppm (parts per million) depending on the pollutant. We construct county-year measures
The two could differ due to crop losses that alter harvestable acres, but sign and magnitudes of all results
are robust to using either measure.
   12
      The ARP could have an impact on weather due to changes in atmospheric pollution. Controlling for
weather affects the interpretation of the reduced-form parameter.
   13
      We group all temperatures below 0 degrees Celsius into a single bin, and use the temperature range of
27-30 degrees Celsius as the omitted group for each.
   14
      The data list the year of installation even if it is not the reporting year. For example, the 1995 data
will list installations that occur in 1994, noting the relevant date.
   15
      See http://ampd.epa.gov/ampd/.



                                                     8
of pollution by calculating the distance between each monitor and each county centroid,
then collapsing monitor data to the county-by-year level using inverse distance weights for
distances up to 50 miles. As with crop output, we use data from counties in which we have at
minimum observations in 1982 and 2007, and impute missing years. As an alternate source
that expands the number of counties, we use a Land-Use Regression model provided by the
Center for AIR, Climate, & Energy Solutions (CACES)16 . This model uses information on
monitor emissions, combined with known pollution sources and local conditions, to generate
an annual airborne concentration estimate for all three pollutants. Because these are modeled
results, data are available in all years and for all counties. This allows us to expand our
sample at the cost of using largely imputed data for many counties with no true pollution
monitors.
   We build anticipated annual county-level airborne sulfates using data on ARP-plant SO2
emissions and the second iteration of the Air Pollution Emission Experiment and Policy
Analysis (APEEP) model (Muller, 2014). This model takes as input SO2 emissions in a
given county and, by taking into account local factors such as topography, wind direction,
and dispersion patterns, estimates how that SO2 results in changing airborne sulfate levels in
all other counties in the United States. Here, airborne sulfates refers to both basic "sulfate"
(SO4) and ammonium sulfate ((NH4)2SO4) combined. Ideally, we would examine direct
changes in soil deposition as an additional test of the policy mechanism. However, deposition
data are limited. Data are available from the EPA Clean Air Markets Division, Clean Air
Status and Trends Network (CASTNET) Total Deposition data, but at only 130 monitor
points and not across all years.17 Using these limited data, we show changes in airborne
sulfates line up very well with changes in H2SO4 deposition. When matching predicted
county-level sulfur levels to county-matched deposition monitors, our sulfate measure and
  16
       https://www.caces.us/data.
  17
       Deposition data are available at www.epa.gov/castnet. Date accessed: January 11, 2016.




                                                    9
H2SO4 deposition have a correlation coefficient of approximately 0.90; Appendix Figure A-1
illustrates this relationship visually.18
   Other variables : We use a number of county-level economic variables from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA) Regional Economic Accounts Local Area Personal Income dataset.
Using these data, we calculate employment rate (total wage employment divided by total
population), farm and nonfarm income per capita, and fertilizer expenditures per acre of
cropland. Fertilizer expenditure data are based on questions from the COA. The BEA
interpolates fertilizer usage data at the county level between non-COA years by incorporating
year-to-year variation in available state-level data.19 We calculate average fertilizer expenses
per acre by dividing by each county's total acreage for crops.20 For variables involving dollar
values we adjusted to 2017 dollars using annual Consumer Price Index data from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics.
   An additional confounder is the expansion of crop insurance in the United States. A
policy change increased the fraction of crops covered by crop insurance in 1995, the same
time as the first enforcement of the ARP. We use data from the USDA Risk Management
Agency (RMA) to examine the number of insurance policies claimed by crop and total dollar
value of insurance collections by crop.
   Summary statistics : Appendix Figure A-2 shows all counties in our analysis with data
available for SO2 (1,215 counties), sulfates (2,490 counties), corn (1,614 counties), and soy-
bean (1,344 counties) -- pollution and crop data are not available for a fully matching set
of counties, and as such the number of counties used to derive estimates varies by outcome.
Panel A of Table 1 shows means for county-level airborne SO2, sulfate particulates, soybean,
and corn yields per acre, as well as soybean and corn acreage. Columns 1 and 2 split means
  18
     The figure shows sulfur deposition (in kilograms per hectare) versus ambient sulfates (in µg/m3 ).
  19
     See Local Area Personal Income Methodology, available online at http://www.bea.gov/regional/pdf/
lapi2016.pdf, (accessed January 14, 2016) .
  20
     We linearly interpolate total acreage at the county level in the non-COA years.




                                                  10
into the 1982-1994 and 1995-2007 periods, or pre- and post-ARP. Average contemporaneous
SO2 levels across the period are 7.8 ppb before the ARP, down to 4.4 ppb after. Airborne
sulfates move similarly, starting at 7.1 µg/m3 and dropping to 4.6 µg/m3 in the later period.
Both average corn and average soybean bushels per acre are increasing over time. Average
corn yield is 80.5 bushels per acre prior to the ARP, and 101.0 after. Country acreage dedi-
cated to corn also increases across the period, from an average of 42,062 acres pre-ARP to
44,101 acres post-ARP. Average soybean yield is 29.4 bushels per acre prior to the ARP, and
34.6 after. Growth in soybean acreage was more drastic, rising from an average of 44,029
acres per county to 51,152.21

4        Method

The ARP was split into two phases: Phase I and Phase II.22 Phase I began in 1995, with
additional power plants added in Phase II in 2000. Much of the reductions in SO2 occurred
after Phase I, which we make the focus of our analysis. We employ a pollution transport
model that predicts county sulfate levels based on SO2 emissions throughout the United
States. We first obtain a list of all ARP plants and their associated boilers from the EPA
Air Markets Program Data, which includes the location of each plant. We use data on SO2
emissions at the plant level as inputs into the APEEP atmospheric transport model to predict
sulfate concentrations for each county throughout the region. The APEEP model takes SO2
emissions from a given county, and, after accounting for factors such as topography, wind
direction, and average source type, predicts how this SO2 converts into airborne sulfates for
all other counties (as well as the emitting county).
     For example, a Phase I power plant exists in the county of Franklin County, MO (FIPS
code 29071). According to the atmospheric transport matrix, the conversion rate between a
    21
      In calculation of our yield per acre here, we do not weight by county-level crop-specific acreage as we
do in regressions.
   22
      We follow an identification strategy very similar to Barreca, Neidell and Sanders (2017). As a result,
much of this section mirrors text from that work.


                                                     11
ton of SO2 produced in Franklin County, MO and a microgram per cubic meter of sulfates
in the same county is 0.0000209. The conversion for nearby St. Louis, MO county (FIPS
29189) is 0.00000125, and for further away Wayne County, MI (FIPS 26163) is 0.000000665.
Thus, 100,000 tons of SO2 produced in Franklin County, MO would predict an additional
2.09 micrograms per cubic meter of PM2.5 in Franklin County, MO, 0.125 additional units
in St. Louis County, MO, and 0.0665 units in Wayne County, MI.
    Our model premise is that, in response to the ARP, coal power plants reduced SO2
emissions from pre-ARP levels, which then led to reductions in ambient sulfates across not
only the county in which the plant resides but also, to varying degrees, all other counties.
Our measure of sulfates does not describe the total levels in a given county, but rather the
contribution to levels in a given county from ARP-associated power plants. EPA data on
plant-level emissions are available annually beginning in 1995. Prior to that, measures are
provided every 5 years: 1980, 1985, and 1990. To estimate boiler-level emissions for the
years with missing data, we assume constant emissions from the last year of available data
(e.g., we assign 1980 levels to 1981-1984, 1985 levels to 1986-1989, and 1990 levels to 1991-
1994). Based on the limited changes in SO2 emissions between 1980 and 1985, and 1985 and
1990, we view this as an appropriate approximation. If plants lower emissions in 1994 in
anticipation of the ARP, this may inflate the change in predicted emissions between 1994 and
1995. Other data sources, such as monitor-level data for county-level SO2 concentrations,
supports the assumption that the most substantial change in emissions occurred in 1995.
    Our empirical approach exploits plant-level timing of the installation of sulfur-control
technologies, such as Flue Gas Desulfurization, that collect SO2 before being released out
of stacks.23 We define our treatment variable, new sulfur controls (SC), as the exposure to
  23
     Installation of sulfur control technology results in rapid and lasting reductions in plant-level SO2 emis-
sions, with reductions from 50% to 98%, obtained from "Air Pollution Control Technology Fact Sheet" EPA
document EPA-452/F-03-034.




                                                      12
sulfur control installations that accounts for the transport of emissions from these boilers:


                       SCc,t = f (Phase I Sulfur Controlsi,t )  100, 000,                  (1)


where SCc,t is the measure of exposure to boiler sulfur control installations, f () is the at-
mospheric transport model, and sulfur controls addresses the sum of all Phase I boilers with
sulfur-controlling technology installed in the specified year in a given county. We multiply
this by 100,000 for ease of reading coefficients.
   Returning to our prior example, we now illustrate the treatment intensity Franklin
County, MO would receive from the top three outside county contributors with upgrades
present by 1995: Gibson, IN (FIPS 18051), Carroll, KY (FIPS 21041), and Warrick, IN
(FIPS 18173). In practice, emissions from multiple counties contribute, but we focus on
these for illustrative purposes. The conversion matrix assigns the following receiving weights:
0.000000395 for Gibson, IN; 0.000000312 for Carroll, KY; and 0.000000303 for Warrick, IN.
Gibson, IN and Carroll, KY each had one Phase 1 sulfur control in 1995, while Warrick,
IN had two. If we based SCc,t on only these three outside counties, Franklin County would
receive a value of:


         100, 000  (1  0.000000395 + 1  0.000000312 + 2  0.000000303) = 0.1313.


   Figure 1 illustrates how the policy affected plant behavior, and how we operationalize
this to address data limitations. Panel A shows the running tally of installed controls on
Phase I boilers, by month and year. The majority of Phase I control installs occurred either
just before, during, or shortly after 1995, and remain largely stable after that. This supports
our assumption of assigning 1990 emissions to the years 1991-4, and shows the sharp impact
of the ARP on these plants response to the policy.
   To understand the impact of these sulfur control installations on emissions, Panel B shows

                                               13
an event study of boiler-level emissions, where the relevant treatment year (0) is the year in
which plants install sulfur control technology. We control for boiler and year fixed effects,
and assign all power plants that do not install control technology in our period a period of
0. The model shows that a Phase I boiler with such technology installed saw reductions
of an average of around 40,000 tons of SO2 annually (we cluster standard errors at the
boiler level). This suggests installation of sulfur-controls is a strong predictor of plant-level
emissions changes. While Phase II control installations also reduce boiler-level emissions,
the effects are much smaller.
   Panel C shows the trends in total boiler emissions by year and plant Phase, which also
illustrates that (1) the majority of reductions appear in 1995, and (2) all reductions are due
to Phase I plant behavior. On net, Phase I plants reduced SO2 output by around 50 million
tons in 1995, while Phase II plants saw largely no change, and even small increases early on.
Our model approach assumes each sulfur control installation reduces pollution by the same
amount. We favor this approach from further weighting by baseline boiler emission level for
simplicity of exposition. We also explore models in which we further weight installed sulfur
controls by baseline emissions, and show results are consistent.
   Appendix Figure A-3 illustrates the county-level values of our upgrade exposure in the
first year in our sample (1982), the first year of the ARP (1995), and the last year in our
primary sample (2007). The figure highlights several important factors. First, the exposure
to upgraded Phase I plants is zero in the beginning of our sample, with substantially higher
levels across the country in 1995. Second, from 1995 to 2007, there is little change in county-
level exposure to upgraded plants, as most of the large upgrades occurred in the first year
of the ARP. Finally, if upgrades reduce emissions, we expect the majority of the pollution
benefits from the ARP to play out in the Midwest and Northeast, which projects the largest
treatment effects due to location of Phase I ARP plants and atmospheric dispersion patterns.
Figure 2 illustrates that predicted sulfate changes line up with our measure of treatment


                                               14
intensity. Graphs show the ARP-associated sulfate predicted by the APEEP model in 1982,
1995, and 2007. As with our measure of upgrade exposure intensity, we see large changes in
predicted sulfate in the Midwest and Northeast between 1985 and 1995, but little additional
change by 2007.
   Our reduced form regression model is:


               outcomec,t = SCc,t XP ostt + c,t + t + c + c  year + c,t ,                 (2)


where outcomec,t is our outcome in county c in year t, SCc,t is each counties weighted sum
of exposure to Phase I plant upgrades in a given year, and P ost is an indicator for years
t greater than or equal to 1995. We include a vector of weather controls for temperature
and rainfall,  , and year and county fixed effects ( and  , respectively) -- see Section 3 for
a detailed description of weather variables. We also control for county-specific time trends
to address potential confounders such as increasing agricultural yields over time. For corn
and soybean, we weight regressions using annual county crop-specific acreage, and for all
COA-based variables we weight by annual county total crop acreage. In robustness checks,
we weight each observation by the county's average pre-ARP acreage values as a check on
the concern that total acreage is endogenous to the policy. We do not weight pollution
regressions. We cluster all standard errors at the level of crop reporting district (CRD).
CRDs are made up of multiple contiguous counties, divided into areas of approximate similar
size, with similar soil types and growing conditions. This allows for common errors within
contiguous counties classified as similar in agricultural makeup. We also explore clustering
by state, using spatially-correlated Conley standard errors, and bootstrapped errors cluster-
sampled by year.
   This model compares the change in outcomes for counties by relative exposure to up-
graded Phase I plants, after controlling for general differences in geography, weather, and


                                             15
production trends. Our treatment measure, SCc,t , captures that while boiler upgrades uni-
versally decreased SO2 emissions, the impact of those reductions varied across space due to
wind patterns, topography, and geography.
    To help explore the mechanism of the ARP's effects, we also use (2) as a first stage
regression in estimating the marginal impact of airborne sulfates on our relevant outcomes.
Our ordinary least squares (OLS) and second stage IV model is:


                 outcomec,t = sulf ates + c,t + t + c + c  year + c,t ,                    (3)


where all other controls are as above. This estimates the marginal effect of an additional
unit of airborne sulfates. Interpretation of marginal changes in ambient sulfates is in some
ways less complex than the reduced form marginal change of weighted atmospheric transport
values, and allows for a direct calculation of replacement costs of lost atmospheric sulfates.


5    Results

As a demonstration of our reduced form model, we split counties by "high" and "low"
upgrade plant exposure as of 1995, the first year of the ARP and the year with the largest
number of single plant controls installed. We define "high exposure" counties as those above
the median of our SCc,t measure as of 1995, and "low exposure as those at or below the
median measure of SCc,t in 1995.
    The first graph of Figure 3 shows annual average ambient SO2 across these two groups.
Both experienced declining pollution levels prior to the ARP's implementation, potentially
due to deregulation of railroads in the early 1980s and related reductions in the cost of
transporting and adopting low-sulfur coal (Ellerman and Montero, 1998). "High exposure"
counties experienced a sharp decline in SO2 in the first year of the ARP of almost 2 parts
per billion (ppb). There is a much smaller decline in SO2 in "low exposure" counties.


                                              16
      The second graph shows a similar pattern for projected airborne sulfates. Counties with
greater exposure to sulfur controls saw airborne sulfate drops of almost 4 µg/m3 , while
counties with lower exposure saw effectively no change. Effects are more drastic for sulfates
than SO2, likely due to determining our sulfate measure using only ARP-related power
plants, while SO2 data are from air monitors and cover all possible SO2 sources.
      The third and fourth graphs of Figure 3 show log yield per acre for corn and soybean
in the period of our analysis.24 Yields just before the ARP were particularly variable --
Appendix B provides background on changes in the agricultural sector around this time as
well as discussion of relevant regional weather shocks. Our identification strategy mitigates
the noise and potential biases from these general trends by focusing on changes in yields
by level of exposure to sulfur control upgrades, while also controlling for area-specific time
trends. The graphs suggest high treatment counties saw relative decreases in average yields,
with a timing that corresponds to the beginning of the ARP.
      The final graph in Figure 3 shows trends in log of crop receipts per acre. These data
cover all crops, and thus represent changes in receipts beyond the corn and soybean outputs
we consider. They also allow for prices to change across time, so in that sense represent a
greater overall impact on producers. In this case, low exposure counties appear to be gaining
crop receipts across time, while high exposure counties remain largely flat after the ARP.

5.1     Event Study Analysis

To explore different pre-trends by treatment exposure while controlling for weather, county,
and year fixed effects, we next show basic event studies. This provides a visual test for time
differences correlated with treatment exposure. Given our empirical model relies on contin-
uous treatment intensity, we show the marginal effects across time rather than differences
across binary treatment and control groups.
  24
     We show the average of log yields for each group for consistency with our main regressions. The log of
the average for each group has the same basic pattern.


                                                    17
   Figure 4 shows annual estimates for marginal effects, with 95% confidence intervals. To
approximate a standard event study with a singular change in treatment, we interact each
year with the level of treatment each county receives in 1995. Figure 1 shows that the
majority of airborne sulfate changes happened in 1995 alone. We treat 1994 as the baseline
year, so each coefficient represents the marginal effect as compared to 1994. For example,
a negative coefficient in 2002 indicates the regression-adjusted impact of our SCc,t measure
was more negative in 2002 than it was in 1994.25 Results for SO2 indicate no clear pre-trend
across treatment exposure. There is a stark decline in SO2 in 1995. Sulfate levels follow a
similar pattern but with a more drastic transition.
   Crop yield results are noisier given substantial variation in annual yields. In a study of
distribution of crop yields, Just and Weninger (1999) note, "Farm-specific randomness may
be caused by errors in management, farm-specific resource constraints, and farm-specific
weather and pest conditions. For example, the impact of floods depends on elevation, slope,
and soil density while drought effects depend on soil depth and quality". This makes year-
by-year inference difficult. However, there is a downward shift in average yields after 1995
for both crops. For both corn and soybean, not a single estimate from 1995 onward is above
1994 levels. Crop receipts follow a similar pattern, with a decrease after 1995.
   1993 is an outlier due to a confluence of bad events, including freezes, unusual rainfall,
a Midwestern flood, a drought, and insects (see Appendix B). The large positive coefficient
suggests that areas with that saw higher levels of our SCc,t measure by 1995 were compara-
tively less harmed by the confluence of these shocks. Given treatment is spatially correlated
and the bad events are spatially correlated, it raises the possibility that random deviations
are correlated with levels of treatment. We address the potential for spatial correlation in
a series of robustness checks. Another possibility is that sulfur can buffer against negative
shocks and that the treatment area had a higher baseline level of sulfur in the soil.26 In later
  25
       With all graphs we weight in the same manner as done in our regressions (see Section 4).
  26
       "Sulfur (S) is an important secondary macronutrient that interacts with several stress metabolites to


                                                     18
regressions, we explore the interactive effects of drought and sulfates, and show that drought
damages are more extreme in areas that also face reduced ambient sulfates.
    To better quantify the ARP's impact, we next use our regression model in (2). Table 2
presents main specification results for ambient sulfate levels, corn yield per acre, and soybean
yield per acre, with different sets of controls. Our model has variation across two dimensions:
time and intensity: time allows the effect to vary across years, particularly before and after
the ARP, and intensity allows for the post-1995 effects of the ARP to vary by exposure to
ARP-related sulfur controls.
    The estimated effect of the ARP is negative for all three outcomes, and in each case is
economically significant and statistically significant at 1 or 5%. In our most basic specifi-
cation (Column 1) controlling for only year and county fixed effects, we find exposure to
an additional weighted unit of sulfur control (approximately 86% of a post-ARP standard
deviation) correlates with a reduction in airborne sulfates of 1.6 µg/m3 , a reduction in corn
yield of 3.6%, and soybean yield by 1.7% . Controlling for weather (Column 2) does little to
change the results.
    The addition of county trends (Column 3) does little to change the estimate for sulfates,
but does increases the magnitude of the effects for both corn and soy. In our full model, an
additional unit of treatment exposure correlates with a reduction sulfates of 1.2 µg/m3 , with
an associated decrease in corn and soybean yields of 5.8% and 4.8%, respectively. Given
the long-run general trend in increased agricultural output across this period, controlling for
regional background trends matters for proper identification.
improve performance of food crops under various environmental stresses including drought. Increased S
supply influences uptake and distribution of essential nutrients to confer nutritional homeostasis in plants
exposed to limited water conditions. (Usmani et al., 2020)




                                                    19
6        Estimates per Unit of SO2 and Sulfates

Thus far our focus has been the reduced form effect of the installation of sulfate control
technology. To better investigate the role of sulfur, we next consider the effects of airborne
sulfates directly. We begin with an OLS analysis, and then expand to an IV setting, using
our reduced form measure of treatment exposure as an instrument airborne sulfate levels --
our first stage F-statistics are always greater than 10.
     Table 3 Panel A shows OLS results for corn yields. We find a statistically and economi-
cally significant increase in yields of 2.4-5.5% per µg/m3 of sulfates. Panel B shows sulfate
estimates are largely unchanged, ranging from 2.6-6.3%. Results for soybean follow a simi-
lar pattern. After controlling for county trends, the sulfate estimates are significant at 1%
and range from 1.6-4.3%. In the IV, sulfate estimates are largely unchanged, ranging from
1.7-6.5% and remain significant at 1%.


7        Robustness Checks and Extensions

Table 4 explores sensitivity of our IV results to different control variables and samples.
Appendix Table A-1 repeats this using our reduced form results.27 Column 1 adds an
indicator equal to 1 for each imputed observation. Columns 2-4 alter the choice of time
controls. Column 2 expands county trends to quadratic. Column 3 replaces county trends
with Crop Reporting District trends. Column 4 adds state-by-year fixed effects to adjust
for state-level policy changes and regional changes in farming technologies. For example,
genetically modified (GMO) strains for various crops first appeared in 1996, and state-by-
year effects adjust for policies that either encourage or discourage adoption of GMOs. State-
by-year fixed effects cause the largest change by reducing estimate magnitudes, particularly
    27
     We also examined models with varied weighting assumptions. One model, omitting weights, ignores
relative county crop magnitudes but is less sensitive to shifts in planting behavior. Another, weighting by the
average crop acreage of the pre-ARP period, avoids post-policy endogeneity from planting behavior. Both
caused effectively no change to our main results.



                                                      20
in the reduced form, which is also expected given treatment has a geographically correlated
component. In all three cases the sign remains negative and statistically and economically
significant. In Column 5, we drop all counties with Phase I or Phase II plants located within
their borders. If economic effects of regulation, or effects of changes in copollutants, are
largely local effects, what remains with our estimate is the isolated effect of transmitted
sulfur.
   Column 6 adds additional controls for O3. Prior research (Boone, Schlenker and Si-
ikam¨
    aki, 2013; McGrath et al., 2015) suggests O3 can damage both corn and soybean. While
the ARP did not regulate O3, it did generate the potential to change local O3 levels through
two primary channels. First, SO2 can serve as a source of light refraction, and its removal via
the ARP could increase O3 formation due to increased ground-level light. Second, the ARP
had some impacts on NO2, a precursor pollutant to O3. The findings in Boone, Schlenker
and Siikam¨
          aki (2013) suggests nonlinearities in O3, with particular sensitivity once hourly
values exceed 77 ppm. As a control, we approximate this using the number of days in a
year where county O3 average 8-hour readings exceed 77 ppm (which is more extreme).
This reduces our coefficients somewhat, but effects remain statistically and economically
significant.
   Columns 7 and 8 separately consider effects for drought and non-drought years.28 Our
results support the idea of sulfur buffering stressful crop conditions; effects in drought years
are 2-3 times as large for the reduced form and 4-10 times larger in the IV.
   We also investigate the robustness of our results to alternative measures of treatment
intensity. Similar to our main specification, in each of these tests we interact a measure of
upgrades to ARP plants with an indicator for P ost, though we now add additional weighting
metrics. Appendix Table A-2 shows our results. Column 1 replicates our main results, while
Column 2 adds an additional instrument that allows for Phase II plant upgrades interacted
  28
       Drought years in our main sample include 1983, 1988, 1993, 1999, 2002, and 2005.



                                                     21
with a P ost indicator as well. Columns 3 and 4 mirror 1 and 2, but weight results by the
amount of SO2 each boiler released in 1985, the period used for calculation of initial permit
allocations. Columns 5 and 6 mirror 3 and 4, but replace 1985 SO2 with 1985 heat output.
In each case, our IV results are effectively unchanged. Given the robustness to different
measures of exposure, we focus on our original model for ease of discussion.
      As a further consideration, we explore various modeling assumptions for our standard
errors. Our main analysis clusters by crop reporting district, an area made up of multiple
contiguous counties. In Appendix Table A-3, we try alternate models. Column 1 replicates
our main result. Column 2 omits weights as a comparison baseline, as we omit weights in
the Conley and bootstrapped errors for computational simplicity. Weighting does little to
change our main results. The following columns explore clustering at the state level, using
geospatial (Conley) standard errors with a radius of 200 miles29 , and bootstrapped standard
errors (stratified on years with replacement) with 10,000 replications. In all models results
remain significant at 1-5%.

7.1      Pollutant Expansions

We test for alternative pollution mechanisms, but analysis by specific pollutant carries two
challenges. First, data are limited by the availability of air monitor data. Second, many
pollutants correlate with each other, and each could play a role in crop yields, which means
considering independent pollution effects could induce bias. Appendix Figure A-4 shows
raw trends and event studies for NO2 and O3, two other pollutants that could also impact
crop yields. While transitions across the ARP are less drastic, there is suggestive movement,
particularly with NO2, that may correlate with the ARP.
      In Appendix Table A-4, we attempt to address both these concerns. To deal with limited
monitor data, we expand pollution data to include the Land Use Regression (LUR) data,
  29
       This process uses the Stata ado file "ols spatial HAC" from Hsiang (2010).




                                                     22
provided by the Center for Air, Climate and Energy Solutions (CACES). To address the issue
of multiple pollutants, we run several separate OLS models (given our single instrument, we
do not use the IV in multi-pollutant models). Using LUR data, we first show that controlling
for LUR-estimated SO2, NO2, and O3 does little to change the coefficient on sulfates. We
then repeat the exercise using a much more restricted data set on monitor-based measures.
Restricting to a sample of counties with nonmissing data for all three pollutants cuts our
sample to approximately 1/10th the size. This sample change decreases the magnitude of
our sulfate estimate and, in the case of soybean, removes statistical significance. However,
conditional on this lower estimate, adding the other pollutants does not change the estimate
on sulfates. This evidence jointly suggests that the mechanism for our effect is airborne
sulfates, which also aligns with the agricultural science.


8    Testing for Industry Adjustment

Given the observed reductions in yields, one consideration is whether this outcome is net of
adjustment behavior on behalf of producers. Based on our investigation of the agricultural
science literature, we do not find references to Clean Air Act-related sulfur loses until 10 or
so years into the program. Further, we found several articles (see Appendix B that suggests
that early on, producers confused sulfur shortages for nitrogen issues or were otherwise
unaware of the link between air pollution, ambient sulfates, and ground sulfur levels. We
test for industry-level responses to the ARP by examining a variety of additional outcomes.
For ease of discussion, we compare our IV models, but results are similar in net effect when
using the reduced form.
    We first use planted acres as an outcome -- farms may shift land to more productive
uses as the ARP reduced yields. In Table 5, we show no economically significant change
in reported acreage differences for corn or soybean. We also construct a measure of total
crop acreage based on information from the agricultural census, interpolated for all non-ag


                                              23
census years, and see no economically or statistically significant changes. We next consider
changes in the probability of reporting any harvested acres for corn or soybean to test for
more drastic reductions in acreage. We find no change in the difference in the probability of
a county reporting corn or soybean by treatment exposure.
   We estimate reported spending on fertilizer expenditures per acre, using data from the
REIS. In Appendix B we provide anecdotal evidence agriculture extension groups eventually
proposed changes in baseline sulfur flows as a cause of recent increases in crop deficiencies, so
to the extent producers already adapted by using more sulfur-based fertilizer (e.g., elemental
sulfur and sulfate compounds such as calcium sulfate and ammonium sulfate), our welfare
calculations underestimate the costs of the ARP. For example, a report from the "Corn
and Soybean Digest" in 2009, shortly after our initial sample ends, notes adding sulfur was
giving higher yields in some parts of Iowa, and suggested sulfur sales had jumped 30%30 .
The sulfur scrubbing process generates synthetic gypsum (calcium sulfate), which private
companies sell as an additive marketed to improve soil drainage. If producers increased use
of synthetic gypsum after the ARP, this might partially offset productivity losses. We find
no statistically or economically significant effect on fertilizer expenditure per acre. This is a
rough measure of fertilizer usage with imputed acreage for non-COA years, and it includes
within it changes in prices, particular fertilizer mix choices, and quantities, so this result
alone cannot verify there was no change in fertilizer mix or behavior.
   In sum, we observe little behavioral response by producers in the first decade or so
following the ARP. The structural shifts in productivity may have been hard to observe
from the perspective of producers, especially in the context of the time trends. Agricultural
yields were increasing over time, so any simple comparison between before and after the
ARP's implementation would falsely suggest the ARP helped yields. Even if producers did
  30
    "Does Sulfur Pay?", Corn and Soybean Digest, Feb 1 2009, available online at http://
cornandsoybeandigest.com/does-sulfur-pay.




                                               24
identify the shift in productivity, singling out sulfur deficiency as the causal mechanism
would have been difficult. Sulfur deficiencies are often confused with nitrogen deficiencies
(and vice versa), and soil tests for sulfur are more complex and less precise than tests for
other minerals.31 This highlights a role for institutions as disseminators of information in
situations where subtle environmental shifts are difficult to detect on an individual level.

8.1    Expansion of Crop Insurance

The expansion of crop insurance in the United States is a potential confounder in identifying
a link between sulfur reductions and losses in yields. As a result of the 1994 Federal Crop
Insurance Reform Act, participation in crop insurance increased substantially around the
same time as the passage of the ARP. If changes in the take-up of crop insurance: (1)
result in changes in yields, (2) correlate with proximate intensity of SO2 emissions from
Phase I plants, and (3) potentially alter producer responses to production shocks (Annan
and Schlenker, 2015), this could be a source of bias in our results. To test for such effects,
we examined data on crop insurance indemnities collected by county/year/crop cell. These
data are available from the USDA Risk Management Agency (RMA), which the government
created in 1996 to help with crop risk and insurance in US agriculture.32 We consider two
primary outcome variables: a binary indicator for any insurance indemnity claim in a given
county/year/crop cell, and the log of crop-specific indemnity claims per acre, in 2017 dollars,
(plus 1, to address the issue of zeros) in a county/year/crop cell. Given crop insurance had
  31
      An article on sulfur deficiency in Northeast Iowa notes, "The soil test for S (measures sulfate-S) is not
an effective means to determine S needs for crops. The estimated available S in a 6 to 8-inch soil core sample
does not correlate to crop yield responses relative to S fertilizer applications. This is because the subsoil
can also provide various amounts of S to crops, S mineralization can quickly change plant-available sulfate
in the soil, potential S mineralization is not measured by the test, and that plant available sulfate-S can
leach from the surface sample depth." (Dealing with Sulfur Deficiency in Northeast Iowa Alfalfa Production,
presented at the 2006 Integrated Crop Management Conference. November 29-30, 2006, p. 225-235. Iowa
State University, Ames, IA.)
   32
      Timing information for this section comes from the "History of the Crop Insurance Program" informa-
tion section of the USDA website (https://www.rma.usda.gov/aboutrma/what/history.html, accessed
April, 2018).




                                                      25
major reforms in 1988, we begin our sample there.
      Table 6 and Appendix Figure A-5 both show insurance take-up shifts around the ARP
in ways that correlate with changes in ambient sulfates. Our results suggest that for every
additional unit of airborne sulfates, the probability of filing an indemnity claim decreases by
8.4 percentage points for corn and 6.0 percentage points for soy. However, pure dollar value
changes are small on average. An additional unit of sulfates means a decrease in indemnity
claims of $1.23 per acre for corn and $1.76 per acre for soy. Collections are not evenly
distributed: for example, in 1995 the median county collected $10.40 per acre, while the
90th percentile was approximately $20 per acre. However, given the price of corn in 1994
was approximately $140 (adjusted to 2017$) per ton, there was an estimated 39.4 bushels per
ton, and the pre-ARP average yield was approximately 80 bushels per acre, our estimated
6.3% reduction in corn yields would be a loss of around $18 per acre. It appears indemnity
payments were not nearly large enough to shield producers from losses.

8.2     Estimated Economic Effects

Our yield results, combined with the crop insurance results, suggest producers should have
seen substantial economic losses as a result of reduced ambient sulfates. In Table 7, we test
for changes in a variety of outcomes to see if yield losses translated into other economic
effects. Our main outcome is atmospheric sulfate, so positive coefficients indicate the ARP
had a negative effect, as it lowered atmospheric sulfate levels. Columns 1 and 2 look at log of
farm and nonfarm income. We see that each additional unit of ambient sulfates raises farm
income by 4.5%, a result that is statistically significant at 10%. We also see a smaller 1%
increase in nonfarm income, which could be a spillover effect into other parts of the economy.
There is a 0.2% increase wage employment over population, suggesting small employment
effects. While overall farm costs per acre are unaffected by sulfate levels, farm labor expenses
increase by 1.4% per µg/m3 , and crop receipts increase by 5.7%. Not surprisingly, there is a



                                              26
decrease in government payments per acre of 3.1%, suggesting regions with higher ambient
sulfates receive less government farm assistance, all else held constant. Farm assistance in
this case includes disaster payments, conservation payments, price supports, and other such
programs. In dollar terms, this is a reduction of $0.98 per acre for each unit of ambient
sulfates, making it similar in value to our prior crop indemnity payments estimate and still
a very small share of overall losses.
      Given the visible economic effects, a natural question is whether or not the shift in
ambient sulfates changed agricultural land values. Theory suggests the value of agricultural
land should be a function of its expected return, which it itself a function of profitability.
Whether or not producers knew why yields were dropping, we would expect the reduction in
revenues to translate to a loss in land values, all else held constant. Assuming producers base
land values somewhat on expectations, this also informs whether or not the market viewed
these revenue reductions as transitory or permanent. Using data from every 5 years in the
agricultural census, we test for changes in the log of land values. We find that each unit of
ambient sulfates raises land values by 7%. Assuming 1992 land values and agricultural crop
acreage, this works out to a decrease of approximately $1.4 billion after the ARP.

8.3     Longer-term Results

As an expansion, we consider effects further into the future, up through the most recent COA
in 2017. Three main confounders exist with the 2007-2017 period. First, major changes in
SO2 regulation with the Clean Air Interstate Rule caused substantial price fluctuations in
sulfur permits, which may weaken the link between our measure of initial treatment and
current emissions levels. Second, expansions of ethanol subsidies were a potential source of
bias in terms of expanded acreage for corn. Finally, like 1993, 2012 was a very unusual year
for crop yields due to regional droughts.
      We illustrate longer-term trends visually in Appendix Figure A-6 by extending our event



                                              27
studies to 2017. The first and second panels show results for corn and soybean yields,
respectively. Even extending into 2017, both corn and soybean yields appear lower than
prior to the ARP. Crop receipts follow a similar pattern (panel 3). Panel 4 shows that
sulfate levels dropped even more in the later 2000/2010s, suggesting some adaptation by
producers at this point: while sulfate levels dropped substantially, yields largely plateaued
at lower post-ARP levels.

8.4     Counterfactual Losses and Costs of Sulfur Replacement

Our evidence suggests no statistically discernable adaptation response in the years imme-
diately following the ARP, but we cannot rule out some level of adaptation. To infer the
size of the adaptation response, we conduct a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the expected
yield losses assuming no adaptation and extrapolating from experiments on the effects of
sulfur on crop yields. Our estimates suggest the average county lost 0.91 µg/m3 of ambient
sulfates due to the ARP. Using data from ground monitors, we estimate this translates to
0.55 pounds of sulfate deposition per acre.33 Based on data from the agricultural extension
and professional literature, corn extracts 0.5 lbs of sulfur per 10 bushels/acre. Soybean is
more intensive at 1.7 lbs per 10 bushels/acre. This suggests the sulfate losses should reduce
corn yields by 11 bushels per acre, and soybean by 3.3 bushels per acre, each of which is
around 10% of 1994 yields. We observe that the average county saw losses closer to 5%,
which suggests producers may have employed some form of mitigation, and our estimates
are net of such effects.
      With this information we can also ask how expensive it would be to fully "replace" the
lost sulfates. Using fertilizer price data from the USDA, we estimate the replacement cost
purchasing ammonium sulfate. Since ammonium sulfate is approximately 24% sulfur, one
ton of ammonium sulfate yields 480 lbs. of sulfur. Based on ammonium sulfate prices, which
  33
     We regress ground SO4 on our measure of estimated ambient sulfates, controlling for county and year
fixed effects as well as county linear trends.


                                                  28
range from $237 - 622 (in $2017), crop acreage, and our estimated sulfur loses, it would cost
a total of around $40-60 million in 2017 dollars per year to replace all ARP-driven sulfate
losses. This is small compared to the substantial losses from corn and soybean. Using our
estimates on bushels lost, price data from the IMF, and regional crop acreage, we estimated
revenue losses ranging up to $1-1.5 billion a year for corn and soybean nationwide. While
our back of the envelope calculations suggest producers offset reductions somewhat, the level
of adaptation was suboptimal. We provide an in-depth description of our calculations, as
well as relevant data sources for all values, in Appendix C.


9    Conclusion

The Acid Rain Program produced large reductions in ambient SO2 levels, which improved
human health and reduced environmental harm to old growth forests, rivers, and lakes.
Agricultural science suggests it also imposed unexpected costs on agricultural producers
by altering atmospheric sulfate levels, fundamentally changing the transfer of production
inputs for high-yield crops like corn and soybean. We test this hypothesis and consider, more
broadly, the adaptability of the agricultural sector to shifting environmental conditions. Our
results present an unusual case where pollution can generate a positive externality.
    We find annual crop revenue losses for corn and soybean total $1-1.5 billion, and as-
sociated losses in all agricultural land value of $1.4 billion. We observe little evidence of
adjustment to the crop losses in the decade following the ARP, suggesting individuals and
industries can be slow to adapt to environmental shifts. The delayed adjustment could be
explained by difficulty with testing ground-level sulfur levels, while annual fluctuations in
yields confound the ability of any one producer to draw inference about changing conditions.
The "signal vs. noise" issue is not be unique to agriculture: research shows environmental
factors have subtle impacts on human health and labor productivity, both difficult to detect
at the level of the individual firm (Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2012; Chang et al., 2015). This


                                             29
highlights a continuing role for institutions, in our case extension centers, in collecting and
disseminating information regarding changing environmental conditions.
   Using back of the envelope calculations based on plant-specific sulfur take-up, we estimate
the observed crop reductions are below those predicted given the observable reduction in
sulfates. We take this as some indication of producer adjustment behavior, though the level
of adaptation is suboptimal. We estimate the total cost of replacing lost sulfur at $40-60
million a year. This is less than 1/10th of the estimated crop revenue losses we calculate for
corn and soybeans.
   While the reduction in yields is a previously unaccounted cost of the Acid Rain Program,
it hardly affects the net social benefits of coal regulation -- previously estimated benefits
of the ARP dwarf costs, largely due to avoided mortality. But it raises important distri-
butional impacts of coal regulation. Various European countries and China are pursuing
SO2 controls. Countries with larger agricultural sectors may incur larger costs of regulation,
and countries with high levels of subsistence farming or extreme poverty might experience
greater inequities. Providing fertilizer subsidies, alleviating credit constraints, supporting
shifts to less sulfur-intensive crops, and increasing information networks to help identify and
detect sulfur shortages are all potential policy tools to help offset the agricultural costs of
coal regulation.
   There remain important related issues for future research. Our analysis focuses on corn
and soybean, but other crops could experience different outcomes depending on their sen-
sitivity to soil acidification, leaf damage, and changes in ground-level sulfur. Further, our
results are in the context of the United States, where pollution levels are modest by historical
and cross-country comparison. In countries with greater levels of pollution, reductions may
have different impacts on even the same crops. Present efforts to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions around the world and move away from coal-generated power motivate a need to
study the pollution-agricultural relationship in other settings.


                                              30
References

Annan, Francis, and Wolfram Schlenker. 2015. "Federal crop insurance and the disin-
  centive to adapt to extreme heat." American Economic Review, 105(5): 262­66.

Barreca, Alan I, Matthew Neidell, and Nicholas J Sanders. 2017. "Long-run pollu-
  tion exposure and adult mortality: Evidence from the acid rain program." NBER Working
  Paper 23524.

Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and
  Joseph S. Shapiro. 2013. "Adapting to Climate Change: The Remarkable Decline in
  the U.S. Temperature-Mortality Relationship over the 20th Century." NBER WP 18692.

Boone, Christopher, Wolfram Schlenker, and Juha Siikam¨
                                                      aki. 2013. "Ground-Level
  Ozone Pollution and Corn Yields in the United States."

Burke, Marshall, and Kyle Emerick. 2016. "Adaptation to climate change: Evidence
  from US agriculture." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(3): 106­40.

Camberato,          Jim,     Stephen       Maloney,        and      Shaun        Casteel.
  2012.   "Sulfur    deficiency   in   corn."   Accessed     January    1,    2014    at:
  http://www.kingcorn.org/news/timeless/SulfurDeficiency.pdf.

Carlson, Curtis, Dallas Burtraw, Maureen Cropper, and Karen L. Palmer. 2000.
  "Sulfur Dioxide Control by Electrict Utilities: What Are the Gains from Trade?" Journal
  of Political Economy.

Chang, Tom, Joshua Graff Zivin, Tal Gross, and Matthew Neidell. 2015. "Partic-
  ulate Pollution and the Productivity of Pear Packers." NBER Working Paper 19944.

Chestnut, Lauraine G, and David M Mills. 2005. "A fresh look at the benefits and costs
  of the US acid rain program." Journal of Environmental Management, 77(3): 252­266.

                                           31
Clean Air Markets Division. 2006. "Acid Rain Program 2005 Progress Report." U.S.
  Environmental Protection Agency.

David, Mark B, Lowell E Gentry, and Corey A Mitchell. 2016. "Riverine Response of
  Sulfate to Declining Atmospheric Sulfur Deposition in Agricultural Watersheds." Journal
  of Environmental Quality.

Deschenes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. 2007. "The economic impacts of climate
  change: evidence from agricultural output and random fluctuations in weather." The
  American Economic Review, 354­385.

Ellerman, A Denny, and Juan-Pablo Montero. 1998. "The declining trend in sulfur
  dioxide emissions: Implications for allowance prices." Journal of Environmental Economics
  and Management, 36(1): 26­45.

Ellerman, A. Denny, Paul L. Joskow, Richard Schmalensee, Juan-Pablo Mon-
  tero, and Elizabeth M. Baily. 2000. Markets for clean air: The US acid rain program.
  Cambridge University Press.

EPA. 1999. "Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act 1990 to 2010: EPA Report to
  Congress." EPA-410-R-99-001.

EPA. 2008. "Integrated Science Assessment for Oxides of Nitrogen and Sulfur ­ Ecological
  Criteria." EPA-600-R-08-082F.

Feng, S., M. Oppenheimer, and W. Schlenker. 2012. "Climate Change, Crop Yields,
  and Internal Migration in the United States." NBER Working Paper 17734.

Fisher, Anthony C, W Michael Hanemann, Michael J Roberts, and Wolfram
  Schlenker. 2012. "The economic impacts of climate change: evidence from agricultural



                                            32
  output and random fluctuations in weather: comment." The American Economic Review,
  102(7): 3749­3760.

Graff Zivin, Joshua, and Matthew Neidell. 2012. "The impact of pollution on worker
  productivity." American Economic Review, 102: 3652­3673.

Harou, Aurlie, Nyambilila Amuri, Malgosia Madajewicz, Christopher Magomba,
  Hope Michelson, Kevin Tschirhart, Johnson M. Semoka, and Cheryl Palm.
  2019. "When does information make a difference? A field experiment with farm specific
  soil information in Tanzania." Working Paper.

Hornbeck, Richard. 2012. "The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short-and
  Long-Run Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe." The American Economic Review,
  102(4): 1477­1507.

Hsiang, Solomon M. 2010. "Temperatures and cyclones strongly associated with economic
  production in the Caribbean and Central America." Proceedings of the National Academy
  of sciences, 107(35): 15367­15372.

Irving, Patricia M, and Joseph E Miller. 1981. "Productivity of field-grown soybeans
  exposed to acid rain and sulfur dioxide alone and in combination." Journal of Environ-
  mental Quality, 10(4): 473­478.

Joskow, Paul L, and Richard Schmalensee. 1998. "The Political Economy of Market-
  Based Environmental Policy: The US Acid Rain Program." Journal of Law and Eco-
  nomics, 41(1): 2.

Just, Richard E, and Quinn Weninger. 1999. "Are crop yields normally distributed?"
  American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 81(2): 287­304.




                                          33
Kliesen,    Kevin L. 1994. "Can Agriculture Rebound This Year?"                "The Re-
  gional Economist", Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed January 6 at
  http://www.stlouisfed.org/publications/re/articles/?id=1876.

Li, Can, Chris McLinden, Vitali Fioletov, Nickolay Krotkov, Simon Carn, Joanna
  Joiner, David Streets, Hao He, Xinrong Ren, Zhanqing Li, et al. 2017. "India
  Is Overtaking China as the World's Largest Emitter of Anthropogenic Sulfur Dioxide."
  Scientific Reports, 7(1): 14304.

Lott, JN. 1994. "The US summer of 1993: A sharp contrast in weather extremes." Weather,
  49(11): 370­383.

McGrath, Justin M, Amy M Betzelberger, Shaowen Wang, Eric Shook, Xin-
  Guang Zhu, Stephen P Long, and Elizabeth A Ainsworth. 2015. "An analysis of
  ozone damage to historical maize and soybean yields in the United States." Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(46): 14390­14395.

Morrison,      Liz.   2009.   "Does   Sulfur    Pay?"     Accessed   January   1,   2014:
  cornandsoybeandigest.com/does-sulfur-pay.

Muller, Nicholas Z. 2014. "Boosting GDP growth by accounting for the environment."
  Science, 345(6199): 873­874.

Place, Sara, Tom Kilcer, Quirine Ketterings, Debbie Cherney, and Jerry
  Cherney. 2007. "Sulfur for Field Crops." Cornell University Cooperative Exten-
  sion Agronomy Fact Sheet Series, Fact Sheet 34, Accessed January 1, 2014:
  nmsp.cals.cornell.edu/publications/factsheets/factsheet34.pdf.

Sawyer, John. 2004. "Nutrient Deficiencies and Application Injuries in Field Crops." Iowa
  State University University Extension IPM 42.


                                               34
Sawyer, John, Brian Lang, Dan Barker, and George Cummins. 2009. "Dealing
  with sulfur deficiency in Iowa corn production." Integrated Crop Management Conference
  - Iowa State University.

Schlenker, W., and M.J. Roberts. 2009. "Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe
  damages to US crop yields under climate change." Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 106(37): 15594­15598.

Schmalensee, Richard, and Robert N. Stavins. 2013. "The SO2 Allowance Trading
  System: The Ironic History of a Grand Policy Experiment." Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, 27(1): 103­122.

Siikam¨
      aki, Juha, Dallas Burtraw, Joseph Maher, and Clayton Munnings. 2012.
  "The US Environmental Protection Agency's Acid Rain Program."

Stavins, Robert N. 1998. "What can we learn from the grand policy experiment? Lessons
  from SO2 allowance trading." The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 69­88.

Stevens, Gene, Peter Motavalli, Peter Scharf, Manjula Nathan, and David Dunn.
  2002. "Crop Nutrient Deficiencies and Toxicities." IPM1016.

Stevens, Stanley C. 1999. Boom and Bust in the '90s: The Story as Told by Corn. Depart-
  ment of Applied Economics, College of Agricultural, Food, and Environmental Sciences,
  University of Minnesota.

Usmani, Muhammad Munir, Fahim Nawaz, Sadia Majeed, Muhammad Asif
  Shehzad, Khawaja Shafique Ahmad, Gulzar Akhtar, Muhammad Aqib, and
  Rana Nauman Shabbir. 2020. "Sulfate-mediated Drought tolerance in Maize involves
  Regulation at physiological and Biochemical Levels." Scientific reports, 10(1): 1­13.




                                            35
Weil, Ray R, and Spider K Mughogho. 2000. "Sulfur nutrition of maize in four regions
  of Malawi." Agronomy Journal, 92(4): 649­656.




                                          36
                                     Table 1
                                 Summary Statistics


                                                    1982-1994     1995-2007

        Panel A: Pollution and Crop Outcomes
          Airborne SO2 (ppb)                               7.48        4.33
          Airborne Sulfates (µg/m3 )                       7.07        4.54
          Corn (Bushels per Acre)                         80.45      101.03
          Corn Acres                                  42,062.14   44,101.73
          Soybean (Bushels per Acre)                      29.44       34.55
          Soybean Acres                               44,028.99   51,152.35
          Weighted Sulfur Controls                         0.05        0.84
Note: We base SO2 measures on monitor-level readings aggregated to county. Airborne
sulfate is predicted by the APEEP atmospheric transport model using ARP-regulated
power plant-level SO2 emissions as inputs. Crop yield per acre is total yield per acre
divided by planted acres in that county-year. Weighted Sulfur Controls is a measure of
county-level exposure to plant upgrades, which is determined by the APEEP
atmospheric transport model (see Section 4).




                                          37
                                         Table 2
   Relationship Between Phase 1 Plant Upgrades, Atmospheric Sulfates, and Crop Outcomes

                                                            (1)       (2)       (3)


          Panel A: First Stage for Sulfates
           SC X Post                                       -1.580    -1.577    -1.234
                                                          (0.244)   (0.248)   (0.262)

            Clusters                                       235       235        235
            Observations                                  64,740    63,622     63,622

          Panel B: Reduced Form for Corn
           SC X Post                                       -0.036    -0.032    -0.050
                                                          (0.011)   (0.010)   (0.014)

            Clusters                                       211       211        211
            Observations                                  41,964    41,964     41,964

          Panel C: Reduced Form for Soybean
           SC X Post                                       -0.017    -0.019    -0.048
                                                          (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.016)

            Clusters                                       175       175        175
            Observations                                  34,944    34,944     34,944

            County FE                                       Yes       Yes       Yes
            Year FE                                         Yes       Yes       Yes
            Weather                                         No        Yes       Yes
            Linear County Trends                            No        No        Yes

Note: We cluster standard errors at the crop reporting district level. We weight crop regressions
by annual county-level acreage, and do not weight pollution regressions. Outcome for corn and
soybean is log of crop yield per planted acre. We derive airborne sulfate measures from the
APEEP atmospheric transport model using ARP-regulated power plant-level SO2 emissions as
inputs. Crop yield per acre is total yield per acre divided by planted acres. SC X Post refers to
an indicator for all years 1995 onward interacted with the count of ARP-regulated boilers with
installed sulfur controls, weighted by the APEEP model to calculate a county-level measure (see
Section 4).




                                                38
                                           Table 3
                    OLS and IV Estimate of Airborne Sulfate on Crop Yields

                                                         (1)       (2)



                         Panel A: OLS for Corn
                          Sulfates (µg/m3 )             0.025     0.055
                                                       (0.003)   (0.007)

                           Clusters                      211      211
                           Observations                 41,964   41,964

                         Panel B: IV for Corn
                          Sulfates (µg/m3 )             0.026     0.063
                                                       (0.004)   (0.008)

                           First Stage F                24.570   16.784

                           Clusters                      211      211
                           Observations                 41,964   41,964

                         Panel C: OLS for Soybean
                          Sulfates (µg/m3 )             0.016     0.043
                                                       (0.002)   (0.007)

                           Clusters                      175      175
                           Observations                 34,944   34,944

                         Panel D: IV for Soybean
                          Sulfates (µg/m3 )             0.017     0.065
                                                       (0.003)   (0.008)

                           First Stage F                18.994   14.741

                           Clusters                      175      175
                           Observations                 34,944   34,944

                           County FE                     Yes      Yes
                           Year FE                       Yes      Yes
                           Weather                       Yes      Yes
                           Linear County Trends          No       Yes


Note: We cluster standard errors at the crop reporting district level. We weight crop regressions
by annual county-level acreage. Outcome for corn and soybean is log of crop yield per planted
acre. We derive airborne sulfate measures from the APEEP atmospheric transport model using
ARP-regulated power plant-level SO2 emissions as inputs. Crop yield per acre is total yield per
acre divided by planted acres. The first stage of IV regressions corresponds to the model in Panel
A of Figure 2 -- different samples and crop weights explain variation in F-statistics.


                                                  39
                                                                  Table 4
                                            Robustness of IV Estimates to Alternate Model Choices

                                               (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)         (8)
                                            Imputed     Quad       CRR      State Year   Drop Plant     O3       Omit        Just
                                            Indicator   Trends    Trends        FE        Counties    Control   Droughts   Droughts


                       Panel A: Corn
                        Sulfates (µg/m3 )     0.063      0.062     0.047      0.045        0.069       0.041     0.020      0.201
                                             (0.008)    (0.008)   (0.009)    (0.010)      (0.008)     (0.007)   (0.006)    (0.028)
                        Damaging O3 Days                                                               -0.011
                                                                                                      (0.003)

                        F Statistic          16.783     15.440    13.705     11.021        25.996     14.942     16.757     10.645
                        Clusters              211        211       211        211           208        201        211        211
                        Observations         41,964     41,964    41,964     41,964        35,620     29,743     32,280     9,684
                       Panel B: Soybean




40
                        Sulfates (µg/m3 )     0.065      0.063     0.045      0.035        0.074       0.041     0.035      0.138
                                             (0.008)    (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.010)      (0.009)     (0.006)   (0.008)    (0.023)
                        Damaging O3 Days                                                               -0.008
                                                                                                      (0.004)

                        F Statistic          14.741     13.220    12.153     13.291        20.893     14.399     14.589     9.093
                        Clusters              175        175       175        175           173        168        175        175
                        Observations         34,944     34,944    34,944     34,944        29,952     24,417     26,880     8,064


     Note: We cluster standard errors at the crop reporting district level. We weight crop regressions by annual county-level acreage.
     Outcome for corn and soybean is log of crop yield per planted acre. We derive airborne sulfate measures from the APEEP
     atmospheric transport model using ARP-regulated power plant-level SO2 emissions as inputs. Crop yield per acre is total yield
     per acre divided by planted acres. The first stage of IV regressions corresponds to the model in Panel A of Figure 2 -- different
     samples and crop weights explain variation in F-statistics. Column headers describe variation in models, and Section 7 describes
     each model modification in detail.
                                             Table 5
                                IV Estimate of Adaptive Responses

                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)
                              Corn       Soybean      Total       Grow       Grow     Fertilizer
                              Acres       Acres       Acres       Corn      Soybean   Expenses


       Sulfates (µg/m3 )     0.001         0.008       -0.001      -0.005    -0.011     0.001
                            (0.005)       (0.010)     (0.002)     (0.008)   (0.009)    (0.004)

       First Stage F          17.768      13.387      22.030      37.210    38.307     19.278

       Clusters                211         175         235         148       164        214
       Observations           42,250      34,944      62,764      26,962    32,318     43,966

Note: We cluster standard errors at the crop reporting district level. We weight crop regressions
by annual county-level acreage. The first stage of IV regressions corresponds to the model in
Panel A of Figure 2 -- different samples and crop weights explain variation in F-statistics.
Column headers describe variation in outcomes, which Section 8 describes in detail.


                                          Table 6
              IV Estimate of Payouts and Collection of Crop Insurance (Per Acre)

                                 (1)         (2)        (3)                        (4)
                                Corn       Soybean  Log Soybean                 Log Corn
                                Prob.       Prob.  Claim (Dollars)           Claim (Dollars)


          Sulfates (µg/m3 )      -0.084      -0.061             -1.240            -1.775
                                (0.029)     (0.019)            (0.716)           (0.448)

          First Stage F         14.763      14.461              14.763           14.461

          Clusters               208         187                 208              187
          Observations          29,659      25,965              29,659           25,965

Note: We cluster standard errors at the crop reporting district level. We weight crop regressions
by annual county-level acreage. The first stage of IV regressions corresponds to the model in
Panel A of Figure 2 -- different samples and crop weights explain variation in F-statistics.
Outcomes are probability of any crop insurance collection and average dollar value per acre of
crop insurance collection. Section 8.1 describes outcomes in detail.



                                                    41
                                                                         Table 7
                                                             IV Estimate of Economic Effects

                                      (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)              (7)            (8)
                                   Log Farm   Log Non-Farm    Wage Emp.   Log Costs   Log Labor   Log Crop Rcpt.   Log Gov't Pmt.   Log Land
                                    Income       Income       Over Pop.   Per Acre    Expenses       Per Acre         Per Acre        Value


               Sulfates (µg/m3 )     0.048        0.010          0.002      0.000       0.014         0.058            -0.031         0.070
                                    (0.024)      (0.003)        (0.001)    (0.004)     (0.005)       (0.011)          (0.011)        (0.018)




42
               First Stage F        20.601       20.601         19.286     19.278      19.278         18.510           18.800        13.210

               Clusters              214          214            214        214         214            211              210           235
               Observations         42,962       42,962         44,045     43,966      43,966         40,352           40,274        14,520


     Note: We cluster standard errors at the crop reporting district level. We weight crop regressions by annual county-level acreage.
     The first stage of IV regressions corresponds to the model in Panel A of Figure 2 -- different samples and crop weights explain
     variation in F-statistics. Column headers describe variation in outcomes, which Section 8.2 describes in detail.
                                                                                     Figure 1
                                                              Installation of Sulfur Controls and Boiler Emissions


                                           Panel A: Monthly Running Count of
                                                                                                                                                  Panel B: Boiler-Level Sulfur Controls and
                                           Phase I Boilers with Sulfur Control
                                                                                                                                                               SO2 Emissions
                                                   Technology Installs




                                                                                                                                                                              10000
                               30




                                                                                                                                                                              0
          Running Count of Boiler Updates by Phase




                                                                                                                                                                              -50000-40000-30000-20000-10000
                                                                                                                                                   Adjusted Mean Difference
                   10               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                               -10             -5                     0               5   10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Year
                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Phase 1          Phase 2
                                           1982m1    1987m1    1992m1               1997m1                                2002m1    2007m1
                                                                        Year


                                                                                                                   Panel C: Total Annual ARP SO2
                                                                                                                         Emissions by Phase
                                                                                                    120
                                                                          Sum of Total SO2 Plant Output by Phase

                                                                                                       100
                                                                                    (millions of tons)
                                                                                60          80      40




                                                                                                                   1980      1985     1990           1995                                                               2000        2005
                                                                                                                                                  Year

                                                                                                                                        Phase 1                                                                      Phase 2




Note: All figures based on data from the EPA Clean Air Markets Acid Rain power plant data set.
Panel A shows the running total of upgraded Phase I boilers by month. Panel B shows the change
in boiler-level SO2 emissions leading up to and following a sulfur control update, by phase
category, and includes any plants without installed sulfur upgrades as controls set to relative time
zero. Panel C shows the sum total of all SO2 emissions from Phase 1 and Phase 2 plants, by year.
Dashed vertical line indicates the beginning of enforcement of the Acid Rain Program. Thick
dashed lines indicate 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                                                                             43
                                                Figure 2
                       County-Level Variation in Sulfates from ARP Plant Sources


                              1982                                  1995




            (20,50]                                    (20,50]
            (10,20]                                    (10,20]
            (7.5,10]                                   (7.5,10]
            (5,7.5]                                    (5,7.5]
            (2.5,5]                                    (2.5,5]
            [0,2.5]                                    [0,2.5]




                                                2007




                                     (20,50]
                                     (10,20]
                                     (7.5,10]
                                     (5,7.5]
                                     (2.5,5]
                                     [0,2.5]




Note: We generate predicted sulfate levels using the APEEP atmospheric conversion matrix
which uses boiler-level SO2 emissions to estimate sulfates, which include sulfate and ammonium
sulfate. See Section 4 for details.




                                                  44
                                                                        Figure 3
                                                        Trending Effects by Treatment Intensity


                         10                       SO2                                                                                                                        Sulfates




                                                                                                                                            12          10
                                                                                                                             Estimated Sulfate Deposition
                         8
          Airborne SO2




                                                                                                                                                8
                6




                                                                                                                                       6
                         4




                                                                                                                               4            2
                         2
                                          1982
                                          1983
                                          1984
                                          1985
                                          1986
                                          1987
                                          1988
                                          1989
                                          1990
                                          1991
                                          1992
                                          1993
                                          1994
                                          1995
                                          1996
                                          1997
                                          1998
                                          1999
                                          2000
                                          2001
                                          2002
                                          2003
                                          2004
                                          2005
                                          2006
                                          2007




                                                                                                                                                             1982
                                                                                                                                                             1983
                                                                                                                                                             1984
                                                                                                                                                             1985
                                                                                                                                                             1986
                                                                                                                                                             1987
                                                                                                                                                             1988
                                                                                                                                                             1989
                                                                                                                                                             1990
                                                                                                                                                             1991
                                                                                                                                                             1992
                                                                                                                                                             1993
                                                                                                                                                             1994
                                                                                                                                                             1995
                                                                                                                                                             1996
                                                                                                                                                             1997
                                                                                                                                                             1998
                                                                                                                                                             1999
                                                                                                                                                             2000
                                                                                                                                                             2001
                                                                                                                                                             2002
                                                                                                                                                             2003
                                                                                                                                                             2004
                                                                                                                                                             2005
                                                                                                                                                             2006
                                                                                                                                                             2007
                                                            Year                                                                                                                            Year

                                             Low Exposure                                  High Exposure                                                                     Low Exposure          High Exposure



                                          Log Corn Yield                                                                                                               Log Soybean Yield


                                                                                                                                            3.8
                         5          4.8
             Log Corn Yield Per Acre




                                                                                                                             Log Soy Yield Per Acre
                                                                                                                                              3.6
                  4.4      4.6




                                                                                                                                 3.4
          4.2




                                                                                                                                            3.2
                         4
                                          1982
                                          1983
                                          1984
                                          1985
                                          1986
                                          1987
                                          1988
                                          1989
                                          1990
                                          1991
                                          1992
                                          1993
                                          1994
                                          1995
                                          1996
                                          1997
                                          1998
                                          1999
                                          2000
                                          2001
                                          2002
                                          2003
                                          2004
                                          2005
                                          2006
                                          2007




                                                                                                                                                             1982
                                                                                                                                                             1983
                                                                                                                                                             1984
                                                                                                                                                             1985
                                                                                                                                                             1986
                                                                                                                                                             1987
                                                                                                                                                             1988
                                                                                                                                                             1989
                                                                                                                                                             1990
                                                                                                                                                             1991
                                                                                                                                                             1992
                                                                                                                                                             1993
                                                                                                                                                             1994
                                                                                                                                                             1995
                                                                                                                                                             1996
                                                                                                                                                             1997
                                                                                                                                                             1998
                                                                                                                                                             1999
                                                                                                                                                             2000
                                                                                                                                                             2001
                                                                                                                                                             2002
                                                                                                                                                             2003
                                                                                                                                                             2004
                                                                                                                                                             2005
                                                                                                                                                             2006
                                                                                                                                                             2007
                                                            Year                                                                                                                            Year

                                             Low Exposure                                  High Exposure                                                                     Low Exposure          High Exposure



                                                                                          Log Crop Receipts Per Acre
                                                                           6
                                                             Log Crop Receipts per Acre
                                                                      5.5  5
                                                                                          1982
                                                                                          1983
                                                                                          1984
                                                                                          1985
                                                                                          1986
                                                                                          1987
                                                                                          1988
                                                                                          1989
                                                                                          1990
                                                                                          1991
                                                                                          1992
                                                                                          1993
                                                                                          1994
                                                                                          1995
                                                                                          1996
                                                                                          1997
                                                                                          1998
                                                                                          1999
                                                                                          2000
                                                                                          2001
                                                                                          2002
                                                                                          2003
                                                                                          2004
                                                                                          2005
                                                                                          2006
                                                                                          2007




                                                                                                                          Year

                                                                                                           Low Exposure                                      High Exposure




Note: Each figure shows outcome trends split by above vs. below the median level of treatment
intensity in 1995 for all available counties east of the 100th degree meridian. SO2 data are from
EPA air quality monitors, which we aggregate to the county level. We derive atmospheric sulfate
projections using the APEEP transport model. Corn and soybean outcomes are log of yield per
planted acre from the USDA NASS. Crop receipts are from BEA data and are divided by total
crop acreage from the Census of Agriculture. We linearly impute crop acreage at the county-level
between COA years.



                                                                                                                    45
                                                                 Figure 4
                                                   Event Studies by Treatment Intensity


                                     1          SO2                                                                                       Sulfates




                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                0
          Adjusted Mean Difference




                                                                                                     Adjusted Mean Difference
                                     0




                                                                                                                                -1
                                                                                                                                -2
                                     -1




                                                                                                                                -3
                                                                                                                                -4
                                     -2
                                           1982
                                           1983
                                           1984
                                           1985
                                           1986
                                           1987
                                           1988
                                           1989
                                           1990
                                           1991
                                           1992
                                           1993
                                           1994
                                           1995
                                           1996
                                           1997
                                           1998
                                           1999
                                           2000
                                           2001
                                           2002
                                           2003
                                           2004
                                           2005
                                           2006
                                           2007




                                                                                                                                      1982
                                                                                                                                      1983
                                                                                                                                      1984
                                                                                                                                      1985
                                                                                                                                      1986
                                                                                                                                      1987
                                                                                                                                      1988
                                                                                                                                      1989
                                                                                                                                      1990
                                                                                                                                      1991
                                                                                                                                      1992
                                                                                                                                      1993
                                                                                                                                      1994
                                                                                                                                      1995
                                                                                                                                      1996
                                                                                                                                      1997
                                                                                                                                      1998
                                                                                                                                      1999
                                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                                      2001
                                                                                                                                      2002
                                                                                                                                      2003
                                                                                                                                      2004
                                                                                                                                      2005
                                                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                                                      2007
                                                  Year                                                                                        Year



                                           Log Corn Yield                                                                             Log Soybean Yield


                                                                                                                                .2
                                     .4




                                                                                                                                .1
          Adjusted Mean Difference




                                                                                                     Adjusted Mean Difference
                                     .2




                                                                                                                                0
                                     0




                                                                                                                                -.1
                                     -.2




                                                                                                                                -.2
                                           1982
                                           1983
                                           1984
                                           1985
                                           1986
                                           1987
                                           1988
                                           1989
                                           1990
                                           1991
                                           1992
                                           1993
                                           1994
                                           1995
                                           1996
                                           1997
                                           1998
                                           1999
                                           2000
                                           2001
                                           2002
                                           2003
                                           2004
                                           2005
                                           2006
                                           2007




                                                                                                                                      1982
                                                                                                                                      1983
                                                                                                                                      1984
                                                                                                                                      1985
                                                                                                                                      1986
                                                                                                                                      1987
                                                                                                                                      1988
                                                                                                                                      1989
                                                                                                                                      1990
                                                                                                                                      1991
                                                                                                                                      1992
                                                                                                                                      1993
                                                                                                                                      1994
                                                                                                                                      1995
                                                                                                                                      1996
                                                                                                                                      1997
                                                                                                                                      1998
                                                                                                                                      1999
                                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                                      2001
                                                                                                                                      2002
                                                                                                                                      2003
                                                                                                                                      2004
                                                                                                                                      2005
                                                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                                                      2007
                                                  Year                                                                                        Year



                                                                                    Log Crop Receipts Per Acre
                                                                              .4
                                                   Adjusted Mean Difference
                                                                              .2
                                                                              0
                                                                              -.2
                                                                                    1982
                                                                                    1983
                                                                                    1984
                                                                                    1985
                                                                                    1986
                                                                                    1987
                                                                                    1988
                                                                                    1989
                                                                                    1990
                                                                                    1991
                                                                                    1992
                                                                                    1993
                                                                                    1994
                                                                                    1995
                                                                                    1996
                                                                                    1997
                                                                                    1998
                                                                                    1999
                                                                                    2000
                                                                                    2001
                                                                                    2002
                                                                                    2003
                                                                                    2004
                                                                                    2005
                                                                                    2006
                                                                                    2007




                                                                                                 Year




Note: Event studies show the annual marginal effect of an additional unit of our treatment
measure as we describe in Section 4. We use 1994, the year prior to the enforcement of the ARP,
as baseline for comparison, and assign 1995 upgrade counts to 1995 and all following years. All
estimates include 95% confidence intervals, where we cluster standard errors by crop reporting
district. SO2 data are from EPA air quality monitors, which we aggregate to the county level. We
derive atmospheric sulfate projections using the APEEP transport model. Corn and soybean
outcomes are log of yield per planted acre from the USDA NASS. Crop receipts are from BEA
data and are divided by total crop acreage from the Census of Agriculture. We linearly impute
between-COA crop acreage at the county-level.

                                                                                                46
  "Adaptation to Environmental Change:
Agriculture and the Unexpected Incidence of
         the Acid Rain Program"
            Appendix Material




                    47
                                                             Table A-1
                                   Robustness of Reduced Form Estimates to Alternate Model Choices

                                       (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)         (8)
                                    Imputed     Quad       CRR      State Year   Drop Plant     O3       Omit        Just
                                    Indicator   Trends    Trends        FE        Counties    Control   Droughts   Droughts


             Panel A: Corn
              SC X Post               -0.050     -0.051    -0.030     -0.017       -0.068      -0.027    -0.016      -0.050
                                     (0.014)    (0.014)   (0.009)    (0.005)      (0.015)     (0.007)   (0.006)     (0.014)
              Damaging O3 Days                                                                 -0.012
                                                                                              (0.003)
              Clusters                211        211       211        211           208        201        211        211
              Observations           41,964     41,964    41,964     41,964        35,620     29,743     32,280     41,964




48
             Panel B: Soybean
              SC X Post               -0.048     -0.049    -0.026     -0.011       -0.072      -0.025    -0.025      -0.048
                                     (0.016)    (0.016)   (0.010)    (0.005)      (0.019)     (0.007)   (0.011)     (0.016)
              Damaging O3 Days                                                                 -0.009
                                                                                              (0.004)
              Clusters                175        175       175        175           173        168        175        175
              Observations           34,944     34,944    34,944     34,944        29,952     24,417     26,880     34,944

     Note: We cluster standard errors at the crop reporting district level. We weight crop regressions by annual county-level acreage.
     Outcome for corn and soybean is log of crop yield per planted acre. We derive airborne sulfate measures from the APEEP
     atmospheric transport model using ARP-regulated power plant-level SO2 emissions as inputs. Crop yield per acre is total yield
     per acre divided by planted acres. refers to an indicator for all years 1995 onward interacted with the count of ARP-regulated
     boilers with installed sulfur controls, weighted by the APEEP model to calculate a county-level measure (see Section 4). Column
     headers describe variation in models, and Section 7 describes each model modification in detail.
                                                                Table A-2
                                                 Alternate Instrument Choices for Sulfate

                                             (1)        (2)            (3)        (4)             (5)        (6)
                                               Basic Update          1985 Sulfur Weighted        1985 Heat Weighted
                                           Phase 1 Phase 1 & 2       Phase 1 Phase 1 & 2        Phase 1 Phase 1 & 2


                  Panel A: Corn
                   Sulfates (µg/m3 )        0.063        0.062         0.040        0.040         0.040        0.040
                                           (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.008)

                    F Stat                 16.784        11.588       50.572        29.126       39.560       27.432

                    Observations           41,964        41,964       41,964        41,964       41,964       41,964




49
                  Panel B: Soybean
                   Sulfates (µg/m3 )        0.065        0.066         0.062        0.060         0.064        0.064
                                           (0.008)      (0.009)       (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.011)      (0.011)

                    F Stat                 14.741        10.162       18.192        10.807       19.086       15.633

                    Observations           34,944        34,944       34,944        34,944       34,944       34,944

     Note: We cluster standard errors at the crop reporting district level. We weight crop regressions by annual county-level acreage.
     Outcome for corn and soybean is log of crop yield per planted acre. We derive airborne sulfate measures from the APEEP
     atmospheric transport model using ARP-regulated power plant-level SO2 emissions as inputs. Crop yield per acre is total yield
     per acre divided by planted acres. The first stage of IV regressions corresponds to variations in the model in Panel A of Figure 2.
     Column (1) repeats our main instrument. Column (2) adds Phase II updates. Columns (3) and (4) follow a similar pattern, but
     interact our original instrument with boiler-level SO2 output in 1985. Columns (5) and (6) replace 1985 SO2 output with 1985
     heat output. See Section 7 for details.
                                         Table A-3
                    Reduced Form Estimates With Alternate Standard Errors

                              (1)          (2)              (3)          (4)         (5)
                            Baseline    Unweighted     State Cluster    Conley    Bootstrap


    Panel A: Corn
     SC X Post                -0.050       -0.056          -0.056        -0.056     -0.056
                             (0.014)      (0.011)         (0.014)       (0.016)    (0.026)

    Panel B: Soybean
     SC X Post                -0.048       -0.050          -0.050        -0.050     -0.050
                             (0.016)      (0.016)         (0.017)       (0.014)    (0.017)

Note: We weight crop regressions by annual county-level acreage. Outcome for corn and soybean
is log of crop yield per planted acre. We derive airborne sulfate measures from the APEEP
atmospheric transport model using ARP-regulated power plant-level SO2 emissions as inputs.
Baseline model in Column (1) corresponds to Column (3) of Table 2. Column (2) omits weights.
Column (3) clusters standard errors at the level of state. Column (4) uses geospatially correlated
Conley standard errors, using a radius of 200 miles. Column (5) uses bootstrapped standard
errors with 10,000 replications, stratified on years with replacement.




                                                50
                                           Table A-4
                                       Expanded Pollutants

                                          (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)      (5)
                                                  LUR Data              Monitor Data




             Panel A: Corn
              Sulfates (µg/m3 )                                0.055    0.023     0.026
                                                             (0.007)   (0.005)   (0.005)
              Airborne SO2 (LUR)         0.004      0.004      0.001
                                        (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)
              Airborne NO2 (LUR)                    -0.006    -0.006
                                                   (0.003)   (0.003)
              Airborne O3 (LUR)                     -0.003    -0.003
                                                   (0.001)   (0.001)
              Airborne SO2 (Monitor)                                              -0.008
                                                                                 (0.003)
              Airborne NO2 (Monitor)                                              0.004
                                                                                 (0.002)
              Airborne O3 (Monitor)                                               -1.107
                                                                                 (1.420)

              Clusters                    211       211       211        96        96
              Observations               41,964    41,964    41,964    11,180    11,180

             Panel B: Soybean
              Sulfates (µg/m3 )                                0.042    0.013     0.013
                                                             (0.007)   (0.004)   (0.004)
              Airborne SO2 (LUR)         0.002      0.003     -0.000
                                        (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)
              Airborne NO2 (LUR)                    0.002      0.001
                                                   (0.002)   (0.002)
              Airborne O3 (LUR)                     -0.004    -0.004
                                                   (0.002)   (0.001)
              Airborne SO2 (Monitor)                                              -0.001
                                                                                 (0.003)
              Airborne NO2 (Monitor)                                              0.000
                                                                                 (0.001)
              Airborne O3 (Monitor)                                               -5.276
                                                                                 (1.433)

              Clusters                    175       175       175       73        73
              Observations               34,944    34,944    34,944    8,320     8,320


Note: We weight crop regressions by annual county-level acreage. Outcome for corn and soybean
is log of crop yield per planted acre. We derive airborne sulfate measures from the APEEP
atmospheric transport model using ARP-regulated power plant-level SO2 emissions as inputs.
Monitor pollutant measures come from air monitor data we aggregate to the county level. Land
Use Regression (LUR) data are from the Center for Air, Climate and Energy Solutions (CACES).
See Section 7.1 for details.
                                                  51
                                                               Figure A-1
                                       Correlation Between Airborne Sulfates and Sulfur Deposition
                  80          60
   Sulfur Deposition (lbs/acre)
  20          40  0




                                   0                    10                         20                30
                                                                                    3
                                                             Airborne Sulfates (µg/m )



Note: We generate predicted sulfate levels using boiler-level SO2 emissions and the APEEP
atmospheric conversion matrix which takes as inputs SO2 and provides as output estimated
sulfates, which include sulfate and ammonium sulfate. Sulfur deposition data are from the Clean
Air Markets Division, Clean Air Status and Trends Network (CASTNET). Data shows raw values
across multiple sensors and multiple years with a simple correlation. We match deposition
monitors to atmospheric sulfates using county of monitor.




                                                                    52
                                          Figure A-2
                                Analysis Counties by Outcome


                         SO2                                   Sulfates




                         Corn                                    Soy




Note: Graphs shade counties used in our main regressions for each noted outcome east of 100
degrees longitude. See Section 3 for details.




                                              53
                                        Figure A-3
    County-Level Variation in Weighted Number of ARP Plants With Technology Upgrades


                          1982                                     1995




            (10,20]                                  (10,20]
            (5,10]                                   (5,10]
            (1,5]                                    (1,5]
            (.5,1]                                   (.5,1]
            [0,.5]                                   [0,.5]




                                              2007




                                 (10,20]
                                 (5,10]
                                 (1,5]
                                 (.5,1]
                                 [0,.5]




Note:.Our measure of treatment is the number of sulfur control boiler upgrades installed at
ARP-treated power plants, weighted by the APEEP atmospheric dispersion matrix for SO2
emissions to ambient sulfates, and multipled by 100,000 for ease of reading. See Section 4 for
details.




                                                54
                                                Figure A-4
                                Trends and Event Studies in Other Pollutants


                                  NO2                                                                              NO2




                                                                                                             2
                    20
                    18




                                                                                                             1
            Airborne NO2




                                                                                  Adjusted Mean Difference
                     16




                                                                                                             0
            14      12




                                                                                                             -1
                    10




                                                                                                             -2
                           1982
                           1983
                           1984
                           1985
                           1986
                           1987
                           1988
                           1989
                           1990
                           1991
                           1992
                           1993
                           1994
                           1995
                           1996
                           1997
                           1998
                           1999
                           2000
                           2001
                           2002
                           2003
                           2004
                           2005
                           2006
                           2007




                                            Year
                                                                                                                  1982
                                                                                                                  1983
                                                                                                                  1984
                                                                                                                  1985
                                                                                                                  1986
                                                                                                                  1987
                                                                                                                  1988
                                                                                                                  1989
                                                                                                                  1990
                                                                                                                  1991
                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                  1993
                                                                                                                  1994
                                                                                                                  1995
                                                                                                                  1996
                                                                                                                  1997
                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                                                                  1999
                                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                                  2001
                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                  2003
                                                                                                                  2004
                                                                                                                  2005
                                                                                                                  2006
                                                                                                                  2007
                             Low Exposure           High Exposure
                                                                                                                     Year



                                   O3                                                                              O3
                 .036




                                                                                                  .002
                 .034




                                                                                                  .001
          Airborne Ozone
                    .032




                                                                     Adjusted Mean Difference
                                                                                                  0
            .03




                                                                                                  -.001
                 .028




                                                                                                  -.002
                 .026
                           1982
                           1983
                           1984
                           1985
                           1986
                           1987
                           1988
                           1989
                           1990
                           1991
                           1992
                           1993
                           1994
                           1995
                           1996
                           1997
                           1998
                           1999
                           2000
                           2001
                           2002
                           2003
                           2004
                           2005
                           2006
                           2007



                                                                                                  -.003




                                           Year
                                                                                                                  1982
                                                                                                                  1983
                                                                                                                  1984
                                                                                                                  1985
                                                                                                                  1986
                                                                                                                  1987
                                                                                                                  1988
                                                                                                                  1989
                                                                                                                  1990
                                                                                                                  1991
                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                  1993
                                                                                                                  1994
                                                                                                                  1995
                                                                                                                  1996
                                                                                                                  1997
                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                                                                  1999
                                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                                  2001
                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                  2003
                                                                                                                  2004
                                                                                                                  2005
                                                                                                                  2006
                            Low Exposure           High Exposure
                                                                                                                  2007
                                                                                                                    Year




Note: Event studies show the annual marginal effect of an additional unit of our treatment
measure as we describe in Section 4. We use 1994, the year prior to the enforcement of the ARP,
as baseline for comparison, and treatment levels in 1995 as our measure of marginal treatment
intensity. All estimates include 95% confidence intervals, where we cluster standard errors by crop
reporting district. Emissions data are from EPA air quality monitors, which we aggregate to the
county level.




                                                                    55
                                                                                Figure A-5
                                                    Trends and Event Studies in Corn and Soybean Indemnity Collections


         Corn Insurance Collections Per Acre Corn Insurance Collections Per Acre




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                     2.5
                 Total Insurance Policies: Corn




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .5
                                          2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Adjusted Mean Difference
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                              1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.5
                     1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                     .5
                                                   1989
                                                           1990
                                                                   1991
                                                                           1992
                                                                                   1993
                                                                                           1994
                                                                                                   1995
                                                                                                           1996
                                                                                                                   1997
                                                                                                                           1998
                                                                                                                                   1999
                                                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                                                                                   2001
                                                                                                                                                           2002
                                                                                                                                                                   2003
                                                                                                                                                                           2004
                                                                                                                                                                                   2005
                                                                                                                                                                                           2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2007



                                                                                                                          Year                                                                                                                     -1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2007
                                                                                                   Low Exposure                                    High Exposure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Year



          Soybean Insurance Collections Per                                                                                                                                                                Soybean Insurance Collections Per
                        Acre                                                                                                                                                                                             Acre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                            2.5
          Total Insurance Policies: Soybean
                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Adjusted Mean Difference
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .5
                 1       1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                              .5
                                                  1989
                                                          1990
                                                                  1991
                                                                          1992
                                                                                  1993
                                                                                          1994
                                                                                                  1995
                                                                                                          1996
                                                                                                                  1997
                                                                                                                          1998
                                                                                                                                  1999
                                                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                                  2001
                                                                                                                                                          2002
                                                                                                                                                                  2003
                                                                                                                                                                          2004
                                                                                                                                                                                  2005
                                                                                                                                                                                          2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2007



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -.5




                                                                                                                         Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2007
                                                                                                  Low Exposure                                    High Exposure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Year




Note: Trend figures show outcome trends split by above vs. below the median level of treatment
intensity in 1995 for all available counties east of the 100th degree meridian. Event studies show
the annual marginal effect of an additional unit of our treatment measure as we describe in
Section 4. We use 1994, the year prior to the enforcement of the ARP, as baseline for comparison,
and treatment levels in 1995 as our measure of marginal treatment intensity. All estimates
include 95% confidence intervals, where we cluster standard errors by crop reporting district.
Insurance indemnities are from the USDA REIS data.




                                                                                                                                                                                                          56
                                                                        Figure A-6
                                                                    Extended Outcomes


                                                        Sulfates                                                                      Corn




                                                                                                                     .4
                                                  0




                                                                                                                     .2
                                                  -2




                                                                                          Adjusted Mean Difference
                       Adjusted Mean Difference




                                                                                                                     0
                                                  -4




                                                                                                                     -.2
                                                  -6




                                                                                                                     -.4
                                                  -8




                                                                                                                           1982
                                                                                                                           1983
                                                                                                                           1984
                                                                                                                           1985
                                                                                                                           1986
                                                                                                                           1987
                                                                                                                           1988
                                                                                                                           1989
                                                                                                                           1990
                                                                                                                           1991
                                                                                                                           1992
                                                                                                                           1993
                                                                                                                           1994
                                                                                                                           1995
                                                                                                                           1996
                                                                                                                           1997
                                                                                                                           1998
                                                                                                                           1999
                                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                                                           2001
                                                                                                                           2002
                                                                                                                           2003
                                                                                                                           2004
                                                                                                                           2005
                                                                                                                           2006
                                                                                                                           2007
                                                                                                                           2008
                                                                                                                           2009
                                                                                                                           2010
                                                                                                                           2011
                                                                                                                           2012
                                                                                                                           2013
                                                                                                                           2014
                                                                                                                           2015
                                                                                                                           2016
                                                                                                                           2017
                                                       1982
                                                       1983
                                                       1984
                                                       1985
                                                       1986
                                                       1987
                                                       1988
                                                       1989
                                                       1990
                                                       1991
                                                       1992
                                                       1993
                                                       1994
                                                       1995
                                                       1996
                                                       1997
                                                       1998
                                                       1999
                                                       2000
                                                       2001
                                                       2002
                                                       2003
                                                       2004
                                                       2005
                                                       2006
                                                       2007
                                                       2008
                                                       2009
                                                       2010
                                                       2011
                                                       2012
                                                       2013
                                                       2014
                                                       2015
                                                       2016
                                                       2017




                                                             Year                                                                        Year



                                                        Soybean                                                            Log Crop Receipts Per Acre
                                                                                                          .4
                                       .2
                                       .1




                                                                             Adjusted Mean Difference
          Adjusted Mean Difference




                                                                                                          .2
                                       0




                                                                                                          0
                                       -.1




                                                                                                          -.2
                                       -.2




                                                                                                                           1982
                                                                                                                           1983
                                                                                                                           1984
                                                                                                                           1985
                                                                                                                           1986
                                                                                                                           1987
                                                                                                                           1988
                                                                                                                           1989
                                                                                                                           1990
                                                                                                                           1991
                                                                                                                           1992
                                                                                                                           1993
                                                                                                                           1994
                                                                                                                           1995
                                                                                                                           1996
                                                                                                                           1997
                                                                                                                           1998
                                                                                                                           1999
                                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                                                           2001
                                                                                                                           2002
                                                                                                                           2003
                                                                                                                           2004
                                                                                                                           2005
                                                                                                                           2006
                                                                                                                           2007
                                                                                                                           2008
                                                                                                                           2009
                                                                                                                           2010
                                                                                                                           2011
                                                                                                                           2012
                                                       1982
                                                       1983
                                                       1984
                                                       1985
                                                       1986
                                                       1987
                                                       1988
                                                       1989
                                                       1990
                                                       1991
                                                       1992
                                                       1993
                                                       1994
                                                       1995
                                                       1996
                                                       1997
                                                       1998
                                                       1999
                                                       2000
                                                       2001
                                                       2002
                                                       2003
                                                       2004
                                                       2005
                                                       2006
                                                       2007
                                                       2008
                                                       2009
                                                       2010
                                                       2011
                                                       2012
                                                       2013
                                                       2014
                                                       2015
                                                       2016
                                                       2017




                                                            Year                                                                        Year




Note: Event studies show the annual marginal effect of an additional unit of our treatment
measure as we describe in Section 4. We use 1994, the year prior to the enforcement of the ARP,
as baseline for comparison, and treatment levels in 1995 as our measure of marginal treatment
intensity. All estimates include 95% confidence intervals, where we cluster standard errors by crop
reporting district. We derive atmospheric sulfate projections using the APEEP transport model.
Corn and soybean outcomes are log of yield per planted acre from the USDA NASS. Crop
receipts are from BEA data and are divided by total crop acreage from the Census of Agriculture.
We linearly impute between-COA crop acreage at the county-level.




                                                                           57
Appendix B           Sulfur as an Input and the Marginal Product

Despite its importance in the growth process, prior to the ARP testing yielded little gains
from the use of sulfur fertilizers, potentially because the sulfur deposition vector provided
sufficient baseline levels. Morrison (2009) notes research in the 1970s and 80s showed little
gains to application of additional sulfur, suggesting sulfur as an input had a low marginal
product. Figure B-1 illustrates a basic model for the marginal productivity of sulfur. If, after
sufficient ground sulfur, additional application yields no gains, the marginal productivity of
sulfur eventually zero and yields are unchanged even with additional application. After the
ARP, the sulfur flow decreased due to lower deposition, pushing the marginal product up
into a region of positive gains.

Appendix B.1       Sulfur Deficiencies and Agricultural Productivity Before the
                   Acid Rain Program

Agricultural science suggests both the stock and flow of sulfur are important. Crops draw soil
sulfur, which needs replenishment to maintain high growth yields. Sulfur loss can also occur
through water drainage and irrigation, which can be more of a problem in high drainage soils.
Productive regions may start with large amounts of ground sulfur, but absent replenishment,
could lose productivity over time due to sulfur deficiencies. Such deficiencies appear as
stunted growth and yellowed leaves due to a lack of chlorophyll coloring (Sawyer, 2004;
Stevens et al., 2002).
   While there is no consensus regarding the association between the ARP and sulfur de-
ficiencies, a 2007 North Carolina State University report from the College of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, SoilFacts: Sulfur Fertilization of North Carolina Crops, specifically notes,
"Today [sulfur] deficiency may be more of a concern due to several factors that farmers may
not have considered: 1) tighter air quality standards for atmospheric emissions mean less




                                              58
sulfur falls onto the landscape [. . . ]".34 Through this channel, in the absence of adaptive
behavior, ARP-associated reductions in soil-level sulfur flows may lead to reduced output.
   Research from the 1970s and 1980s found little benefit to using sulfur fertilizer (Mor-
rison, 2009). By the mid-2000s, experiments suggested a newly-found positive relationship
between additional sulfur and yields for most crops studied (Camberato, Maloney and Cas-
teel, 2012), presenting a shift from prior findings that sulfur levels were sufficiently high
without additional fertilizers (Sawyer et al., 2009). In addition to the ARP, a number of
industry changes could explain shifts in baseline sulfur flows. Adoption of newer fertilizer
and pesticide technologies, both with decreased sulfur content compared to older versions,
removed a common flow of ground sulfur over time. Field burning, now less common, was
another potential mechanism for returning sulfur to the soil for the following season.35
   Sulfur flow also came in the form of acid raid and general sulfuric deposition, which
decreased substantially with the CAAA. As of yet, there is little work on how the CAAA,
and specifically the ARP, affected agricultural through this channel. The EPA considered
the effect the program had via benefits of O3 reductions, and estimated gains in crop yields
between 1990 and 2010 valued at approximately $7.5 billion due to reductions in O3 (see the
Appendix of EPA (1999)). In a follow-up 2008 report, the EPA further discussed theoretical
effects of sulfur and oxides of nitrogen on plants, but did not expand models to the assessment
of the ARP due to a lack of valuation studies linking said pollutants to the productivity of
agricultural land (EPA, 2008). Extension literature began writing of a potential link between
the ARP and sulfur deficiencies during the late 2000s. The following quotes (from reports
by the Purdue University Department of Agronomy, the Cornell University Cooperative
Extension, and North Carolina State University) show a recent move to the hypothesis of a
potential link between the ARP and reduced sulfur:
  34
     Extension report E07-50255 , available online at http://www.soil.ncsu.edu/publications/
Soilfacts/AG-439-63W.pdf.
  35
     "The Skinny of Sulfur", Agronomy Insider, 3/05/2015.



                                              59
       Sulfur deficiency of corn and other crops may be becoming more prevalent because
       less [sulphur] is deposited from the troposphere to the soil due to reductions in
       power plant [sulphur] emissions. ("Sulfur Deficiency in Corn", 2012)36

       Since the Clean Air Act was passed in 1970, emissions of sulfur dioxide have
       decreased dramatically resulting in reduced sulfur deposition in many parts of
       the state. ("Sulfur for Field Crops", 2007))37

       There are several factors that have resulted in the increasing number of cases
       where sulfur is being diagnosed as deficient or limiting in young corn plants.
       First, there is the fact that we have had an extended period of frequent and
       intense rainfall events starting in the fall of 2002 and continuing through the
       spring of 2003. Since sulfur is a mobile nutrient and is water soluble, this sulfur
       in the upper soil profile (top 2 to 4 inches) has been leached into the lower rooting
       zone. The reduction in sulfur emissions brought about by the clean air act means
       that these same rainfall events are not replacing the sulfur leached [. . . ] ("Sulfur
       Deficiency Symptoms in Emerging Corn, 2003)38

       Yellow striping on corn leaves is more prevalent this year than in the past, possibly
       because of sulfur deficiency in the soil, says a Purdue Extension soil fertility
       specialist.
       Yellow, green-yellow or yellow-white striping on the leaves of corn plants can
       indicate a variety of nutrient deficiencies or other damage, said Jim Camberato.
       Analysis of soil and tissue samples shows that many cases of striping are due to
       sulfur deficiency.
       "We used to get quite a bit of sulfur from rainfall. The power plants would burn
       coal that had sulfur in it, so sulfur would be deposited in rainfall or absorbed
       directly from the air by the soil," Camberato said. "But over the last 20-25
       years, these emissions have been reduced, so perhaps now the amounts in rainfall
       and atmosphere deposition are low enough that plants are not getting enough
       that way anymore." ("Soil fertility specialist says yellow striping in corn may be
       linked to sulfur deficiency", 2016)

Appendix B.2        Trends in Agriculture Around the Time of the ARP

Figure B-2 shows the long-run trend in both corn and soybean output across time -- in
both cases, yields per acre have been regularly increasing. Around the time of the ARP,
  36
     Camberato, Maloney and Casteel (2012)
  37
     Place et al. (2007)
  38
     http://www.ces.ncsu.edu/plymouth/cropsci/docs/sulfur.html.


                                                60
productivity and prices were volatile both nationally and globally. Figure B-3 shows the
global price of corn and soybean across time (in 2015 dollars). Weather drove supply losses
and price spikes in the 1990s, as did sharp changes in demand on global markets. China
left the corn export market in 1994, leading to speculative price increases. By early 2000,
prices had returned to 1994 levels (Stevens, 1999). Our research design controls for these
confounders to the extent they affect all areas in a similar fashion over time. There was
a drought in 1991 and a combination of freezes, unusual rainfall, a Midwestern flood, a
drought, and insects in 1993 (Kliesen, 1994; Lott, 1994). A high-production year followed in
1994, but yields fell again in 1995 due to heat waves and late planting seasons. Starting in
1996, yields stabilized, followed by a number of consistently high-yield years (Stevens, 1999).




                                              61
                                                                             Figure B-1
                                                                  Potential Model of Sulfur Inputs


                                                               Sulfur Levels and Marginal Products




                           Marginal Product of Sulfur Inputs
                                                                            Post-ARP                        Pre-ARP




                                                                                            Sulfur (fertilizers + deposition)

                                                                    Sulfur Levels and Outputs
                           Crop Yield per Acre




                                                                            Post-ARP                        Pre-ARP




                                                                                            Sulfur (fertilizers + deposition)




Note: Panel A shows potential relationship between the marginal product of sulfur inputs and
sulfur levels from both applied fertilizers and provision via deposition. Panel B shows potential
relationship between the output and sulfur levels from both applied fertilizers and provision via
deposition. "Pre-ARP" and "Post-ARP" present potential levels corresponding with pre- and
post-regulatory soil sulfur levels in a field.




                                                                                       62
                                                                     Figure B-2
                                                         Historical Log Annual Crop Yield


                                                                               Corn
                                5       4.5
                    Average Log Yield/Acre
                             4  3.5
                                3




                                              1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                                                                    Year

                                                                            Soybean
                                4
                    Average Log Yield/Acre
                      2         1      3




                                              1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                                                                    Year




Note: Historic crop data are in log yield per planted acre. Data come from the U.S. Department
of Agriculture's National Agricultural Statistical Service.




                                                                                 63
                                                                            Figure B-3
                                                             Historical Global Prices for Corn and Soy
                                     800
                                     600
  Log Price Per Metric Ton ($2015)
                                     400
                                     200
                                     0




                                           1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011
                                                                                     Time

                                                                             Corn              Soybean




Note: Global price data come from the International Monetary Fund historic primary commodity
data and are inflated to 2015 dollars.




                                                                                64
Appendix C          Cost Calculations

Our primary independent variable is airborne sulfates as predicted using the APEEP at-
mospheric transport model. This includes both SO4 and (NH4)2SO4. To convert this to a
measure of ground deposition of SO4, we use data from the EPA Clean Air Markets Divi-
sion, Clean Air Status and Trends Network (CASTNET) Total Deposition data. We merge
ground deposition monitors to air sulfate measures using monitor county information. We
then run the following regression, which includes year fixed effects, county fixed effects, and
a county-specific linear year trend:




                    SO4 = sulf ates + year + 1        2
                                             county + county Xtrend.




We find  = 0.6835, which implies each additional µg/m3 of airborne sulfates correlates with
an additional 0.68 pounds of ground SO4 deposition.
   To convert this reduced SO4 to reduced crop yields, we use data on how much sulfur each
crop removes from the soil -- our assumption is that removing S deposition is equivalent to
preventing crop take-up of the required sulfur. The Purdue University Soil Fertility Update
(July 11, 2017) notes that soybean removes about 0.17 pounds of sulfur per bushels of grain,
and corn grain is around 0.05 pounds per bushel. This suggests that each µg/m3 of airborne
sulfates lost reduces yields per acre by:


                           0.68/0.05 = 13.6 corn bushels per acre

                           0.68/0.17 = 4 soybean bushels per acre


   To calculate replacement costs, we use data on fertilizer use and price from the Economic
Research Service in the United States Department of Agriculture. While they do not have


                                              65
direct data on pure sulfur costs, they do track ammonium sulfate, which is 24% sulfur.
We assume to replace a pound of sulfur, producers must purchase 4.17 (1/0.24) pounds of
ammonium sulfate. To find average cost per county to replace lost sulfur, we multiply the
price of ammonium sulfate by the lost sulfur per acre by the number of acres for each relevant
crop. This provides us with an approximate county-level measure of the replacement cost of
lost sulfur.
   To calculate lost crop receipts, we first repeat our primary reduced form regressions using
levels of corn and soybean yields per acre. We find a per-unit reduction of 3.99 corn bushels
per acre and 1.61 soybean bushels per acre. As pricing data are often in tons, we convert
our bushel measure to tons: data suggest approximately 40 bushels per ton for corn and 37
bushels per ton for soybean. This implies the average county lost approximately 0.04 tons
of corn yield per acre and 0.02 tons of soybean yield per acre. To obtain total lost revenues,
we multiply these values by the price per ton in a given year and the number of acres in a
given county-year.




                                             66
