                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE VALUE OF EMPLOYER-SPONSORED HEALTH INSURANCE

                                       Casey B. Mulligan

                                      Working Paper 28590
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28590


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




I appreciate discussions on this topic with Tom Philipson and Kevin M. Murphy. This project,
financially supported by Cigna, uses only publicly available data. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Value of Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 28590
March 2021
JEL No. D40,D71,H30,I13,J32

                                          ABSTRACT

Based on published estimates of its price elasticity of demand and of tax wedges, as well as the
method of revealed preference, I estimate that the annual social value of ESI is about $1.5 trillion
beyond what policyholders, their employers, and taxpayers pay for it. The private component of
that value, which in some respects is the other side of "job lock," derives in part from group
plans, with the group determined by many characteristics other than the demand for healthcare.
With voluntary groups formed this way, adverse risk selection is reduced, the groups can be
effective at obtaining substantial discounts and rebates for their members, and division of labor
employed in shopping for health providers. ESI is also a mechanism for employers to act on their
incentives for a healthy and productive workforce. External effects include tax externalities (in
both directions), encouraging work, and easing government expenditure obligations by helping to
prevent people from going without health insurance.


Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28590
   I.        Introduction

        Employer-sponsored health insurance (ESI) is over a trillion-dollar market with about
160 million Americans (a majority) participating as plan members, of which about 80 million are
policy holders and the remainder family members of policy holders. The policies are valuable
not only to employers and employees, but society generally. The purpose of this paper is to
estimate the social value of ESI and its components. Value in this paper is relative to a baseline
in which ESI does not exist and consumers must instead choose between individual-market
plans, existing government plans, and uninsured status.
        The social value of ESI is the sum of private value and external value. Private value is
the benefit that an individual family obtains from its access to ESI, whereas the external value is
the benefit the same family obtains from the access that other Americans have to ESI. External
value comes from the effect of ESI on work and thereby tax revenue and business formation, its
effect on the number of people insured, and its effect on the number of people on subsidized
insurance.
        Two basic approaches are used to estimate private value in Section II of this paper. The
first approach is revealed preference, which utilizes information on historical changes in the
price of ESI and thereby the number of persons that remain on ESI if its price increased to
various levels. As long as the underlying data is reliable, revealed preference methods carry a lot
of weight in policy evaluation "because revealed preference data are based on actual decisions,
where market participants enjoy or suffer the consequences of their decisions" (Office of
Management and Budget 2003, p. 24). In other words, revealed preference shows a product to
be (privately) valuable only to the extent that the product passes the market test.
        The second approach is to separately estimate components of private value.            One
attractive feature of ESI is that it consists of group plans, with the group determined by many
characteristics other than the demand for healthcare. With groups formed this way, adverse risk
selection is reduced whereas individual-market plans require compromises to plan design or
additional expenditure on administrative costs in order to manage the distribution of risks among
the members of the plan. Diverse groups can also be effective at obtaining substantial discounts
and rebates for their members. Another advantage of joining an ESI plan is that a single
employer can represent multiple employees in shopping for and enrolling in plans, thereby


                                                 1
reducing consumer effort. This is especially valuable for lower-income or lower-skilled workers
who would have difficulty navigating the healthcare system on their own.
        Employers and employees work together, and employers want employees to be healthy,
particularly in the context of diseases that can spread around a workplace.                     Even beyond
infectious diseases, employers have incentives for their workforce to remain healthy and
therefore productive.
        In taking both of these approaches, this paper assumes that decisions about work and
coverage maximize the joint surplus of employers and employees.1 This means, among other
things, that insurance premiums paid by employers on behalf of employees nonetheless reflect
the value that employees place on health insurance because the employer could be compensating
the employee with additional salary instead of premium payments.2
        Section II presents the revealed preference estimates of the private value of ESI, finding
that it significantly exceeds what employers, employees, and (implicitly) taxpayers pay for it.
Section III looks in more detail at components of the private value. Section IV estimates the
social value of ESI, which is the sum of the private value and the external value. The external
value is about $0.7 trillion annually, putting the total social value at about $1.5 trillion beyond
what ESI costs annually.




1
 This is the dominant framework in labor economics, as with Lazear (1979).
2
 The composition of compensation between cash and health insurance has tax consequences, which are part of the
analysis in this paper.

                                                       2
    II.      ESI passes the market test

          Because markets allocate goods with prices, the prices reflect valuations and costs by
market participants. Specifically, all units sold in the market have values (to buyers) of at least
the price paid, otherwise the buyers would not have purchased. If we observe the market two
times separately, each time with the same set of buyer valuations, once with a low price and a
second time with a high price, then the extra units sold in the former market are those units with
valuations between the two prices. The units sold in the latter market are those units valued at
least as much as its price (the greater of the two prices). This is the principle of revealed
preference.3
          With enough different price observations, including prices all the way up to the "choke
price" where no units are sold, any and all units sold in the market can be valued. Namely, any
sale with a buyer value of, say, one, occurs at a price of one (or less) but does not occur at any
price greater than one. In terms of a demand curve, we order the units sold in descending order
of value and their combined value (to buyers) is the area under the demand curve. The various
price observations indicate the position and shape of this demand curve. In practice, we have
only a finite number of observations and therefore applications of the principle of revealed
preference must interpolate and extrapolate the values corresponding to the unobserved price
points. For the purpose of interpolating and extrapolating values, this paper uses two alternative
demand curves: linear and logistic.
          Both value and the market demand curve refer to an alternative to purchasing the good
being valued. For the purposes of revealed preference valuation, both must refer to the same
alternative. For this paper, the valuation of interest is the aggregate value of ESI, which means
that the demand curve appropriate for revealed preference analysis is the market demand curve
for ESI where buyers have the alternatives of individual policies, participating in a government
plan, or being uninsured (whichever of the remaining alternatives is "next best").
          The market demand curve corresponding to the valuation question posed by this paper is
similar to the price-quantity relationships revealed in a large number of empirical studies of ESI


3
 Koo (1963) pioneered empirical analysis with revealed preference methods, building on theoretical advances
dating back to Samuelson (1938) and Houthakker (1950). OMB (2003, p. 20) adds that "there is a large and well-
developed literature on revealed preference in the peer-reviewed, applied economics literature." Note that a special
case of revealed preference, "hedonic analysis," is also referenced as "revealed preference" but this paper uses the
phrase in the broader sense.

                                                         3
using variation across firms in their workers' marginal tax rates.                        Conforming with the
conceptual experiment, the workers populating the empirical studies do not have the alternative
to be a policyholder at another employer because they carry their tax rates with them. Their
spouses or partners, perhaps working at another employer, would also have similar tax rates
(although could be different as to disposition of the payroll tax cap). However, dual-earning
couples working for different employers would not experience the full estimated offer elasticity
from an aggregate change in tax rates because consumers can switch to joining a spouse's ESI.4
On the other hand, many of the empirical studies do not attempt to measure the effect of ESI
prices on the amount spent by each policyholder, which is another margin by which market
participants can substitute away from ESI when it gets more expensive.5 In summary, the
demand curve corresponding to this paper's valuation question has about the same price
elasticity, and reflects about the same consumer surplus, as the demand curves estimated in the
literature.
         A review of more than 80 empirical studies of the price elasticity of the demand for
health insurance finds that the local price elasticity of employer offer is about -0.6 (Lui and
Chollet 2006). The local price elasticity of ESI demand is the sum of the local elasticity of offer
and the local price elasticity of take-up conditional on offer, which the same review finds to be
small (typically, closer to zero than -0.1). This paper therefore takes the local price elasticity of
ESI demand to be -2/3.
         A linear demand curve with a local price elasticity of -2/3 has a choke price that is 150
percent above the price that consumers normally pay net of tax subsidies.6 In other words, the
linear assumption says that a 150 percent increase in price would eliminate all surplus and
demand from the market, which arguably understates the values of those ESI members with the
highest valuations. This is why the linear demand assumption likely understates the value of
ESI.7 Nevertheless, this assumption says that the private value of ESI is 175 percent of (i.e., 75


4
  They might not experience the full spending elasticity, either, because categories of coverage dropped by the
employer could be picked up by a spouse.
5
  Gruber and Lettau (2004) measure the amount spent on ESI by an employer conditional on offering ESI, which
reflects the product of the propensity of employees to take up the employer's offer, the share of premiums paid by
employer, and the amount spent per policyholder.
6
  For any linear demand curve with local price elasticity -h, the formula for the choke price is (1+h)/h times the
price normally paid.
7
  The conceptual experiment of eliminating ESI can be understood as the effects of raising the price of ESI so high
that the choke point of the ESI demand curve is reached. In contrast, the empirical literature examines more local

                                                         4
percent more than) what is paid for ESI net of tax subsidies. In the aggregate, this is about $0.8
trillion annually. The first column of Table 1 summarizes the results for the linear demand
method.


Table 1. Revealed Preference Estimates of the Value of ESI

Functional form                                                  Linear Log-Logistic
Choke price, as ratio to normal price                               2.5       None
Private surplus
  as percentage of consumer spending                                75%               84%
  $ trillions per year                                               0.8               0.9

Parameters
Local price elasticity                                                     -0.67
Annual consumer spending on ESI, $ trillions
  Before tax subsidy                                                        1.26
  After tax subsidy                                                         1.04
Share of FT workers with ESI, 2015                                          0.83



Sources: Lui and Chollet (2006), 2018 National Health Expenditure
Accounts Table 5-6, Actuarial Research Corporation (2017), Carroll and
Miller (2018), Long and Marquis (1999), author's calculations from the CPS
Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups.

        The linear demand model assumes that the value of ESI is uniformly distributed in the
population. Because a family's value of ESI is related to its income, willingness to avoid hassle
costs, and their value of health, the cross-sectional distribution of ESI values may be shaped
more like the earnings distribution, which is approximately log-logistic. Figure 1 graphs both the
log-logistic (green) and the linear (blue) demand curves supporting the results from the Table.
Both demand curves have the same price elasticity in the neighborhood of normal ESI prices in
order to represent the empirical estimates published in the aforementioned literature. More




price changes. As typical in the valuation of goods and services, the demand curve can be extrapolated from the
observed data to the choke point by assuming a functional form.

                                                         5
generally, because the demand for ESI is not highly price elastic (demand is significant even at
higher prices), there must be a significant consumer surplus from the existence of ESI.8




Figure 1 Two demand curves used for revealed preference estimation



         The second column of Table 1 shows results for the log-logistic model, calibrated so that
at normal prices 83 percent of full-time employees are enrolled in ESI, as has been the case
recently. The private value of ESI is 184 percent of (i.e., 84 percent more than) what is paid for
ESI net of tax subsidies.9 In the aggregate, this is almost $1 trillion annually.
         As noted previously, Table 1 and Figure 1 refer to the value of ESI relative to the next
best alternative that has been present in the marketplace, which would be a particular individual-
market plan, a particular government program, or being uninsured. The next best alternative
could be alternating between plans, programs, or uninsured over time. Because the next best
alternative itself has value relative to the third best, fourth best, etc., forcing an individual to




8
  The price elasticities estimates cited by Lui and Chollet (2006) are routinely used for policy analysis, e.g., by
Congressional Budget Office (2007), Goldman, Jena and Lakdawalla (2010), Gravelle (2017), and Mahoney (2015).
9
  Note that the standard deviation of log ESI values in this calibration of the log-logistic model is 0.14, which is
much less than the standard deviation of log earnings. Calibrations of the log-logistic model with greater variability
show greater surplus. See also Appendix I.

                                                            6
replace her ESI with a particular individual-market plan or government program than is not next
best for her would cost more than indicated in Table 1 and Figure 1.


     III.      Sources of Value

            The significant value of ESI is apparent not only from worker's purchasing decisions, but
also characteristics of the product itself. ESI is connected with healthcare and health, which are
themselves valuable. ESI and its managers at the employer obtains substantial discounts and
rebates and acquires valuable expertise on behalf of their members. A healthy workplace is
important to both employers and employees. Moreover, the characteristics of ESI adapt and
improve over time as insurers compete for employers who themselves compete for employees.
This section provides more details on these ESI characteristics.


III.A. The Value of Health
            Tremendous progress has been made on heart disease, infant sickness, and other erstwhile
killers, adding tens of trillions of dollars to national wealth (Murphy and Topel 2006). Because a
shifting emphasis on the health sector is a natural consequence of economic growth (Hall and
Jones 2007), ESI becomes increasingly important over time as a means of financing that sector.
This paper does not claim that ESI is synonymous with healthcare or health, because healthcare
can alternatively be financed through individual-market plans, government programs, or paying
cash directly to providers.10 At the same time, there is a relationship between the value of ESI
and the value of health because ESI is the way that most Americans finance their healthcare.
Furthermore, studies have connected ESI with health through, for example, prevention,
detection, and management of chronic disease. It should therefore be no surprise that the
average worker puts a lot of value on ESI.
            Having good workers on the payroll may be the most important action a business can
take, given that the majority of value added in the economy comes from labor. As part of
attracting and retaining good workers who value ESI participation, employers benefit from
offering ESI, especially in a competitive labor market. A 2017 survey of businesses found that
95 percent of employers offering coverage do so either out of "a sense of responsibility towards

10
  Health is not synonymous with healthcare because important elements of health are the efforts of individuals and
families, as distinct from health providers.

                                                         7
employees" or "staying competitive with other companies" (Mercatus Center at George Mason
University 2017). The businesses also proved to be "knowledgeable about the health plans
offered by competitors, about the health plans that current employees had on their previous job,
and about the current health plans of former employees" (Gallen and Mulligan 2018).




III.B. Paying Less for Healthcare: the Value of Group Purchasing
       ESI is a procompetitive force in healthcare markets, where providers frequently have
market power.      Some of the provider market power derives from patents, especially in
pharmaceuticals. Compliance with Affordable Care Act regulations spawned a rapid pace of
hospital acquisitions of physician practices and other hospitals (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services 2018). State regulations such as "certificate of need," "scope of practice," and
"network adequacy" requirements limit competition among hospitals, between healthcare
occupations, and between states.
       There are calls for deregulation to facilitate entry into, and competition between, health
provider professions.    But until that happens, competition can still be enhanced by group
purchasing and negotiated discounts. ESI does exactly that, in some of the same ways that
Costco, Sam's Club, and other buyers' clubs obtain manufacturer discounts on behalf of their
members.
       To further appreciate the social value of group purchasing, it helps to recall how sellers
exercise market power: by restricting the quantity that they sell. A seller would like to raise its
price ­ charge more ­ but cannot do so without restricting quantity.            The Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) is perhaps the most famous sellers' cartel. OPEC
exercises its market power by limiting the oil production of each of its members. Healthcare
providers do that too, with, for example, hospital regulators using "certificates of need" to
restrict the quantity of hospital beds in the market or professional associations limiting the
number of spots in certified medical schools (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
2018). Exercising market power delivers more profits when the sellers face a demand curve that
is less price sensitive, so that small reductions in quantity can sustain large price increases.
       Buyers' clubs induce sellers to limit their exercise of market power by presenting them
with a more price-elastic demand curve (Jaffe, et al. 2019). The members of Costco may not

                                                  8
have a particularly price-elastic demand for particular brands of, say, skateboards. Skateboard
manufacturers know this and hike their prices when dealing with consumers individually. But
Costco limits the number of manufacturers who can sell to their members to one or two
manufacturers pricing the lowest. In effect, each manufacturer bidding to be in Costco faces a
very price-elastic demand from the club because a small increase in price will cost her all of her
sales through Costco. With a low price of skateboards in the store, Costco members buy more
skateboards than they would if there were no buyers' clubs in that market. Quantity discounts
obtained by buyers' clubs serve much the same purpose (Murphy, Snyder and Topel 2014).
Either way, lower prices and higher quantities are the proof that buyers' clubs are
procompetitive.
         Sheer size of a buyers' club can also push prices lower, but the sheer size effect is
anticompetitive because a buyers' club dominating the market restricts the amount that it
purchases in order to squeeze a lower price out of the sellers. Lower prices and lower quantities
are proof that the practices of a dominant buyer are anticompetitive.11 This "monopsony"
approach to purchasing healthcare is taken by "single-payer" countries, which restrict the
quantity of healthcare by withholding treatments from particular demographic groups or having a
narrower range of available drugs (Council of Economic Advisers March 2019). Results of
monopsony in healthcare markets include shorter survival times for cancer, and fewer intensive
beds available during the COVID-19 pandemic.12
         In much the same way that Costco excludes skateboard manufacturers and restaurants
exclude soda vendors, ESI plans exclude health providers in order to get their members a greater
quantity of healthcare at a lower price. "Narrow networks" are one way this is done: the plan
encourages its members with low coinsurance rates to use a select list of hospitals and doctors
that have negotiated especially low rates with the plan.13 As an article in the New England
Journal of Medicine explained, "providers that do not face the threat of exclusion [from the plan

11
   Restaurant purchases of soda are an example of how buyers' clubs can be effective even on a small scale.
Restaurants, any one of which has purchases that are a tiny fraction of the overall soda market, typically tell Coca-
Cola and PepsiCo that only one of the companies' products will be served in the restaurant, to be determined by
which offers the lowest price (Klein and Murphy 2008). The result is sometimes a discount that is so significant that
the restaurant provides consumers "free refills" (i.e., a large quantity of soda).
12
   See Philipson et al (2012) on cancer survival times. Rhodes et al (2012) measures per-capita intensive care beds
around the world. The lowest four are all single-payer countries. Another difference between single-payer (or other
large government programs) and ESI is that each workplace can have different ESI, tailored to their specific needs
and circumstances.
13
   The narrow networks used by plans for purchases of pharmaceuticals are known as "drug formularies."

                                                         9
network] have little reason to temper their demands for higher prices" (Howard 2014, p. 592).
The article further notes that the consumer benefit from narrow networks is greatest when
providers have market power to exercise, "as providers consolidate into large health systems,
exclusive networks will provide insurers with their only recourse for limiting increases in
payment rates."
         Just as Costco membership has little relation to skateboard-brand preference, or
restaurant choice little relation with soda-brand preference, working for a business has at most a
weak relation with the demand for health insurance and its attributes. The diversity of the group
is what allows the group purchasing to deliver so much value. If all of the patrons of a restaurant
strongly preference Coke, Coke would have little reason to offer the restaurant a discount for an
exclusive position on its menu knowing that customer demand alone would sustain that
position.14
         The value created by group purchasing in healthcare has been significant. In 2011,
private insurers (which are primarily ESI) obtained hospital discounts of at least 40 percent
(Cooper, et al. 2019).            Rebates of 12 percent were negotiated from prescription-drug
manufacturers on behalf of private insurers.15 These observations suggest that the total amount
of rebates and discounts obtained by ESI plans likely exceeds $100 billion annually. These
amounts are not entirely benefits for consumers because, as explained previously, they are
obtained by increasing the purchases from particular healthcare providers and reducing
purchases from others (with an overall net increase).16 Nevertheless the amounts are good
proxies for the combined value of group purchasing to plans and providers (Jaffe, et al. 2019).




III.C. Health in the Workplace
         As the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) explains, the "workplace is an
important setting for health protection, health promotion, and disease prevention programs. On

14
   In the context of health insurance, a diverse group also helps reduce the costs of "adverse risk selection," which in
extreme circumstances can leave a large fraction of the population uninsured (Hackmann, Kolstad and Kowalski
2015, Bundorf, Levin and Mahoney 2012).
15
   The available data is for 2016, from Roehrig (2018).
16
   Employers often give employees a choice of plans, some of which have narrower networks and lower premiums
and others broader networks and higher premiums. An employee choosing a plan with narrower networks is trading
the additional discounts and rebates (reflected in plan premiums) against the additional provider choice in the
broader network.

                                                          10
average, Americans working full-time spend more than one-third of their day, five days per week
at the workplace." (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2016). The World Health
Organization adds that "occupational safety and health can contribute to improving the
employability of workers..." (World Health Organization 2020). The CDC and others cite
workplace health strategies such as tobacco-free campuses and coverage for preventative
screenings that ESI plans promote and offer (Black 2017, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention 2018a).
       Data collected by the CDC (2018a) indicate how employers help prevent, detect, and
manage chronic disease, especially among large employers where ESI is nearly ubiquitous.
Smoking cessation programs are particularly common prevention programs sponsored by
employers. In terms of detection, conditions screened through employer programs can include
blood pressure, blood cholesterol, diabetes, obesity, breast and other cancers, musculoskeletal
disorders, and depression. Employers have multiple incentives to help reduce chronic disease in
their workforce, including attracting and retaining employees who value such efforts and
reducing health claims that translate into premiums paid by employers and their employees. In
some occupations, such as trucking where goods need to be moved safely over road, poor health
among the employees will create regulatory challenges for the employer and a substandard
product for the consumer (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2018b).
       The workplace may be the best place for controlling the spread of contagious diseases
because employers and their insurers have incentives and can marshal necessary resources.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, Cigna (a provider of ESI) waived cost-sharing and co-pays for
"office visits, testing, and treatment..." as well as COVID-19 testing (Cigna 2020). They also
provided information and advice to clients as to how to safely open their workplaces.
       Although the COVID-19 pandemic is temporary, it has motivated changes in healthcare
that may enhance the value beyond what this paper estimates on the basis of historical data.
Most notable is adoption of telehealth by many health providers, which allows patients to receive
some of their healthcare "services from their doctors without having to travel to a healthcare
facility" (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 2020). Mehrotra, et al. (2020) find that
telehealth visits peaked in April 2020 at fourteen percent of all provider visits, from 0.1 percent
before March. That percentage remained above seven even in the most recent data (end of July).
As a cost of healthcare beyond payments to providers, travel to and from providers can be a

                                                11
significant barrier to receiving care (Leminen, Tykkyläinen and Laatikainen 2018, Nesbitt, et al.
2000). Reducing the travel costs thereby increases the value of insurance coverage that would
help pay providers.




III.D. Division of Labor and the Delegation of Insurance Decisions
       Psychology and economics studies have documented how many individuals can be
overwhelmed by information and the range of choices in many markets. Moreover, the costs
may not merely be psychic but also result in suboptimal decisions (Thaler and Sunstein 2009,
Kahneman 2011).
       At the same time, markets offer opportunities for specialization and division of labor.
Specific employees in a business, or its agents, can specialize in acquiring and processing
information about health providers as well as providing the administration for group purchasing
activities. Specialists can monitor employee experiences with specific providers and be watchful
for new providers and products. ESI is an especially common framework for engaging this kind
of specialization.
       Specialization in healthcare decisions has proven benefits. Kling et al (2008) find that
individuals make better choices about plans when relevant information has been acquired and
presented to them. Absent the specialization, Abaluck and Gruber (2011) find that choice errors
add 27 percent to insurance costs. In the context of health insurance for working-aged people,
that would be savings of almost $2,000 per covered life year. Those funds could be saved by
delegating information gathering and elements of decision-making to specialists motivated to
advance the interests of the insured.




III.E. Innovation and Competition
       It is easy to take the above sources of value for granted but, as in any market, valuable
goods and services are the result of innovation. Moreover, products are not static but evolve
over time as market participants attempt to improve them. ESI is a large and competitive market
in which employers (the buyers) seek the insurer that offers the most value to them and
employees. Employers themselves are competing for employees and ESI is an important part of

                                               12
that competition. Unfortunately, competition is largely ignored in many of the health insurance
"microsimulation" models used to evaluate health policy: "the employers in the microsimulation
models update their insurance offering without regard for what their competitors are doing." In
reality, "the evidence shows that employers offer fringe benefits on the basis of their
understanding of their competition, and not just characteristics of their current payroll."17




     IV.      The Social Value of ESI

           The benefits of ESI include an important external component that accrues outside the
factory gate. ESI is connected to work, which is not only important to working families, but also
society generally because of the tax revenue and business formation it creates. ESI also helps
prevent people from being without health insurance, which eases obligations on governments.
The social value of ESI is the sum of private value (Sections II and III) and external value.


IV.A. The Value of Work
           ESI, and the value it delivers to plan members, is connected to work. A person cannot
participate in ESI without working or having a family member who works.18 Eliminating ESI
would therefore reduce work by eliminating an important advantage of working.19 The average
worker losing ESI cannot just take his money to purchase something else with the same value
because, by definition, the worker leaves the ESI surplus behind. That is what it means for
Figure 1's demand curves to be above one: each dollar spent on ESI is worth more than the value
that the dollar would purchase elsewhere.


17
   Both quotes are from Gallen and Mulligan (2018, p. 78), referring to the Congressional Budget Office's Health
Insurance Simulation Model, RAND's Comprehensive Assessment of Reform Efforts, and other microsimulation
models reviewed by Remler, Zivin, and Glied (2004) and Buchmueller, Carey, and Levy (2013).
18
   Former employees sometimes participate in ESI after they retire or otherwise separate from their employer. For
example, 34 percent of non-elderly household heads and spouses unemployed in March 2012 were covered by their
former employer's plan (Mulligan 2015, Table 4.2). Opportunity to participate in ESI after an employment tenure
(spell), which for many workers is guaranteed by the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act and other
statutes, further adds to the value of the tenure. The guaranteed opportunities for continuation coverage are
sometimes forgotten by labor market commentators asserting that losing health insurance coverage is a consequence
of unemployment (Economic Policy Institute 2020).
19
   Many studies have documented effects of ESI on work. Mulligan (2015) reviews the studies, and provides the
example of "Mike Smith, who was working long hours in California as a district manager for a national auto parts
dealer. Despite wanting to help care for his grandchild and elderly in-laws, Mr. Smith kept his manager job into his
60s because he and his wife wanted the health insurance that came with it."

                                                        13
       The magnitudes of the work incentives are large. As shown in Table 2, if purchasing
coverage and paying out-of-pocket costs for self and a family member at the national average,
the median-wage worker spends about 30 percent of her compensation (which includes employer
payments of premium) on ESI. Reducing or eliminating her surplus from ESI would therefore
reduce the value of employment by a sizeable percentage. The ESI advantage of work is
disproportionate for the lower-middle class because ESI is a greater fraction of their
compensation: over 60 percent at half the median wage.


 Table 2. ESI Expenditure Shares at Various Points of the Wage Distribution
 Each worker is assumed to cover herself and one family member at the average cost per
 ESI life year

                                                                       Expenditure
 Worker with:                                                            Share
 Wage at half the median                                                      0.61
 Wage at the median                                                           0.30
 Wage at double the median                                                    0.15

 Note: The median refers to the population of workers at employers offering ESI, which
 was about $22 per hour in 2016.

 Source: Mulligan (2015, Chapter 4)

       Work is not only important to working families, but also society generally. Scholars
ranging from Michael Sandel to Charles Murray have documented the harm to families and
communities that comes from a lack of work. Sandel (2018) cautions against a "transition to a
world without work" for the erstwhile working class because it misses "the meaning of work and
its place in a good life." Murray (2013) links joblessness to reductions in civic engagement and
other forms of social capital. Case and Deaton (2017, pp. 428f) attribute higher rates of suicide
and fatal drug overdose in working class communities to their declining rates of employment and
marriage.
       Work directly generates about 80 percent of the tax revenue funding federal, state and
local governments. Work indirectly generates even more tax revenue and creates additional
business formation because few businesses can earn a profit or pay profits taxes without finding
the right personnel to join their workforce. The tax revenues from work help fund government

                                               14
programs and to keep tax rates lower. If ESI were eliminated, that would reduce work and
thereby the aforementioned social benefits.
         The tax- and profit-related external benefits from ESI are easiest to quantify because
eliminating ESI is analogous to putting a new tax on work. By reducing work, such a new tax
reduces profits and other tax revenues. The amount of the reduction per dollar of new tax is
known as the "marginal excess tax burden" (METB) (Dahlby 2008). The METB is widely used
in academic policy analysis and is recommended by the White House Office of Management and
Budget (1992, 2003) for regulatory impact analysis.20 Because the external effect of new tax
revenue is the product of the METB and the dollar amount of that revenue, this method suggests
that the external effect (in terms of profits and other tax revenues) of eliminating ESI is the
product of the METB and the private surplus from ESI ($0.8 to $0.9 trillion annually). Using a
METB of 0.5 in order to reflect the various markups and implicit taxes in the economy (CEA
2020), that puts the external effect of ESI at $0.4 trillion. This is net of the implicit tax subsidy
for ESI and does not count any value of the social capital effects of work that occur because ESI
is available.21 See Table 3.




20
  OMB (2019) recommends that more federal regulatory impact analyses use the METB.
21
  In other words, ESI annually creates about $0.6 trillion in profits and other tax revenues but at the same time, for
given amounts and composition of national income, reduces payroll and income tax revenues by about $0.2 trillion
because ESI premiums are excluded from the tax bases (U.S. Department of Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis 2018).
The $0.4 trillion cited in the text is the net of these two effects.

                                                         15
Table 3. The Social Value of ESI
$ trillions per year, unless otherwise noted

Functional form                                           Linear      Log-Logistic
Private surplus (Table 1)                                    0.8              0.9
Positive effects on other tax revenues and profits
  Tax expenditure on ESI                                    -0.2                -0.2
  Increased taxable factor supplies                          0.6                 0.7
Reduced healthcare subsidies
  Uncompensated care                                        0.04               0.04
  Individual-market subsidies                                0.2                0.2
TOTAL = Social Surplus of ESI
  $ trillions per year                                       1.4                 1.6
  $ per year per insured life                            $9,124             $10,000


Parameters
Marginal Excess Tax Burden, rate                                    0.50
Millions insured by ESI                                              157
Share of ESI that would be uninsured                                0.27
Per capita annual external cost of uncompensated care               $989
Per capita annual subsidy for individual market                    $1,900


Sources: CEA (2019a), CBO (2018), Avalere (2018), Kaiser Family Foundation
(2020)

The role of ESI in encouraging work has been pejoratively described as "job lock."             As
economist Ed Dolan (2018) laments, "people with [ESI] are less likely to change jobs, become
self-employed, retire early, or reduce hours of work." These behaviors are just the other side of
the coin of ESI's tremendous value: workers sometimes give up other things of value in order to
have ESI. These are the workers represented by the parts of Figure 1's demand curve near a
price of one. What the job lock literature ignores is that workers giving up leisure time or early




                                                16
retirement in order to retain ESI are conferring a positive externality through the payment of
additional taxes and the other channels noted in Table 3.22



IV.B. Getting People Covered
         An important goal of the 2010 Affordable Care Act was to "increase the number and
share of Americans who are insured" (Section 10106). Even if eliminating ESI had no effect on
work, it would remove the number one health insurance option, leaving those erstwhile covered
either uninsured, on a government plan, or on an individual-market plan. Each of these three
would create additional expenses for federal, state, and local government budgets. Based on
previous studies of the effect of expanding ESI on the enrollment status of the U.S. population, I
assume that 27 percent of those on ESI would become uninsured and 73 percent join individual-
market or government plans.23 If uncompensated care costs $989 per uninsured per year, this
component of the external cost of ESI totals $0.04 trillion annually.
         The average annual subsidy in the individual market (plans compliant with the
Affordable Care Act requirements) is currently about $3,800 (Council of Economic Advisers
February 2019). Conservatively assuming half that subsidy for the average person taking up
individual-market or government plans as the result of the elimination of ESI, those additional
individual-market subsidies would be about $0.2 trillion annually.24                        Including the private
surplus, the aggregate annual social value of ESI is between $1.4 trillion and $1.6 trillion beyond
what workers and taxpayers pay for it.25 Per covered life, the aggregate annual social value is
between $9,000 and $10,000.




22
   Note that the question posed in this paper ­ the costs of eliminating ESI ­ is different from the questions posed in
the "job lock" literature such the effects of subsidizing specific segments of the private insurance market. As noted
previously in this paper, a significant number of workers retain their ESI after leaving employment.
23
   Council of Economic Advisers (February 2019), Congressional Budget Office (2018), and Avalere (2018).
24
   This amount would be much greater to the extent that a large number of persons were moved to Medicaid, where
the average annual spending per non-elderly person enrolled is about $4,400 by the federal government plus
additional subsidies from states (Congressional Budget Office 2017).
25
   Recall from Table 1 that about $1.3 trillion is spent annually on ESI, including premiums, implicit tax subsidies,
and out-of-pocket payments.

                                                          17
   V.        Conclusions

        It has been said that employer-sponsored health insurance (ESI) is a persistent
anachronism from World War II that needs to be phased out because it costs more than it is
worth (A. E. Carroll 2017, Dolan 2018). But this ignores how easily ESI passes the market test.
Its demand is strong even when it becomes more expensive. Revealed preference estimates
suggest that workers value ESI 75 to 84 percent more than employers and employees together
pay for it. This private surplus from ESI significantly exceeds the tax subsidy for ESI implicit in
the exclusion of premiums from taxable income. The value of ESI is no surprise once we
recognize the values of health, group purchasing, and strategies for improving health in the
workplace.
        Moreover, ESI has significant external value that likely more than justifies its implicit tax
subsidy. It strongly encourages work in an economy where the large majority of value and tax
revenue is created by work. It helps maintain a healthy population. ESI is a procompetitive
force in healthcare markets that have become increasingly consolidated on the provider side.
The alternatives to ESI ­ individual plans, government plans, and uninsured status ­ often
involve more public subsidies than ESI does. These are reasons why the annual social value of
ESI (net of its tax subsidy) per covered life may exceed $10,000 beyond what it costs employers,
employees, and taxpayers. In the aggregate, that is an annual surplus of at least $1.6 trillion.




                                                 18
    VI.      Appendix: Inferring Consumer Surplus from the Local Price Elasticity of
             Demand

          The purpose of this appendix is to provide the detailed calculus used to obtain the value
private estimates shown in Table 1. Let q denote the aggregate quantity of ESI, p the price (net
of subsidies), and u(q) denote the aggregate value to all q consumers. Consumer surplus is u(q)
- pq. The inverse market demand (a.k.a. marginal value) curve is p = u¢(q). I normalize the
baseline price, quantity, and expenditure to one, which means that u(1) - 1 is baseline consumer
                       !! (#)
surplus. Let  = - !!! (#) denote the local baseline magnitude of the price elasticity of demand.

          Two surplus functions, and therefore two demand functions, are used to calculate Table
1. The first "linear" case is:
                                        2(1 + ) -                   1
                                () =                 ,   (1) - 1 =
                                             2                     2
                                                   1 +  - 
                                          % () =
                                                       
                                              % ()
                                                       % ()
                                          - %%      = 
                                             ()          

          In this case the baseline surplus (as a ratio to baseline expenditure) is readily calculated
from any empirical estimate of h by inverting it and dividing by two.
          The second "log-logistic" case is


                                1 -   +  - 1      1 -      '()*#
                                                                    *
                                                                      #*'    
           () = & # .-              ,        ,2 -      , 0  ) (1 - ) )
                                                                           +  - 1
                                                       #*'        #*'
                                             1     )               )
                                     % () = . - 10 1        2
                                                       1 - 
                                            % ()     1 - 
                                         - %%    = 
                                            ()       1 - 



where & # is the Gaussian hypergeometric function and the parameter s satisfies s Î (1-h,1).
The marginal value curve u¢(q) derived from the Gaussian hypergeometric function is a log-
logistic demand curve, which does not have a choke point but it has a satiation point 1/s.
Therefore, the baseline quantity is the fraction s of the maximum possible quantity. For this


                                                  19
reason, I calibrate s as the fraction of full-time employees that are covered by ESI.26 Both the
linear and log-logistic versions of the ESI demand curve u¢(q) are graphed in Figure 1 for a value
of h = 2/3.




26
  Based on Carrol and Miller (2018), Long and Marquis (1999), and my own calculations from the CPS Merged
Outgoing Rotation Groups, I estimate s = 0.833. Note that logistic demand curves are often interpreted as
representing a market with consumer preferences distributed logistic, which is of interest in its own right and also as
close approximation to the normal distribution.

                                                          20
Bibliography
Abaluck, Jason, and Jonathan Gruber. "Choice inconsistencies among the elderly: evidence from
      plan choice in the Medicare Part D program." American Economic Review 101 (2011):
      1180­1210.

Avalare. Association Health Plans: Projecting the Impact of the Proposed Rule. Washington,
       DC: Avalare, 2018.

Besedes, Tibor, Cary Deck, Sudipta Sarangi, and Mikhael Shor. "Reducing choice overload
      without reducing choices." Review of Economics and Statistics 97 (2015): 793­802.

Black, Alexandra. "Five Reasons Employee Wellness Is Worth the Investment." health.gov. May
       17, 2017. https://health.gov/news-archive/blog/2017/05/five-reasons-employee-wellness-
       is-worth-the-investment/index.html.

Buchmueller, Thomas, Colleen Carey, and Helen G. Levy. "Will Employers Drop Health
     Insurance Coverage Because Of The Affordable Care Act?" Health Affairs 32, no. 9
     (September 2013): 1522-30.

Bundorf, M. Kate, Jonathan Levin, and Neale Mahoney. "Pricing and welfare in health plan
      choice." American Economic Review 102 (2012): 3214­48.

Carroll, Aaron E. "The Real Reason the U.S. Has Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance." New
        York Times, September 7, 2017.

Carroll, William A., and G. Edward Miller. Differences in Health Insurance Coverage between
        Part-Time and Full-Time Private-Sector Workers, 2005 and 2015. Washington, DC:
        Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2018.

Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton. "Mortality and morbidity in the 21st century." Brookings papers
       on economic activity 2017 (2017): 397­476.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. "Long-Haul Truck Drivers." cdc.gov. 2018b.
       https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/truck/health.html.

--. "Workplace Health in America 2017." cdc.gov. 2018a.
      https://www.cdc.gov/workplacehealthpromotion/data-surveillance/docs/2017-Workplace-
      Health-in-America-Summary-Report-FINAL-updated-508.pdf.

--. "Workplace Health Model." cdc.gov. May 13, 2016.
      https://www.cdc.gov/workplacehealthpromotion/model/index.html (accessed August
      2020).




                                             21
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. "Medicare Telemedicine Health Care Provider Fact
       Sheet." cms.gov. March 17, 2020. https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/fact-sheets/medicare-
       telemedicine-health-care-provider-fact-sheet.

Cigna. "cigna.com." Coronavirus (COVID-19) Information for Employers and Brokers. August
       11, 2020. https://www.cigna.com/coronavirus/employers (accessed August 2020).

Congressional Budget Office. "CBO's Health Insurance Simulation Model: A Technical
      Description." CBO Background Paper, October 2007.

--. "Federal Subsidies for Health Insurance Coverage for People Under Age 65: 2018 to 2028."
       Congressional Budget Office. May 23, 2018. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/53826.

Congressional Budget Office. Health Insurance Subsidies in 2017 for People Under Age 65.
      Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office, 2017.

Cooper, Zack, Stuart V. Craig, Martin Gaynor, and John Van Reenen. "The price ain't right?
      Hospital prices and health spending on the privately insured." The Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 134 (2019): 51­107.

Council of Economic Advisers. Deregulating Health Insurance Markets: Value to Market
      Participants. Executive Office of the President, February 2019.

Council of Economic Advisers. Economic Report of the President. Executive Office of the
      President, February 2020.

Council of Economic Advisers. Economic Report of the President. Executive Office of the
      President, March 2019.

Dahlby, Bev. The marginal cost of public funds: Theory and applications. Cambridge, MA: MIT
      press, 2008.

Dolan, Ed. "What's Wrong with Employer Sponsored Health Insurance." niskanencenter.org.
       November 6, 2018. https://www.niskanencenter.org/whats-wrong-with-employer-
       sponsored-health-insurance/ (accessed August 2020).

Economic Policy Institute. "12 million people have likely lost employer-sponsored health
      insurance since February." epi.org. August 26, 2020. https://www.epi.org/press/12-
      million-people-have-likely-lost-employer-sponsored-health-insurance-since-february-
      policymakers-should-work-to-delink-jobs-and-access-to-insurance-coverage-by-
      expanding-public-options/.

Gallen, Trevor S., and Casey B. Mulligan. "Wedges, Labor Market Behavior, and Health
       Insurance Coverage." National Tax Journal 71, no. 1 (March 2018): 75-120.


                                              22
Goldman, Dana P., Anupam B. Jena, Darius N. Lakdawalla, Jennifer L. Malin, Jesse D. Malkin,
      and Eric Sun. "The value of specialty oncology drugs." Health services research 45
      (2010): 115­132.

Gravelle, Jane. The Excise Tax on High-Cost Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance: Estimated
       Economic and Market Effects. Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 2017.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Michael Lettau. "How elastic is the firm's demand for health insurance?"
       Journal of Public Economics 88 (2004): 1273­1293.

Hackmann, Martin B., Jonathan T. Kolstad, and Amanda E. Kowalski. "Adverse selection and an
     individual mandate: When theory meets practice." American Economic Review 105
     (2015): 1030­66.

Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones. "The value of life and the rise in health spending." The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics (MIT Press) 122 (2007): 39­72.

Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. "Health Insurance Coverage of the Total Population."
       kff.org. 2020. https://www.kff.org/other/state-indicator/total-
       population/?dataView=1&currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Loc
       ation%22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%7D (accessed August 2020).

Houthakker, H. S. "Revealed preference and the utility function." Economica 17 (May 1950):
      159-174.

Howard, David H. "Adverse effects of prohibiting narrow provider networks." N Engl J Med 371
      (2014): 591­593.

Jaffe, Sonia, Robert Minton, Casey B. Mulligan, and Kevin M. Murphy. Chicago Price Theory.
        Princeton University Press (ChicagoPriceTheory.com), 2019.

Kahneman, Daniel. Thinking, fast and slow. Macmillan, 2011.

Klein, Benjamin, and Kevin M. Murphy. "Exclusive dealing intensifies competition for
       distribution." Antitrust LJ 75 (2008): 433.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee Vermeulen, and Marian V. Wrobel.
        "Misperception in choosing Medicare drug plans." Unpublished manuscript, 2008.

Koo, Anthony Y. C. "An empirical test of revealed preference theory." Econometrica: Journal of
      the Econometric Society, 1963: 646­664.

Lazear, Edward P. "Why is there mandatory retirement?" Journal of political economy 87
       (1979): 1261­1284.



                                                23
Leminen, Aapeli, Markku Tykkyläinen, and Tiina Laatikainen. "Self-monitoring induced savings
      on type 2 diabetes patients' travel and healthcare costs." International journal of medical
      informatics 115 (2018): 120­127.

Long, Stephen H., and M. Susan Marquis. "Comparing Employee Health Benefits In The Public
       And Private Sectors, 1997: The benefits of government workers stack up well against
       those in the private sector, and government workers are more likely to be offered health
       insurance at work." Health Affairs 18 (1999): 183­193.

Lui, Su, and Deborah Chollet. Price and Income Elasticity of the Demand for Health Insurance
       and Health Care Services: A Critical Review of the Literature. Washington, DC:
       Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., 2006.

Mahoney, Neale. "Bankruptcy as implicit health insurance." American Economic Review 105
     (2015): 710­46.

Mehrotra, Ateev, Michael Chernew, David Linetsky, Hilary Hatch, David Cutler, and Eric C.
      Schneider. "The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Outpatient Visits: Changing
      Patterns of Care in the Newest COVID-19 Hot Spots." commonwealthfund.org. August
      13, 2020. https://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/2020/aug/impact-covid-19-
      pandemic-outpatient-visits-changing-patterns-care-newest.

Mercatus Center at George Mason University. "Summary of Interesting Findings in the ACA
      Small Business Survey." mercatus.org. June 2017.
      https://www.mercatus.org/system/files/mercatus-summary-findings-aca-survey-v1.pdf
      (accessed June 28, 2017).

Mulligan, Casey B. Side Effects and Complications: The Economic Consequences of Health-care
       Reform. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015.

Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel. "The value of health and longevity." Journal of
      political Economy (The University of Chicago Press) 114 (2006): 871­904.

Murphy, Kevin M., Edward A. Snyder, and Robert H. Topel. "Competitive discounts and
      antitrust policy." The Oxford Handbook of International Antitrust Economics, Volume 2,
      2014: 89.

Murray, Charles. Coming Apart: The State of White America, 1960-2010. New York: Crown
      Publishing Group, 2012.

Nesbitt, Thomas S., Donald M. Hilty, Christina A. Kuenneth, and Allan Siefkin. "Development
       of a telemedicine program: a review of 1,000 videoconferencing consultations." Western
       Journal of Medicine 173 (2000): 169.



                                               24
Office of Management and Budget. "Circular A-4: Regulatory Analysis." (OMB, Office of
       Information and Regulatory Affairs) 2003.

Office of Management and Budget. "Circular A-94: Guidelines and Discount Rates for Benefit-
       Cost Analysis of Federal Programs." (OMB, Office of Information and Regulatory
       Affairs) 1992.

--. "Marginal Excess Tax Burden as a Potential Cost Under E.O. 13771." regulations.gov. 2019.
      https://www.regulations.gov/document?D=OMB-2017-0002-0055.

Philipson, Tomas, Michael Eber, Darius N. Lakdawalla, Mitra Corral, Rena Conti, and Dana P.
       Goldman. "An analysis of whether higher health care spending in the United States
       versus Europe is `worth it'in the case of cancer." Health Affairs 31 (2012): 667­675.

Remler, Dahlia K., Joshua Graff Zivin, and Sherry A. Glied. "Modeling Health Insurance
      Expansions: Effects of Alternate Approaches." Journal of Policy Analysis and
      Management 23, no. 2 (January 2004): 291-313.

Rhodes, Andrew, Patrick Ferdinande, Hans Flaatten, Bertrand Guidet, Philipp G. Metnitz, and
      Robert P. Moreno. "The variability of critical care bed numbers in Europe." Intensive
      care medicine (Springer) 38 (2012): 1647­1653.

Roehrig, Charles. The impact of prescription drug rebates on health plans and consumers.
       Washington: Altarum, 2018.

Samuelson, Paul A. "A Note on the Pure Theory of Consumer's Behavior." Economica 5, no. 17
      (February 1938): 61-71.

Sandel, Michael J. "Populism, liberalism, and democracy." Philosophy & Social Criticism
       (SAGE Publications Sage UK: London, England) 44 (2018): 353­359.

Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein. Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and
        happiness. Penguin, 2009.

"The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act." Public Law 148, March 23, 2010.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. "Reforming America's Healthcare System
       Through Choice and Competition." hhs.gov. 2018.
       https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/Reforming-Americas-Healthcare-System-
       Through-Choice-and-Competition.pdf.

U.S. Department of Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis. "Tax Expenditures, Fiscal Year 2020."
       October 2018.



                                              25
World Health Organization. "Workplace health promotion." who.int. 2020.
      https://www.who.int/occupational_health/topics/workplace/en/index1.html (accessed
      August 2020).




                                            26
