                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                WELFARE CONSEQUENCES OF SUSTAINABLE FINANCE

                                        Harrison Hong
                                         Neng Wang
                                        Jinqiang Yang

                                      Working Paper 28595
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28595


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2021, Revised April 2021




We thank Patrick Bolton, Xavier Vives, Rafael Repullo, Marcin Kacperczyk, John Hassler, Bob
Litterman, and seminar participants at IESE Banking Conference, Peking University, University
of Edinburgh, and University of Virginia for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Harrison Hong, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Welfare Consequences of Sustainable Finance
Harrison Hong, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 28595
March 2021, Revised April 2021
JEL No. E20,G12,G30,H50

                                        ABSTRACT

In lieu of carbon taxes to address global warming, sustainable investment mandates are proposed
to incentivize firms to achieve net-zero emissions. With underspending on mitigation due to
externalities, we model the welfare consequences of these investments in firms that qualify by
spending enough on decarbonization technologies. Our dynamic stochastic general equilibrium
model generates several testable predictions. A cost-of-capital wedge between qualified and
unqualified firms equals firm mitigation divided by its Tobin's q. Given projections of global
warming and cost of decarbonization technologies, we calculate the mandate size and cost-of-
capital wedge needed to meet net-zero targets.

Harrison Hong                                  Jinqiang Yang
Department of Economics                        Shanghai University of Finance
Columbia University                            and Economics
1022 International Affairs Building            Guoding Rd. 777
Mail Code 3308                                 Shanghai, 200433
420 West 118th Street                          China
New York, NY 10027                             yang.jinqiang@mail.sufe.edu.cn
and NBER
hh2679@columbia.edu

Neng Wang
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nw2128@columbia.edu
1         Introduction
In light of the failure to implement carbon emissions taxes to address global warming, there
is growing pressure on the financial and corporate sectors to provide alternative solutions.
One widely-discussed solution is sustainable investment mandates to incentivize firms to
meet net-zero emissions by either 2030 or 2050, consistent with the goals of the 2015 Paris
Climate Agreement. These mandates are typically implemented as passive screens whereby
a fraction of wealth is restricted to invest in companies that meet certain sustainability
guidelines.1 To meet net-zero targets and to qualify to be held in investors' sustainable
portfolios, firms have to spend enough on decarbonization measures.
        According to a recent Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) special report
(Rogelj et.al. (2018)), most mitigation pathways to net-zero emissions require a portfolio
of decarbonization technologies, including renewables and negative emission technologies
(NETs) such as afforestation and reforestation, soil carbon sequestration, bioenergy with
carbon capture and storage (BECCs), and direct air capture (DAC).2 The costs of these
existing technologies--while currently high--are expected to fall over the next thirty years.
        Support for such a solution comes from both private financial actors, including large asset
managers such as Blackrock, and public ones, encompassing sovereign wealth funds and pen-
sion plans. Recently, central banks have indicated interest in similar mandates, as reflected
in the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS). Despite their widely publicized
pledges, there is still considerable skepticism due to the ambiguity of these mandates. Indeed,
the Biden administration is pressing the financial community to "disambiguate" sustainable
finance, i.e., to clarify these commitments.3
        To address this issue, we seek to quantify the amount of capital that has to be ded-
icated to these mandates along with the costs to shareholders in order for the industrial
    1
     According to US SIF Foundation in January 2019, around 38% of assets under management already
undergo some type of sustainability screening and over 80% of these screens as implemented as passive
portfolios.
   2
     One reason is that for heavy industrial sectors like cement and steel, which generate nearly 20% of global
CO2 emissions, switching fuel sources is not a viable option for achieving net-zero (de Pee (2018)).
   3
     Zac Colman, 03/12/2021 on Politico.com "Kerry to Wall Street: Put your money behind your climate
PR."


                                                      1
sector to meet net-zero emissions targets. Whereas integrated assessment models (Nord-
haus (2017)) embed the global warming externality in emissions to analyze the social cost
of carbon, we consider an economy where capital is the only input of production and there
is an externality when it comes to corporate mitigation spending in order to evaluate the
social benefits of decarbonization spending. Since rising global temperatures result in more
frequent and destructive weather disasters that damage capital stock (National Academy of
Sciences (2016)),4 decarbonization spending, which comes at the expense of firm produc-
tivity, reduce the expected losses from these disasters by keeping global temperatures from
rising.
       Because the benefits of this mitigation only affect the aggregate risk and the market
price of risk, which firms take as given, there is over-investment and over-accumulation of
capital and underspending on decarbonization. While a carbon emissions tax is required to
curtail emissions in integrated assessment models of emissions curtailment (Golosov, Hassler,
Krusell and Tsyviski (2014)), a tax on capital is needed in our model to fund mitigation to
address this market failure and achieve first-best (Hong, Wang and Yang (2020)). Like a
carbon emissions tax in traditional integrated assessment models, a capital tax in our model
can be quantitatively significant since weather disasters cause significant welfare losses (Rietz
(1988), Barro (2006), Weitzman (2009), and Pindyck and Wang (2013)) for households with
non-expected utility (Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990)).
       Instead of a capital tax to achieve first best, we consider restrictions on the representative
investor's portfolio, i.e., sustainable finance mandates. The representative investor, who has
access to a complete set of financial securities (e.g., all contingencies including idiosyncratic
shocks are dynamically spanned), is restricted to passively index a fixed fraction of total
wealth to firms that meet sustainability guidelines. To be included in the representative
investor's sustainable portfolio, otherwise ex-ante identical unsustainable firms have to spend
   4
     For instance, climate models point to increased frequency and damage from hurricanes that make landfall
(Grinsted, Ditlevsen, and Christensen (2019), Kossin et.al. (2020)). Similarly, the wildfires in the Western
US states are also linked to climate change (Abatzoglou and Williams (2016)). See Bansal, Ochoa, and Kiku
(2017) for the impact of higher temperature on growth stocks and Hong, Karolyi, and Scheinkman (2020)
for a review of evidence on the damage of natural disasters for financial markets.



                                                     2
a minimum amount on decarbonization which they otherwise would not due to externalities.
   The cost of capital and firm value for sustainable and unsustainable firms are endoge-
nously determined so as to leave value-maximizing firms indifferent between being sustainable
and not -- the Tobin's q or stock price is the same for all firms in equilibrium. The risk-free
rate, stock-market risk premium, Tobin's q for aggregate capital, and growth rates are jointly
determined in equilibrium. Despite being a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model,
the solution is intuitive and offers several testable restrictions.
   Since firms have the same Tobin's q , the investment and growth paths of both sustainable
and unsustainable firms are identical (path by path) over time. A firm's Tobin's q is given by
a Gordon Growth formula: compared to unsustainable firms, sustainable firms have lower
cashflows to pay out (a lower numerator) due to mitigation spending but have a smaller
denominator due to a lower cost of capital (the expected return required by the representative
investor). The cash-flow effect and the discount-rate effect have to exactly offset each other
so as to leave all firms indifferent between being a sustainable and an unsustainable firm.
   Hence, the equilibrium cost-of-capital wedge between sustainable and unsustainable firms
is equal to a sustainable firm's mitigation spending divided by its Tobin's q . The lower cost
of capital for sustainable firms subsidizes their decarbonization, which they would have
otherwise invested or distributed to shareholders. The benefits of this mitigation accrue to
the entire economy. For a given fraction of wealth allocated to sustainability mandates, we
calculate the welfare-maximizing qualification criterion. A higher fraction of wealth allocated
to sustainable firms leads to more unsustainable firms becoming sustainable, higher aggregate
mitigation spending, and higher welfare, therefore moving the competitive economy closer
to the first-best.
   An earlier generation of papers considered the real effects of ethical and socially respon-
sible investing. Notably, Heinkel, Kraus, and Zechner (2001) examine the effects of green
portfolio restrictions using a static constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) framework with
no capital accumulation, an exogenous interest rate, and a given fixed cost that brown firms
can pay to become green. Hong and Kacperczyk (2009) find that ethical investing mandates
indeed generate cost-of-capital wedges.

                                                3
       But to conduct welfare calculations when it comes to firm mitigation of global warming,
it is desirable to have a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model where qualification
criterion based on decarbonization spending, interest rates, and capital accumulation are
endogenous. Hence, our paper combines integrated assessment models of climate change,
typically done in a social planner setting, with richer competitive financial markets to eval-
uate the viability of sustainable finance mandates to avoid climate disasters.
       In this vein, given projections of global warming and cost of decarbonization technologies,
we use our model to calculate the fraction of wealth dedicated to sustainable firms, the firm-
level qualification threshold based on decarbonization spending, and the cost-of-capital wedge
that are needed to incentivize firms to reach net-zero targets. It is important to caveat that
projections for global warming and cost of decarbonization technologies have considerable
uncertainty, which are modeled in Barnett, Brock, and Hansen (2020). We do not take a
stand on which projections are accurate. Our contribution is to show, for a given set of
projections, how to calculate the financial commitment needed from sustainable finance to
incentivize firms to reach net-zero targets.
       Each year, the global industrial sector emits around 50 billion metric tons of greenhouse
gases. The social cost of carbon (SSC) ranges from US $177-805 metric ton of emissions
(Ricke, Drouet, Caldeira and Tavoni (2018)). As a baseline scenario, we suppose that the
portfolio of decarbonization technology costs over the next thirty years reach either 144
dollars per metric ton (low cost) or 288 dollars per metric ton (high cost).5 This would mean
firms need to spend 3.67 (7.4) trillion dollars on mitigation or 0.6% (1.2%) of 600 trillion
dollars of global capital stock.6
       We then calibrate our model to a damage scenario absent mitigation from Burke, Hsiang,
and Miguel (2015). We map one of their damage scenarios, which corresponds to -0.3% GDP
expected growth rate per annum globally, over to our damage function that depends on two
   5
     According to estimates from a McKinsey Sustainability report (de Pee (2018)), decarbonization of just
the heavy industries that account for 20% of the global carbon emissions will cost around 20 trillion dollars
up to 2050. See Gates (2021) for a discussion of costs of NETs. Estimates of carbon capture vary greatly
depending on location and might be as low as 60-100 dollars per to (Schmelz, Hochman and Miller (2020)).
   6
     Gadzinki, Schuller and Vacchino (2018) estimate global capital stock (including both traded and non-
traded assets) in 2016 to be between 500 and 600 trillion dollars.


                                                     4
parameters: the arrival rate of weather disasters and the fat-tailed damage conditioned on an
arrival (Barro and Jin (2011)). We then calibrate the impact of decarbonization spending on
mitigating expected losses by assuming that annual decarbonization spending (either 0.6%
or 1.2% of the global capital stock) will offset the damage from higher temperatures and
yield a positive annual growth rate that can range anywhere from 0.5% (low effectiveness)
to 1.5% (high effectiveness). Typically, welfare gains from mitigation increase with the
effectiveness of decarbonization in insulating growth rates from global warming damage.
Our calibration, like recent work on integrated assessment models (Cai and Lontzek (2019),
Daniel, Litterman, and Wagner (2019)), uses parameters from the long-run risk framework
(Bansal and Yaron (2004)).
   As a baseline scenario, we consider a low cost (with mitigation spending being around
0.6% of capital stock) and moderate effectiveness of decarbonization (by calibrating to a
1% annual growth rate that will result from reaching net-zero emissions goals). In the first-
best economy, aggregate mitigation spending is about 1.72% of the aggregate capital stock
per annum, which comes at the expense of lower consumption and investment. Welfare is
significantly higher in the first-best economy, by around 36% to reflect the urgency of the
climate change problem.
   The 0.6% net-zero emissions target mitigation spending increases welfare by about 25%
compared with the competitive market economy (with no mitigation). Due to the force
of aggregate risk reduction from mitigation, the risk-free rate is higher (2.1% compared to
0.82% per annum under competitive equilibrium with no mitigation) and Tobin's q is only
slightly lower (1.77 compared to 1.79). This implies that the net-zero target capital tax rate
is 0.36%=0.6%/1.77, i.e., the aggregate mitigation spending divided by Tobin's q .
   The amount of sustainable capital and the welfare-maximizing qualification criterion
needed to achieve a targeted decarbonization spending depend on firm policy requiring cer-
tain fraction of their cashflows to be paid out as dividends. With a restriction that a firm
pays around 36% of its revenues as dividends (i.e., roughly the payout ratio for mature con-
sumer or industrial companies), achieving the net-zero target aggregate spending of 0.6%
of capital stock per annum requires that at least 38% of wealth be allocated to mandates

                                              5
and a qualification criterion requiring a firm to spend 1.6% of its capital stock each year
on mitigation. The compensating cost-of-capital advantage for a sustainable form over an
unsustainable one is 0.90% per annum. A higher dividend payout requirement implies that
first-best can only be achieved with a greater fraction of wealth committed to mandates
since these sustainable firms can spend less on mitigation. Large enough dividend payout
requirements may mean mandates cannot achieve first-best since firms ultimately cannot
spend much on mitigation.
       As we vary the effectiveness of decarbonization technology in limiting damage to economic
growth, we find fairly similar financial commitments. However, as we increase the cost of
decarbonization technology, i.e., suppose that net-zero targets require spending 1.2% as
opposed 0.6% of capital stock on decarbonization measures, then the amount of sustainable
capital needed increases substantially from 38% of wealth to 60% of wealth and so does the
cost-of-capital wedge, rising from 0.90% to 1.15%.
       There are multiple ways to check the commitment of sustainable finance in our framework,
whether it is disclosure of firm-level mitigation spending or using the cost-of-capital wedge
as a proxy for the costs that shareholders are bearing to fund mitigation. One implication
of our analysis is that for sustainable finance to confront the climate change problem it has
to be different than what has been labeled sustainable finance in the past. Assets under
management devoted to sustainable funds is on average 20% over the last twenty years.
Over a long sample period, there is little evidence that there are significant differences in
the cost of capital for sustainable versus unsustainable firms (see Matos (2020) for a review
of the evidence). According to our model, this means that the qualification criterion to be a
sustainable firm has historically been not stringent.7
       Moreover, our assumption of a restriction on the representative investor's portfolio to
passively index to sustainable firms generates realistic downward sloping demand curves
(Shleifer (1986), Chang, Hong and Liskovich (2015), Kashyap, Kovrijnykh, Pavlova (2018),
   7
     However, evidence based on return differences for higher versus low carbon emissions companies in the
last few years (Bolton and Kacperczyk (2020)) suggest that qualification criterion might be getting more
stringent.




                                                    6
Koijen and Yogo (2019)) even with complete financial spanning. Hence our model makes
a sharp prediction linking the cost-of-capital wedge between sustainable and unsustainable
firms to the amount of mitigation. But a cost-of-capital wedge also arises whenever there is
demand for firms with sustainability attributes by a subset of investors who cannot perfectly
hedge the idiosyncratic firm risks due to lack of full financial spanning.
    In this vein, Pastor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2020) model how some investors' non-
pecuniary taste for green stocks generates three-fund separation in a static CAPM setting
and differences in expected returns between green and brown stocks. But the cost-of-capital
wedge in their model also depends on investor preferences and the nature of incomplete
spanning. Pedersen, Fitzgibbons, and Pomorski (2020) also incorporate potential mispricing
of fundamental information captured by sustainability measures. To the extent that demand
curves are flat, it can be more efficient to engage activist strategies relying on voting as
opposed to divestment to effect change (Gollier and Pouget (2014), Broccardo, Hart, and
Zingales (2020) and Oehmke and Opp (2020)).
    Our paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe our model. In Section 3, we
analyze the first-best outcome or planner's solution. We then solve our sustainable finance
mandate model in Section 4. We calibrate our model in Section 5 to business-as-usual global
warming forecasts and calculate the main variables of interests. We conclude in Section 6.


2     Model
While mitigating climate disaster risk benefits the society, doing so is privately costly for
the firm. We model sustainable finance mandates as portfolio restrictions on the represen-
tative agent's portfolio and examine the extent to which it encourages firms to provide risk
mitigation and quantify its implications for social welfare. We use a representative-agent
framework for expositional simplicity, where this agent can be interpreted as representing
both public (e.g., sovereign wealth funds) and private investors.
    On the demand side for financial assets, the representative agent holds and invests the
entire wealth of the economy between sustainable (S ) firms, unsustainable (U ) firms, and


                                               7
the risk-free bonds. The agent has to invest an  fraction of the entire aggregate wealth
in a sustainable type-S firm. The risk-averse representative agent is required to meet the
sustainable investment mandate at all times when allocating assets.
       On the supply side, a portfolio of S firms and a portfolio of U firms will arise endogenously
in equilibrium, which we refer to as S -portfolio and U -portfolio, respectively. For a firm to
qualify to be type-S , it has to spend at least a fraction m of its capital on mitigation via
a portfolio of decarbonization technologies so as to reduce disaster risk. Otherwise, it is
labeled a type-U for unsustainable.

2.1       Firm Production, Capital Accumulation, and Disaster Shocks

The firm's output at t, Yt , is proportional to its capital stock, Kt , which is the only factor
of production:
                                              Yt = AKt ,                                             (1)

where A > 0 is a constant that defines productivity for all firms. This is a version of widely-
used AK models in macroeconomics and finance.8 All firms start with the same level of
initial capital stock K0 and have the same production and capital accumulation technology.
Additionally, they are subject to the same shocks (path by path).
       That is, there is no idiosyncratic shock in our model. This simplifying assumption makes
our model tractable and allows us to focus on the impact of the investment mandate on
equilibrium asset pricing and resource allocation. Despite being identical in all aspects,
some firms choose to be sustainable while others remain unsustainable in equilibrium.


Investment and Capital Accumulation. Let It and Xt denote the firm's investment
and mitigation spending, respectively. As in Pindyck and Wang (2013), the firm's capital
stock, Kt , evolves as:

                      dKt = (It- , Kt- )dt + Kt- dBt - (1 - Z )Kt- dJt .                             (2)
   8
     There are pros and cons of using an AK model for our climate-change analysis. For analyzing weather
disasters such as hurricanes which have been shown to have permanent effects on capital and output, an AK
model setup is natural. But an AK setup might miss important features of growth rate dynamics in other
settings (Jones (1995)).

                                                   8
As in Lucas and Prescott (1971) and Jerrmann (1998), we assume that (I, K ), the first
term in (2), is homogeneous of degree one in I and K , and thus can be written as

                                        (I, K ) = (i)K ,                                              (3)

where i = I/K is the firm's investment-capital ratio and ( · ) is increasing and concave.
This specification captures the idea that changing capital stock rapidly is more costly than
changing it slowly. As a result, installed capital earns rents in equilibrium so that Tobin's
q , the ratio between the value and the replacement cost of capital exceeds one.
       The second term captures continuous shocks to capital, where Bt is a standard Brownian
motion and the parameter  is the diffusion volatility (for the capital stock growth). This
Bt is the source of shocks for the standard AK models in macroeconomics. This diffusion
shock is common to all firms. Had we introduced an additional shock that is idiosyncratic
across firms, our solution would remain unchanged as firms can perfectly hedge idiosyncratic
shocks at no cost and our aggregation results remain valid.
       The firm's capital stock is also subject to an aggregate jump shock. We capture this
jump effect via the third term, where Jt is a (pure) jump process with a constant arrival
rate, which we denote by  > 0. To emphasize the timing of potential jumps, we use t- to
denote the pre-jump time so that a discrete jump may or may not arrive at t. Examples of
jumps include hurricanes or wildfires that destroy physical and housing capital stock.
       When a jump arrives (dJt = 1), it permanently destroys a stochastic fraction (1 - Z ) of
the firm's capital stock Kt- , as Z is the recovery fraction where Z  (0, 1). (For example,
if a shock destroyed 15 percent of capital stock, we would have Z = .85.) There is no limit
to the number of these jump shocks.9 If a jump does not arrive at t, i.e., dJt = 0, the third
term disappears.
   9
    Stochastic fluctuations in the capital stock have been widely used in the growth literature with an AK
technology, but unlike the existing literature, we examine the economic effects of shocks to capital that
involve discrete (disaster) jumps.




                                                    9
2.2    Mitigation and Externality

We use t- (Z ) and t- (Z ) to denote the cumulative distribution function (cdf) and proba-
bility density function (pdf) at time t- for the recovery fraction, Z , conditional on a jump
arrival at t, respectively. We postulate that the cdf t- (Z ) and pdf t- (Z ) depend on the
pre-jump aggregate mitigation spending Xt- and the aggregate capital stock Kt- in the
economy. Let xt- = Xt- /Kt- . We use boldfaced notations for aggregate variables.
   To preserve our model's homogeneity property, we assume that the cdf t- (Z ) and pdf
t- (Z ) depend on mitigation spending purely via the pre-jump scaled aggregate mitigation
spending (xt- ). That is, if we simultaneously double the aggregate mitigation spending
Xt- and aggregate capital stock Kt- , the cumulative distribution t- (Z ) is unchanged.
It is sometimes useful to make the dependence of t- (Z ) and t- (Z ) on scaled aggregate
mitigation spending xt- explicit: t- (Z ) = (Z ; xt- ) and t- (Z ) =  (Z ; xt- ).
   As disaster shocks are aggregate and disaster damages are only curtailed by aggregate mit-
igation spending X, absent mandates or other incentive programs, firms have no incentives
to mitigate on their own as the economy is competitive and their own mitigation spending
have no impact on the aggregate mitigation spending (Hong, Wang and Yang (2020)).


Alternative specification: mitigation spending changes the disaster arrival rate.
Since global warming is expected to magnify not just the damage but also the frequency of
disasters, we can consider an alternative specification where by spending on mitigation, a
private agent reduces the likelihood of a disaster arrival . Specifically, suppose that for a
given pre-jump mitigation spending Xt- with an implied scaled mitigation xt- = Xt- /Kt- ,
the jump arrival rate changes to (xt ) from the constant arrival rate  absent mitigation.
We assume that mitigation spending decreases the disaster arrival rate,  (xt ) < 0. All the
other parts of the model remain the same as in our baseline model. The core mechanism in
our model remains the same. The welfare theorem again fails as no firms have incentives to
mitigate to reduce the disaster arrival rate on their own as the economy is competitive and
firms have incentives to free ride on others.



                                                10
2.3     Sustainable Investment Mandates

Let 1S
     t be an indicator function describing the status of a firm at t. To qualify as a sustainable

(S ) firm at t, the firm has to spend at least Mt at t on disaster risk mitigation, which
contributes to the reduction of aggregate risk. That is, 1S
                                                          t = 1 if and only if the firm's

mitigation spending Xt satisfies:
                                             X t  Mt .                                       (4)

Otherwise, 1S
            t = 0 and the firm is unsustainable (U ).

   To preserve our model's homogeneity property, we assume that the mandated mitigation
spending is proportional to firm size Kt :

                                         Mt = mt Kt ,                                        (5)

where mt is the minimal level of mitigation per unit of the firm's capital stock to qualify
a firm to be sustainable. That is, it is cheaper for a firm (with smaller Kt ) to qualify as a
sustainable firm. Later, we endogenize the S -firm qualification threshold, mt , to maximize
the representative agent's utility.
   The investment mandate  creates the inelastic demand for S firms. In equilibrium, the
remaining 1 -  fraction is invested in the U -portfolio so that the agent has no investment
in the risk-free bonds in equilibrium.

2.4     Optimal Firm Mitigation

Each firm can choose to be either a sustainable (S ) or a unsustainable firm (U ). We assume
that a firm's mitigation is observable and contractible. While spending on aggregate risk
mitigation yields no monetary payoff for the firm, doing so allows it to be included in the
S -portfolio.
   A value-maximizing firm chooses whether to be sustainable or unsustainable depending
on which strategy yields a higher value. Let Qn
                                              t denote the the market value of a type-n firm

at t, where n = {S, U }. By exploiting our model's homogeneity property, we conjecture and



                                                11
verify that the equilibrium value of a type-n firm at time t must satisfy:

                                                Qn    n n
                                                 t = q Kt ,                                                  (6)

where q n is Tobin's average q for a type n-firm.
       In equilibrium, as mitigation spending has no direct benefit for the firm, if the firm
chooses to be U , i.e., 1S
                         t = 0, it will set Xt = 0. Moreover, even if a firm chooses to be a S

firm, it has no incentive to spend more than Mt , i.e., (4) always binds for a type-S firm.
       As we later verify, the equilibrium expected rate of return for a type-n firm, which we
denote by rn , is constant. A type-n firm maximizes its present value:
                                                      
                                                               n
                                     max
                                     n n
                                         E               e-r t CFtn dt                                       (7)
                                     I ,X         0

subject to the standard transversality condition specified in the Appendix A.1. In equation
(7), CFtn is the firm's cash flow at t, which is given by

                     CFtS = AKtS - ItS - XtS             and CFtU = AKtU - ItU ,                             (8)

as an unsustainable firm spends nothing on mitigation.
       Since It and Xt are both proportional to Kt , spending on Xt effectively reduces the
productivity of firms. Hence, Xt can be broadly interpreted as various mitigatory activities
that reduce firm productivity including limiting carbon emissions or spending on other forms
of mitigation.
       In addition, we assume that there is a lower bound on payouts in the economy given
                                                                   n
by CF t for all firms at time t, i.e. CFtn  CF t with n = {S, U } should be satisfied for
                                                           n
all t  0. For simplicity, we assume that CF t is always proportional to the firm's capital,
           n
i.e. CF t = cf Ktn where cf > 0 is constant. This payout lower bound is meant to capture
realistic features of corporate governance that indirectly limit firm investment and mitigation
spending.10
  10
    We can express this payout constraint in several alternative ways. For example, one way is to require a
firm to pay out at least a fraction of its earnings, which equals revenue minus capital depreciation, (A -  )Kt .
Another way is to require a firm to pay out a fraction of its free cash flow, which equals revenue minus
investment costs, (AKt - It ). These formulations are very similar in essence. For illustrative purposes, we
choose the payout constraint as a fraction of the firm's capital stock.

                                                         12
2.5    Dynamic Consumption and Asset Allocation

The representative agent makes all the consumption and asset allocation decisions. We
thus use individual and aggregate variables for the agent interchangeably. For example,
the aggregate wealth, Wt , is equal to the representative agent's wealth, Wt . Similarly, the
aggregate consumption, Ct , is equal to the representative agent's consumption, Ct .
   The representative agent has the following investment opportunities: (a) the S portfolio
which includes all the sustainable firms; (b) the U portfolio which includes all other firms
that are unsustainable; (c) the risk-free asset that pays interest at a constant risk-free interest
rate r determined in equilibrium; and (d) actuarially fair insurance claims for disasters with
every possible recovery fraction Z (and also for diffusion shocks.)


Type-S and type-U portfolios. The S and U portfolios include all the S and U firms,
respectively. Let QS      U
                   t and Qt denote the aggregate market value of the S portfolio firm and

the U portfolio at t, respectively. Similarly, Let DS      U
                                                    t and Dt denote the aggregate dividend

of the S portfolio firm and the U portfolio at t, respectively.
   We conjecture and then verify that the cum-dividend return for the type-n portfolio is
given by
                     dQn     n
                       t + Dt- dt
                                  = rn dt + dBt - (1 - Z ) (dJt - dt) ,                        (9)
                         Qn
                          t-
where rn is the endogenous constant expected cum-dividend return for a type-n firm in
equilibrium. In equation (9), the diffusion volatility is equal to  as in equation (2). The
third term on the right side of equation (9) is a jump term capturing the effect of disasters on
return dynamics. Both the diffusion volatility and jump terms are martingales (and this is
why rn is the expected return.) Note that the only difference between the S - and U -portfolio
is the expected return. The diffusion and jump terms are the same as those in the capital
evolution dynamics given in equation (2).


Disaster risk insurance (DIS). We define DIS as follows: a DIS for the survival fraction
in the interval (Z, Z + dZ ) is a swap contract in which the buyer makes insurance payments
p(Z )dZ , where p(Z ) is the equilibrium insurance premium payment, to the seller and in

                                                13
exchange receives a lump-sum payoff if and only if a shock with survival fraction in (Z, Z +dZ )
occurs. That is, the buyer stops paying the seller if and only if the defined disaster event
occurs and then collects one unit of the consumption good as a payoff from the seller. The
DIS contract is priced at actuarially fairly terms so that investors earn zero profits.


Preferences. We use the Duffie and Epstein (1992) continuous-time version of the recur-
sive preferences developed by Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990), so that the represen-
tative agent has homothetic recursive preferences given by:
                                              
                               Vt = Et           f (Cs , Vs )ds   ,                        (10)
                                          t

where f (C, V ) is known as the normalized aggregator given by
                                                     -1
                                           C 1- - ((1 -  )V )
                       f (C, V ) =                            .                            (11)
                                   1 -  -1     ((1 -  )V )-1

Here  is the rate of time preference,  the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS), 
the coefficient of relative risk aversion, and we let  = (1 -  -1 )/(1 -  ). Unlike expected
utility, recursive preferences as defined by (10) and (11) disentangle risk aversion from the
EIS. An important feature of these preferences is that the marginal benefit of consumption
is fC = C --1 /[(1 -  )V ]-1 , which depends not only on current consumption but also
(through V ) on the expected trajectory of future consumption.
   If  =  -1 so that  = 1, we have the standard constant-relative-risk-aversion (CRRA)
expected utility, represented by the additively separable aggregator:

                                              C 1-
                                 f (C, V ) =       -  V.                                   (12)
                                             1-

This more flexible utility specification is widely used in asset pricing and macroeconomics for
at least two important reasons: 1) conceptually, risk aversion is very distinct from the EIS,
which this preference is able to capture; 2) quantitative and empirical fit with various asset
pricing facts are infeasible with standard CRRA utility but attainable with this recursive
utility, as shown by Bansal and Yaron (2004) and the large follow-up long-run risk literature.



                                                  14
Wealth dynamics. Let Wt denote the representative agent's wealth. Let HtS and HtU
denote the dollar amount invested in the S and U portfolio, respectively. Let Ht denote the
agent's wealth allocated to the market portfolio at t. That is, Ht = HtS + HtU . The dollar
amount, (Wt - Ht ) is the dollar amount invested in the risk-free asset. For disasters with
recovery fraction in (Z, Z + dZ ), t (Z )Wt dt gives the total demand for the DIS over time
period (t, t + dt).
   The agent accumulates wealth as:

  dWt = r (Wt- - Ht- ) dt + rS HtS    U U
                                 - + r Ht- dt + Ht- dBt - (1 - Z ) Ht- (dJt - dt)
                              1
             -Ct- dt -            t- (Z )p(Z )dZ Wt- dt + t- (Z )Wt- dJt .                  (13)
                          0

The first term in (13) is the interest income from savings in the risk-free asset, the second
term is the expected return from investing in the S and U portfolios. Note that the expected
returns are different: rS and rU for the S and U portfolios, respectively. The third and fourth
terms are the diffusion and jump martingale terms for the stock market portfolio. Note that
the stochastic (shock) components of the returns (diffusion and jumps) for the two portfolios
are identical path by path. The fifth term is the standard consumption outflow term. The
sixth term is the total DIS premium paid by the consumer before the arrival of disasters.
Note that this term captures the financial hedging cost. The last term describes the DIS
payments by the DIS seller to the household when a disaster occurs.
   The total market capitalization of the economy, Qt , is given by

                                         Q t = q S KS    U U
                                                    t + q Kt .                              (14)

    S     U
Let t and t denote the fraction of total wealth Wt allocated to the S and U portfolio
at time t, respectively. That is, HtS = t
                                        S
                                          Ht , HtU = t
                                                     U
                                                       Ht , and the remaining fraction
    S   U
1 - t + t of Wt is allocated to the risk-free asset.
   In equilibrium, the investment mandate requires that the total capital investment in the
S portfolio has to be at least an  fraction of the total stock market capitalization Qt :

                                              HtS  Qt .                                     (15)

                                                  15
In equilibrium, the total stock market capitalization Qt depends on the mandate. We later
derive a closed-form expression for the relation between Qt and .
   Rewriting equation (13), we express the household's wealth dynamics as:
                                                                          1
                        S       S        U    U
dWt =      rWt- - Ct- + t - · (r - r ) + t- (r - r ) Wt- dt -                 t- (Z )p(Z )dZ Wt- dt
                                                                      0
            S     U
          + t - + t- Wt- [dBt - (1 - Z ) (dJt - dt)] + t- (Z )Wt- dJt .                        (16)

   Let Yt , Ct , It , and Xt denote the aggregate output, consumption, investment, and
mitigation spending, respectively. Adding across all type-S and U firms, we obtain the
aggregate resource constraint:
                                     Yt = Ct + It + Xt .                                     (17)

2.6    Competitive Equilibrium

We define the competitive equilibrium subject to the investment mandate as follows: (1)
the representative agent dynamically chooses consumption and asset allocation among the
S portfolio, the U portfolio, and the risk-free asset subject to the investment mandate given
in (15); (2) each firm chooses its status (S or U ), and investment policy I to maximizes its
market value; (3) all firms that choose sustainable investment policies are included in the S
portfolio and all remaining firms are included in the U portfolio; and (4) all markets clear.
   The market-clearing conditions include (i) the net supply of the risk-free asset is zero;
(ii) the representative agent's demand for the S portfolio is equal to the total supply by
firms choosing to be sustainable; (iii) the representative agent's demand for the U portfolio
is equal to the total supply by firms choosing to be brown; (iv) the net demand for the DIS of
each possible recovery fraction Z is zero; and (v) the goods market clears, i.e., the resource
constraint given in (20) holds.
   Because the risk-free asset and all DIS contracts are in zero net supply, the agent's entire
wealth Wt is invested in the S and U portfolios.




                                              16
2.7       Optimal Qualification Criterion

Finally, for a given level of , we endogenize the criterion at the firm level characterized
by the scaled mitigation threshold Mt = mt Kt , for a firm to qualify as a sustainable firm.
Specifically, at time 0, the planner announces {Mt ; t  0} and commits to the announcement
with the goal of maximizing the representative agent's utility given in equation (10) taking
into account that the representative agent and firms take the mandate as given and optimize
in competitive equilibrium.11 Since no firm spends more than Mt to qualify as an S firm,
the equilibrium aggregate mitigation spending satisfies:

                                              Xt = Mt .                                              (18)


Comment. In our model, the representative agent represents investors in the whole econ-
omy including both the private and public sectors. We may also interpret our representative-
agent model as one with heterogeneous agents where an  fraction of them are sustainable
investors, who have investment mandates (e.g., large asset managers and sovereign wealth
funds), and the remaining 1 -  fraction do not. The sustainable investors group has inelas-
tic demand for sustainable firms and moreover they do not lend their shares out for other
investors to short sustainable firms.


3        First-Best: Capital Tax
Before solving the model for the ESG economy, we first report the first-best solution where
the planner chooses aggregate C, I, and X to maximize the representative agent's utility
                                                                      n
defined earlier. (We drop the payout constraints CFtn  CF t for n = {S, U }.)
       As our model features the homogeneity property, it is convenient to work with scaled
variables at both aggregate and individual levels. We use lower-case variables to denote the
corresponding upper-case variables divided by contemporaneous capital stock. For example,
at the firm level, it = It /Kt , t = t /Kt , and xt = Xt /Kt . Similarly, at the aggregate level,
  11
   Broadly speaking, our mandate choice is related to the optimal fiscal and monetary policy literature in
macroeconomics. See Ljungqvist and Sargent (2018) for a textbook treatment.



                                                   17
xt = Xt /Kt . For consumers, ct = ct = Ct /Kt .
   Let V (K ) denote the representative agent's value function. As in Hong, Wang, and Yang
(2020), the following Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation characterizes the planner's
optimization problem:
                                                                          1
                                    2K 2
0 = max f (C, V ) + (I, K )V (K ) +      V (K ) +                             [V (ZK ) - V (K )]  (Z ; x)dZ , (19)
    C, I, x                          2                                0

subject to the following resource constraint at all t:

                                      AKt = Ct + It + xt Kt .                                               (20)

   The first-order condition (FOC) for investment I is

                               fC (C, V ) = I (I, K )V (K ) .                                               (21)

And the FOC with respect to mitigation spending is
                                               1
                                      1                 (Z ; x)
                       fC (C, V ) =                             V (ZK ) dZ ,                                (22)
                                      K    0            x
if the solution is strictly positive, x > 0. Otherwise, x = 0 as mitigation cannot be negative.
The representative agent's value function takes the following homothetic form:
                                                    1
                                      V (K ) =        (bK )1- ,                                             (23)
                                                   1-
where b is a constant measuring the agent's certainty-equivalent wealth and is endogenously
determined.
   Substituting (23) into the investment FOC (21) and the FOC (22) for mitigation spend-
ing, we obtain:
                                                                                         -/(1- )
                                                                     1/(1- )       
                                       b = (A - i - x)                                             ,        (24)
                                                                                   (i)

                                                                 1
                             -1   -1 -1                               (Z ; x) 1-
              (A - i - x)- b               =                                 Z   dZ .                       (25)
                                                   1-        0        x
And then by substituting (24) into (25), we obtain
                                                   1
                                                         (Z ; x) 1-
                        1=                                      Z   dZ .                                    (26)
                           (1 -  ) (i)         0         x

                                                        18
Finally, substituting (23) and (24) into (19) and simplifying the expression, we obtain
                                                                         1
           (A - i - x) (i)                 2    
0=                         - 1 +  ( i ) -    +                                (Z ; x)Z 1- dZ - 1 . (27)
   1 -  -1                                2    1-                    0

    We now summarize the first-best solution. First, jointly solving (26) and (27), we obtain
the first-best levels of iF B and xF B . Second, we obtain the first-best level for bF B using (24)
and cF B = A - iF B - xF B . Third, we infer the equilibrium aggregate value of capital (average
q ), by using qF B = 1/ (iF B ). Finally, we obtain the first-best capital tax rate: xF B /qF B .


4     Solution
In this section, we solve for the equilibrium solution with the ESG mandate.
    First, we consider the micro-level problem where firms take the sustainability mandate
m as given and make decisions.

4.1    Firm Optimization

For a firm to be sustainable, it spends the minimal required m fraction of its capital stock:

                                                      XtS
                                               xS
                                                t =       = m.                                     (28)
                                                      KtS
Any additional spending on mitigation is suboptimal as it yields no further benefit to the
firm. All other firms spend nothing on mitigation and hence are unsustainable, i.e., xU
                                                                                      t = 0.

    Next, we solve for optimal investment policies for both types of firms. The firm's objective
                    s -rn t                n
(7) implies that   0
                     e      CFtn dt   + e-r s Qn
                                               s is a martingale under the physical measure. We

obtain the following Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation by using Ito's Lemma:

                                      1
  rn Qn = max  CF n + (I n , K n )Qn     n 2 n
                                   K + (K ) QKK                  + E [Qn (ZK n ) - Qn (K n )] , (29)
           I n
                                      2
where rn is the cost of capital and CF n is the cash flow for a type-n firm given by (8), and
the choice of investment is subject to the firm payout constraint, AK n - X n - I n  cf K n .
Here, E [ · ] is the conditional expectation operator with respect to the distribution of recovery
fraction Z . Recall that the last term only depends on the aggregate mitigation spending Xt
and has the same effect on all firms.

                                                      19
   By using our model's homogeneity property, Qn    n
                                               t = q Kt , we obtain the following


                                  rn q n = max
                                            n
                                               cf n + g (in )q n ,                           (30)
                                              i


subject to in  A - xn - cf , where g (i) is the expected firm growth rate:

                                 g (i) = (i) - (1 - E(Z ))                                   (31)

and cf n = CF n /K n is the scaled cash flow for a type-n firm. As xS = m and xU = 0, we
have cf S = A - iS - m  cf for a type-S firm and cf U = A - iU  cf for a type-U firm.
   The investment FOC for both types of firms implied by (30) is the following well known
condition in the q -theory literature:
                                                   1
                                         qn =            .                                   (32)
                                                   (in )
A type-n firm's marginal benefit of investing is equal to its marginal q , q n , multiplied by
 (in ). Equation (32) states that this marginal benefit, q n  (in ), is equal to one, the marginal
cost of investing at optimality. The homogeneity property implies that a firm's marginal q
is equal to its average q (Hayashi, 1982). Next, we determine aggregate variables.

4.2    Market Equilibrium

Since the financial investment and growth opportunities are time invariant, the equilibrium
risk-free rate r, the expected returns (rS and rU ) for the S and U portfolios, Tobin's average
q for all firms (and also the aggregate capital stock) are all constant over time.
   As our model features perpetual growth, we may also calculate q S and q U by using the
Gordon growth model (with constant endogenous discount rate and growth rate) as follows:
                                 A-i-m                                A-i
                qS =    max                       and q U = max                .             (33)
                       iA-m-cf   rS - g (i)                  iA-cf   rU- g (i)
   As a firm can choose being either sustainable or not, it must be indifferent between the
two options at all time. That is, in equilibrium, all firms have the same Tobin's q , which in
equilibrium is also Tobin's q for the aggregate economy:

                                          qS = qU = q .                                      (34)

                                                   20
Equations (32) and (34) imply that all firms also have the same equilibrium investment-
capital ratio, which is also the aggregate i:

                                          i S = iU = i                                  (35)

As the investment-capital ratio is the same for the two types of firms (iS = iU ) and xS =
m > xU = 0, the cash flows difference between a U and an S firm is exactly the mitigation
spending: cf U - cf S = m where cf U = A - i.
   Since each S firm spends mKtS units on mitigation and all firms are of the same size,
we have the following relation between the scaled mitigation m at the firm level and scaled
mitigation at the aggregate level x = X/K:
                                                x
                                     m(x) =        x.                                   (36)
                                                
The mitigation spending mandate for a firm, m, is larger than the aggregate scaled mitiga-
tion, x, as only an  fraction of firms are sustainable.
   By using (33), (34), and (35), we obtain q, the average q for aggregate capital stock:
                                  A - i - m(x)    A-i
                             q=                = U                                      (37)
                                    r - g (i)
                                     S          r - g (i)
subject to the scaled aggregate investment constraint:

                                     i  A - cf - (x/) .                                 (38)

   In equilibrium, the aggregate consumption is equal to the aggregate dividend:

                                     c = cf = A - i - x .                               (39)

Using the second equality in (37), we obtain the following expression:
                                  c         A-i-x          1
                       q=                 = M           =      .                        (40)
                            rM (x) - g(i)  r (x) - g(i)    (i)
   Next, we report that the equilibrium risk-free rate r, and aggregate stock-market risk
premium, rM (x)-r(x), are the same as in a representative-firm economy (with no mitigation)
but with two modifications: (1) productivity set at A - x and (2) the cdf for the recovery
fraction Z given by (Z ; x) for a given x.

                                                21
Equilibrium risk-free rate r and expected market return rM (x) for a given x.
Using the results in Pindyck and Wang (2013) and Hong, Wang, and Yang (2020), we
calculate the aggregate stock-market risk premium, rM (x) - r(x), by using

                        rM (x) - r(x) =  2 + Ex (1 - Z )(Z - - 1) .                        (41)

The risk-free rate is

                             ( -1 + 1) 2                                   1 - Z 1-
  r(x) =  +  -1 (i) -                    - Ex        Z - - 1 +  -1 -                    . (42)
                                 2                                           1-

The first two terms in (42) capture the standard Ramsey channels via the discount rate
() and the expected growth of capital ((i)). The third term captures the precautionary
savings effect and the last term is the jump-induced volatility and higher-order moments.
Aggregate mitigation spending Xt = xKt has a direct effect on the distribution of Z and also
an indirect effect on r via its impact on i. To make the distribution of Z on x explicit, we use
x as the superscript for the expectation operator for jump distributions, e.g., in equations
(41) and (42) for the stock market risk premium, rM (x) - r, and the risk-free rate, r.
   Next, we calculate that the aggregate investment, average q , and consumption.


Aggregate investment, average q , and consumption: i, q, and c for a given x.
For a given level of x, we solve for the aggregate scaled investment i by substituting (41)
for rM (x) and g = (i) - Ex (1 - Z ), given in (31), into the last equality in (40) subject to
i  A - m - cf . It is a constrained optimization problem with the only unknown, i.
   Using the optimal investment policy as a function of mitigation, i(x), we then obtain
the aggregate q by using q(x) = 1/ (i((x)) (equivalently (40)), the aggregate scaled con-
sumption/dividends c(x) = cf (x) by using (39), and the market risk premium rM (x) - r by
using (41). Having characterized all aggregate variables as functions of x, we next turn to
the cost-of-capital calculations for S and U firms.


Cost-of-capital wedge. It is helpful to use n to denote the wedge between the expected
return for a type-n firm, rn , and the aggregate stock-market return, rM , and write for


                                                22
n = {S, U },

                                      rn = rM + n .                                        (43)

As an  fraction of the total stock market is the S portfolio and the remaining 1 -  fraction
is the U portfolio, we have

                               rM =  · rS + (1 - ) · rU .                                  (44)

   Using the last equality in (37) and (40), we obtain
                                              x   m(x)
                                  U =           =       > 0.                               (45)
                                              q   q (x)
Equation (45) states that investors demand a higher rate of return to invest in U firms than
in the aggregate stock market. The expected return wedge between the U -portfolio and
the market portfolio is equal to U , which is equal to the aggregate mitigation spending X
divided by aggregate stock market value Q. This ratio x/q can be viewed as a "tax" on the
unsustainable firms by investors in equilibrium.
   Substituting (43) into (44) and using (45), we obtain:
                          1- U  1-x            m(x)
                  S = -      =-     = - (1 - )       < 0.                                  (46)
                                  q            q (x)
The cost-of-capital difference between U and S firms is given by
                                                     1x   m(x)
                              rU - rS = U - S =         =      .                           (47)
                                                     q     q
By being sustainable, a firm lowers its cost of capital from rU to rS by rU - rS . To enjoy this
benefit, the firm spends m(x) on mitigation. To make it indifferent between being sustainable
and not, the cost-of-capital wedge is given by rU - rS = m(x)/q, the ratio between the firm's
mitigation spending, m(x)K , and its market value, qK .


Equilibrium portfolios. In equilibrium the fraction of total wealth invested in the S
portfolio is equal to , the fraction of the market capitalization that is mandated to be
sustainable:  S = . Also, the fraction of total wealth invested in the U portfolio satisfies
 U = (1 - ) and the risk-free asset holdings is zero. That is, HtS = Wt = QS
                                                                           t =  Qt ,

HtU = (1 - )Wt = QU                             S    U
                  t = (1 - )Qt , and Wt = Qt = Qt + Qt . The disaster hedging

position must be zero  (Z ) = 0 for all Z .

                                                23
4.3       Testable Restrictions

Equations (46) and (47) are testable restrictions of our model. At the firm level, Modigliani
Miller financing irrelevance theorem holds. Thus, when interpreting our model and conduct-
ing empirical analysis, we un-lever the firm by computing its cost of capital with a weighted
average cost of all types of capital, including debt, equity, and other financial claims.
       In the traditional risk-return sense, an unsustainable firm is not "riskier" than a sus-
tainable firm in our model as dividend payments for a sustainable firm are larger than for
an unsustainable firm path by path creating a seeming "arbitrage" profits. However, the
investors of the S -portfolio demand a lower rate of return due to the investment mandate.
       Hence, it is the investment mandate that causes the cost of capital for sustainable and
unsustainable firms to be different rather than the covariance between a firm's return and
the stock-market return. Since in our laissez-faire competitive-market model private sectors
provide no aggregate risk mitigation, the mandate increases welfare as it encourages private
sectors to mitigate aggregate risk which in turn generates positive externality.
                                                                                                 dQn    n
                                                                                                   t +Dt- dt
       Finally, we note another testable restriction is that the cum-dividend return,               Qn
                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                      t-

given in (9) is higher for U than for S firms path by path, but the realized capital gain,
dQn   n
  t /Qt- , is always the same for the two types.
                                                 12
                                                    That is, the return wedge for the U and S
firms comes solely from the dividend-yield difference between them: (cf U /q) - cf S /q = m/q.

4.4       Welfare-Maximizing x and Firm Qualification Criterion m(x)

So far, we have taken a given level of scaled aggregate mitigation spending, x, as given.
Recall that the representative agent's welfare is measured by b given in (23)-(24):
                                                                       -/(1- )
                                                               
                           b(x) = (A - i - x)1/(1-)                              .                       (48)
                                                                (i)

We may endogenize x by maximizing (48). Let xF B denote the maximand of (48), which is
the first-best level of x.
  12
      This result follows from the equilibrium properties that the two types have the same Tobin's average q ,
i.e., QU     U       S   S                      S    U
       t /Kt = Qt /Kt = q, which implies i = i = i via the investment optimality condition and also
g = g = g. As a result, the expected capital gains is equal to the expected growth rate, Et- (dQU
  S     U                                                                                              U
                                                                                                   t /Qt- ) =
         S    S
Et- (dQt /Qt- ) = gdt, which follows from (2).


                                                     24
First-best. The minimal amount of capital needed to attain the first-best, F B , is

                                            xF B
                               F B =                    1.                                (49)
                                       A - iF B - cf

If there exists a level of F B  1, the first-best is attainable. Otherwise, the first-best
is attainable. The intuition for this condition is as follows. Provided that at least an F B
fraction of wealth supports sustainable investments under dividend constraints cf n  cf , i.e.,
 > F B , the first-best outcome is attainable by setting the mitigation spending mandate for
an individual firm by setting mF B = xF B /. When  is very close to F B , the sustainable
firms spend their entire post-investment capital on mitigation and pays minimal dividends
out cf . As  increases, more firms become sustainable as the cost of mitigation spending for
each firm is reduced. This equilibrium adjustment also has implications for the cost-of-capital
wedge and other equilibrium price and quantity variables.
    Now consider the case where  < F B , where F B is given in (49). In this case, the
first-best cannot be attained. The qualification threshold for being a sustainable firm is now
set at
                                        m(x) = x/ .                                       (50)

The solution requires an  fraction of the firm in the economy to pay minimal dividends
(cf = cf ) and spend their entire free cash flows, A - i - cf , on mitigation. In this case,
the (scaled) aggregate mitigation spending is x =  A - i - cf .
    We choose x to maximize the representative consumer's utility, equivalently the welfare
measure b given in (24) for the value function (23), subject to x = (A - i - cf ) and

                            cf + (1 - )(A - i)    1
                                               =      = q.                                (51)
                                r - g(i)
                                 M                (i)

5        Quantitative Analysis
In this section, we operationalize our model. First, we calibrate our model and choose
parameter values based on business-as-usual projections of the damage of global warming to
economic growth. Second, we describe our quantitative results and findings.


                                              25
5.1     Calibration

Preferences parameters. We choose consensus values for the coefficient of relative risk
aversion,  = 2 and the time rate of preferences,  = 5% per annum. Estimates of the EIS
 in the literature vary considerably, ranging from a low value near zero to values as high
as two.13 We choose  = 1.1 which is larger than one, as emphasized by Bansal and Yaron
(2004) and the long-run risk literature for asset-pricing purposes.


Production parameters. As in Pindyck and Wang (2013), we specify the investment-
efficiency function (i) as

                                                      i2
                                         (i) = i -       -,                                              (52)
                                                      2
where  is the depreciation rate and  measures the degree of adjustment costs. We set the
productivity parameter: A = 22% per annum and the adjustment-cost parameter  = 3.5
as in Eberly, Rebelo, and Vincent (2012), the annual depreciation rate  = 6% as in Stokey
and Rebelo (1995), and the annual diffusion volatility  = 14% close to that in Pindyck and
Wang (2013).


Disaster arrival rate  and damage function. We calibrate the disaster arrival rate and
damage function using business-as-usual projections from Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015).
Their projections are based on a set of panel regressions documenting the adverse effects of
exogenous annual changes in temperature (i.e. weather shocks) for economic growth (Dell,
Jones, and Olken (2014)).14 They quantify the potential impact of warming on national and
global incomes by combining these estimated response functions (which can also be modeled
as non-linear as opposed to linear functions) with "business as usual" scenarios (Repre-
sentative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5) of future warming and different assumptions
  13
      Attanasio and Vissing-Jørgensen (2003) estimate the elasticity to be above unity for stockholders, while
Hall (1988), using aggregate consumption data, obtains an estimate near zero. Guvenen (2006) reconciles
the conflicting evidence on the elasticity of intertemporal substitution from a macro perspective.
   14
      This panel regression approach initially focused on how weather affects crop yields (Schenkler and
Roberts (2009)) by using location and time fixed effects. But it is now applied to many other contexts
including economic growth and productivity. The main idea is that extreme annual temperature fluctua-
tions are plausibly exogenous shocks that causally trace out the impact of higher temperatures on output.

                                                     26
regarding future baseline economic and population growth. This approach assumes future
economies respond to temperature changes similarly to today's economies.
   Their projection is that absent mitigation median global GDP per capita in 2100 will
be 76.3% of what it is in 2010, i.e., 23.6% lower per capita in 2100 compared to 2010 due
to global warming absent mitigation. A 23.6% lower GDP per capita in 2100 compared
to 2010 maps into an annual GDP per capita growth rate of -0.3% absent mitigation, as
(1 - 1/100)90 = 0.763 where 90 is the number of years between 2010 and 2100.

                               Table 1: Parameter Values


                 Parameters                                 Symbol    Value
                 elasticity of intertemporal substitution              1.1
                 time rate of preference                               0.05
                 coefficient of relative risk aversion                  2

                 productivity                                 A        22%
                 quadratic adjustment cost parameter                    3.5
                 capital diffusion volatility                          14%
                 depreciation rate                                     6%
                 dividend constraint                          cf       8%

                 power-law exponent with no mitigation        0        100

                 jump arrival rate                                      4.19
                 mitigation technology parameter              1      8.9 × 103

All parameter values, whenever applicable, are continuously compounded and annualized.


   Since extreme annual temperatures are related weather disasters (Auffhammer, Hsiang,
Schlenker, and Sobel (2013)), we map these business-as-usual projections into our disaster
framework. As in Barro (2006) and Pindyck and Wang (2013), we assume that the cdf of the
recovery fraction, Z , is given by a power-law function defined over (0, 1) (Gabaix (2009)):

                                      (Z ; x) = Z  (x) ,                                 (53)

where  (x) depends on scaled aggregate mitigation x. To ensure that our model is well
defined (and economically relevant moments are finite), we require  (x) >  - 1. As in

                                               27
Hong, Wang, and Yang (2020), we use the following linear specification for  (x):

                                       (x) = 0 + 1 x ,                                     (54)

with 0  max{ - 1, 0} and 1 > 0. The coefficient 0 is the exponent for recovery Z in
the absence of mitigation. The coefficient 1 is a key parameter that measures the efficiency
of the mitigation technology.
   Conditional on a jump arrival, the expected fractional capital loss, (x), is given by
                                                 1           1
                        (x) = Ex (1 - Z ) =            =             .                     (55)
                                               (x) + 1   0 + 1 x + 1
The larger the value of  (x), the smaller the expected fractional loss Ex (1 - Z ). We set the
power-law parameter in the absence of mitigation 0 = 100. Absent mitigation (x = 0), the
implied expected fractional capital loss is (0) = 1/(0 + 1) = 1/101  1% as 0 = 100.
   Recall that for a given x, the expected aggregate growth rate, g, is
                                                       
               g = (i) - Ex (1 - Z ) = (i) -                 = (i) -  (x) .                (56)
                                                     (x) + 1
Absent mitigation (x = 0), applying our solution procedure we obtain i = 12.65% per
annum. The implied jump arrival rate is  = 4.19 per annum in order to match the -0.3%
growth rate per annum from Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015). We report these parameters
associated with the business-as-usual competitive equilibrium in Table 1.


Mitigation spending on decarbonization technology. According to estimates from a
McKinsey Sustainability report (de Pee (2018)), decarbonization of just the heavy industries
like cement that account for 20% of the global carbon emissions will cost around 20 trillion
dollars up to 2050 (or 0.75 trillion dollars per year just for heavy sectors). Each year, the
entire global industrial sector emits around 50 billion metric tons of greenhouse gases. As
a baseline scenario, we suppose that the portfolio of decarbonization technology costs over
the next thirty years reach either 144 dollars per metric ton (low cost) or 288 dollars per
metric ton (high cost). These numbers are lower than widely quoted range for the social
cost of carbon. This would mean firms need to spend 3.67 (7.4) trillion dollars annually on
decarbonization or 0.6% (1.2%) of 600 trillion dollars of global capital stock.

                                               28
   We then calibrate the parameter 1 as follows. Suppose that the aggregate mitigation
spending is x = 0.6% is able to stop the rise of global temperature and that the expected
growth rate is not as severely damaged as it otherwise would be absent mitigation. There
is in general uncertainty about how the abatement of temperatures will translate to the
mitigation of damages. We set g = 1% per annum as a baseline scenario and consider some
alternative targets ranging from 0.5% to 1.5% in the comparative statics. For our baseline,
solving (56) yields 1 = 8.9 × 103 .


Lower bound on dividend payouts. Additionally, we impose a restriction that a firm
pays about 36 percent of its revenues (AK ) as dividends, i.e. cf = 8%, which is roughly the
payout ratio for mature consumer or industrial companies. We vary this restriction cf in a
comparative statics exercise.

      Table 2: Comparing Competitive Market Solution with First-Best



                   A. Competitive Market Outcomes
                   mitigation level                          x         0
                   aggregate investment                       i     12.65%
                   aggregate consumption/dividends            c     9.35%
                   expected GDP growth rate                   g     -0.3%
                   (real) risk-free rate                      r     0.82%
                   stock market risk premium                M
                                                           r -r     4.09%
                   stock market return volatility                   14.30%
                   Tobin's q                                 q       1.79

                   B. First-Best Outcomes
                   first-best mitigation level              xF B     1.72%
                   aggregate investment                     iF B    11.75%
                   aggregate consumption/dividends          cF B     8.53%
                   expected GDP growth rate                 gF B     1.68%
                   (real) risk-free rate                     r       2.76%
                   stock market risk premium               rM - r    3.95%
                   stock market return volatility                   14.05%
                   Tobin's q                                qF B      1.70

All parameter values, whenever applicable, are continuously compounded and annualized.



                                             29
   In Table 2, we report equilibrium outcomes for key variables of interest for both the
competitive equilibrium and first-best solutions. Panel A reports the competitive equilibrium
predictions. There is no aggregate risk mitigation, x = 0. The market risk premium is 4.09%
per annum and the real risk-free rate is 0.82% per annum. Additionally, the implied Tobin's
average q is 1.79 and the annual stock market volatility is 14.30%.
   Panel B of Table 2 reports the first-best results. With 1 = 8.9 × 103 , the first-best level
of mitigation is xF B = 1.72% per annum. Mitigation spending makes the economy more
sustainable turning the aggregate (expected) growth rate positive (1.68% per annum) from
-0.3% per annum. Compared with the competitive equilibrium results in Panel A, in the first-
best planner's economy, the real risk-free rate is higher (2.76% per annum) and the equity
risk premium is slightly lower (3.95% per annum). While aggregate risk mitigation costs
roughly 1.72% of the capital stock each year, causing both consumption and investment
to be lower than in the competitive market economy, optimally mitigating aggregate risk
nonetheless enhances welfare and generates sustainable growth.

5.2    Findings

Relation between x and outcome variables of interest. Figure 1 shows that as
aggregate mitigation spending x increases, both the aggregate investment i and consumption
c decrease (see Panels A and C). This is because fewer resources are left (after mitigation)
to allocate between investment and consumption. The black dots in these panels correspond
to the net-zero emissions target spending of x = 0.6%. At x = 0.6%, investment is 12.4%
of capital stock and consumption is 9% of capital stock. Investment is only a bit lower
compared to the competitive equilibrium, i.e. x = 0 but consumption is significantly lower
by 50 bps per annum.
   Since the investment FOC implies that Tobin's q is monotonically increasing in i, the
market value of capital, q, hence also decreases with aggregate x (Panel B). Panel D of
Figure 1 plots the society's willingness to pay (WTP) to move away from a competitive




                                              30
                     A. investment i                                      B. Tobin s q
    0.128                                               1.8

    0.126                                              1.78
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                     o




    0.124            o
                     o
                     o
                     o
                     o
                     o
                     o
                     o


                                                       1.76

    0.122                                              1.74

     0.12                                              1.72

    0.118                                               1.7

    0.116                                              1.68
            0   0.005     0.01     0.015   0.02               0   0.005       0.01       0.015   0.02
                           x                                                   x

                    C. consumption c                      D. society s willingness to pay WTP(x)
    0.094                                               0.4

    0.092
                                                        0.3

     0.09            o
                     o
                     o
                     o
                     o
                     o
                     o
                     o                                               o
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                     o




                                                        0.2
    0.088

                                                        0.1
    0.086

    0.084                                                0
            0   0.005     0.01     0.015   0.02               0   0.005       0.01       0.015   0.02
                           x                                                   x


Figure 1: This figure plots the effects of aggregate mitigation x on aggregate investment i, ag-
gregate Tobin's q, consumption c and society s willingness to pay WTP(x). The parameters
values are reported in Table 1.

equilibrium where x = 0 to one with an aggregate mitigation spending level x:
                                                   b(x)
                                       WTP(x) =         - 1,                                            (57)
                                                   bCE
where bCE = b(xCE ) = b(0), as xCE = 0 in competitive equilibrium. Naturally, WTP(x)
increases with x.
   The black dots in these panels again mark the net-zero emissions target corresponding
to x = 0.6%. With the aggregate risk mitigation of x = 0.6, the WTP is about 25% percent
higher than in the competitive equilibrium. As aggregate risk mitigation x approaches 1.72%
of the aggregate capital stock (x = 1.72%), welfare is maximized and welfare is 36% higher
than in the competitive equilibrium. And Tobin's q when x = 0.6% is only slightly lower
than in the competitive equilibrium with (x = 0) (1.77 compared to 1.79).

                                                  31
                 A. expected GDP growth rate g (i)                          B. market risk premium rM - r
     0.015                                                     0.0415

      0.01                                                      0.041

     0.005                   o
                             o
                             o
                             o
                             o
                             o
                             o
                             o


                                                               0.0405

        0                                                        0.04              o
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o




     -0.01                                                     0.0395

    -0.005                                                      0.039
             0          0.005           0.01      0.015                 0       0.005    0.01    0.015      0.02
                                  x                                                       x

                        C. interest rate r                                        D.  U = rU - rM
      0.03                                                      0.012

     0.025                                                       0.01

                        o
                        o
                        o
                        o
                        o
                        o
                        o
                        o
                                                                0.008
      0.02
                                                                0.006
     0.015
                                                                0.004
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o
                                                                                   o




      0.01                                                      0.002

     0.005                                                         0
             0       0.005       0.01     0.015   0.02                  0       0.005    0.01    0.015      0.02
                                  x                                                       x


Figure 2: This figure plots the effects of (scaled) aggregate mitigation x on the expected
growth rate g, the market risk premium rM - r, the interest rate, and the wedge between
the sustainable firm's cost of capital and the market return, U = rU - rM . The parameters
values are reported in Table 1.


   Panel A of Figure 2 shows that the expected growth rate g increases with (scaled) ag-
gregate mitigation spending x. Two forces drive this relationship. On the one hand, since
investment i decreases with x as we see from Figure 1 and growth increases with investment,
we expect g to fall with x. This is a standard investment crowding out effect from mitiga-
tion spending. On the other hand, increasing x also makes the economy less risky and hence
lowers conditional damages, which increases g. The latter force in our calibration dominates
the former investment crowding out effect. That is, aggregate risk mitigation makes growth
more sustainable. At the black dot indicating x = 0.6, the expected growth rate g is by
construction 1%.
   Panel B of Figure 2 shows that the aggregate market risk premium, rM - r, decreases

                                                          32
with (scaled) aggregate mitigation spending x. This is because the equilibrium jump risk
premium is proportional to Ex [(1 - Z )(Z - - 1)], which decreases with x as Z becomes less
fat tailed. At the black dot indicating x = 0.6, the market risk premium is a bit less than 4%,
not much different from the level at the competitive equilibrium of no mitigation spending.
   Panel C of Figure 2 shows that the equilibrium risk-free rate r increases with x. Since
increasing x makes the distribution for Z less fat-tailed, mitigation lowers the representative
agent's precautionary savings demand and hence increases r as we see from (42). The
risk-premium and risk-free rate results again reflect a key force in our model: mitigation
spending lowers aggregate risk, which in turn reduces the agent's precautionary savings
demand, supports sustainable growth, and enhances welfare. Due to the force of aggregate
risk reduction from mitigation, the risk-free rate is higher (2.1% at the net-zero emissions
target of x = 0.6% compared to 0.82% per annum under competitive equilibrium with no
mitigation)


The cost of being an unsustainable firm. As we have shown, an unsustainable firm
has a higher cost of capital than a sustainable one. Panel D of Figure 2 shows that the wedge
between the cost of capital for an unsustainable firm and the market portfolio, U = rU - rM ,
increases with the scaled mitigation x. Because q decreases with x (see Panel B of Figure
1) and U = x/q, U unambiguously increases with x. The intuition for this result is
as follows. As x increases, the unsustainable firm's cost of capital relative to the market
increases as more mitigation has to be done by sustainable firms. Note that this wedge U
does not depend on the mandate . The black dot in Panel D shows that the expected
return of unsustainable companies is close to 0.4% higher relative to the expected return of
the market is higher when x = 0.6


The effect of  on equilibrium outcomes. Next, we analyze how aggregate mitigation
x, qualification criterion m for a firm to be sustainable, Tobin's q , and the cost-of-capital
wedge, rU - rS between S and U firms, vary as we increase the fraction of capital to support
sustainable investing, . Panel A of Figure 3 shows that as  increases, aggregate mitigation


                                              33
                 A. scaled mitigation x                                     B. qualification threshold m
     0.02                                                      0.024

                                                               0.022
    0.015
                                                                0.02

     0.01                                                      0.018

                       o
                       o
                       o
                       o
                       o
                       o
                       o
                       o
                                                               0.016                 o
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     o




    0.005
                                                x              0.014
                                                xFB
        0                                                      0.012
            0   0.2        0.4      0.6   0.8         1                0      0.2        0.4      0.6   0.8   1
                                                                                               

                      C. Tobin s q                                         D. cost-of-capital wedge rU - rS
      1.8                                                      0.014

     1.78                                                      0.013
                       o
                       o
                       o
                       o
                       o
                       o
                       o
                       o




                                                               0.012
     1.76
                                                               0.011
     1.74
                                                                0.01
     1.72
                                                               0.009                 o
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     o




      1.7                                                      0.008

     1.68                                                      0.007
            0   0.2        0.4      0.6   0.8         1                0      0.2        0.4      0.6   0.8   1
                                                                                               


Figure 3: This figure plots the effects of (scaled) aggregate mitigation x on the expected
growth rate g, the market risk premium rM - r, the interest rate, and the wedge between
the sustainable firm's cost of capital and the market return, U = rU - rM . The parameters
values are reported in Table 1.


x increases, eventually reaching the first-best level xF B . The reason is that the economy can
support more mitigation spending with a higher .
   Panel B of Figure 3 shows that the optimal mandate m is increasing slightly with  for
  F B and then decreasing significantly in  for  > F B . To see why, recall that for
 < F B the economy does not attain the first-best and the sustainable firm spends their
entire free cash flows on mitigation, i.e., m = x/ = A - i - cf . Since investment i is
decreasing in x (see Panel A of Figure 1) and x is increasing in  (Panel A), investment i
must also decrease in  and hence the qualification threshold m = A - i - cf must increase
in  in the region where  < F B . When the first-best is attained, i.e.  > F B , each S
firm chooses m = xF B /, which is decreasing in  as more S firms share a fixed level of

                                                          34
aggregate mitigation xF B .
   Panel C of Figure 3 shows that Tobin's q decreases with  in the region where  < F B ,
as a higher  implies a higher x which gives rise to a lower average q as shown in Panel B
of Figure 1. When  > F B , the economy attains first-best and therefore q = qF B .
   Finally, Panel D shows that the cost-of-capital wedge between sustainable and unsus-
tainable firms, rU - rS , increases with  until reaching F B . Recall that (47) shows the
cost-of-capital wedge, rU - rS , is equal to m/q. As m increases and Tobin's q decreases with
 in the region where  < F B (Panels B and C), the equilibrium cost-of-capital wedge,
rU - rS , increases with . That is, an increase in  leads to an increase in the firm's qual-
ification threshold m and a decrease in Tobin's q . These two forces reinforce each other
causing rU - rS = m/q to increase with .
   However, the wedge rU - rS decreases with  for  > F B . This decreasing result follows
from rU - rS = m(xF B )/q F B = xF B /(q F B ), as more firms are available to support first-best.
As a result, each firm spends less on mitigation and its required compensation in terms of
cheaper cost of capital falls.


Amount of capital and cost-of-capital wedge needed to support net-zero. From
Figure 3, we can calculate the amount of capital, firm-level mitigation mandate, and cost-
of-capital wedge needed to support the net-zero target. To support x = 0.6%, we need
 = 37.6%. Each firm's mitigation spending is equal to m = x/ = 0.6%/37.6% = 1.6% of
its own capital stock (captured by the black dots in these panels). Each firm pays cf = 8%
as dividends to shareholders and uses the remaining (scaled) cash flow A - m - cf = 22% -
1.6% - 8% = 12.4% for investment.
   In contrast, the minimum fraction of wealth needed for sustainable finance to reach the
first-best is F B = 76.3%. That is, to attain the first-best planner's outcome, we need 76.3%
of the firms in the economy to be sustainable. Each firm's mitigation spending is equal to
m = xF B /F B = 1.76%/76.3% = 2.31% of its own capital stock. To achieve first-best, the
wedge rU - rS reaches the maximum of 1.33% per annum when  = F B = 76.3%.



                                               35
5.3    Comparative Statics: Payout Constraints cft  cf

Figure 4 shows that when the payout constraint parameter cf increases from 8% (for our
baseline case) to 8.8%, first-best is unattainable because there does not exist a level of
F B  1 that satisfies equation (49). The intuition is that when the required payouts
are too high, even if all firms in the economy ( = 1) spend their entire free cash flows,
x = A - i - cf , on mitigation, the aggregate mitigation level is still below the first-best level:
x < xF B as shown in Panel A. Panels B, C, and D show that qualitatively the effects of 
on qualification threshold m, Tobin's q , and the cost-of-capital wedge, rU - rS are the same
as those in the baseline model for the region where  < F B (see Figure 3).
   The quantitative effects become less significant for a given level of  since mitigation
decreases as required minimal payouts increase. As a result, the amount of capital needed
to achieve net-zero mitigation spending of x = 0.6% is now around 75%. The qualification
threshold m is now 80 bps and the cost-of-capital wedge is now 45bps since each sustainable
firm is doing less mitigation.

                   Table 3: Effects of aggregate mitigation level


                        x         g       1                 m     rU - rS
                        0.6%      0.5%   5100    36.38%   1.65%    0.94%
                        0.6%     0.75%    6900   36.99%   1.62%    0.92%
                        0.6%       1%     8900   37.60%   1.60%    0.90%
                        0.6%     1.25%   11400   38.23%   1.57%    0.89%
                        0.6%      1.5%   14300   38.90%   1.54%    0.87%
                        1.2%      0.5%   3380    58.92%   2.04%    1.18%
                        1.2%     0.75%   4380    59.67%   2.01%    1.17%
                        1.2%       1%    5620    60.48%   1.98%    1.15%
                        1.2%     1.25%   7060    61.28%   1.96%    1.13%
                        1.2%      1.5%   8860    62.11%   1.93%    1.12%

All parameter values, whenever applicable, are continuously compounded and annualized.



5.4    Other Scenarios

Finally, in Table 3, we consider how the amount of sustainable capital, mandate and cost-

                                                 36
                 A. scaled mitigation x                                      B. qualification threshold m
     0.02                                                       0.011

                                                                 0.01
    0.015
                                                                0.009

     0.01                                                       0.008                                o
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                     o




                                                                0.007
                                      o
                                      o
                                      o
                                      o
                                      o
                                      o
                                      o
                                      o




    0.005
                                                x               0.006
                                                xFB
        0                                                       0.005
            0   0.2    0.4      0.6       0.8         1                 0      0.2    0.4      0.6       0.8   1
                                                                                            

                      C. Tobin s q                                          D. cost-of-capital wedge rU - rS
     1.81                                                       0.006

      1.8                                                      0.0055
     1.79
                                                                0.005
     1.78
                                                               0.0045                                o
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                     o




     1.77
                                      o
                                      o
                                      o
                                      o
                                      o
                                      o
                                      o
                                      o




                                                                0.004
     1.76

     1.75                                                      0.0035

     1.74                                                       0.003
            0   0.2    0.4      0.6       0.8         1                 0      0.2    0.4      0.6       0.8   1
                                                                                            


Figure 4: This figure plots the effects of  on optimal (scaled) aggregate mitigation x,
qualification threshold m, Tobin's average q , and the cost-of-capital wedge rU - rS . Dividend-
capital lower bound is cf = 8.8% and all other parameters values are reported in Table 1.



of-capital wedge vary with two key comparative statics regarding the effectiveness of decar-
bonization technology and the cost of decarbonization technology.
   In the first five rows, we fix the cost of decarbonization technology as in our baseline, i.e.
x = 0.6%, and vary 1 around our baseline of 1 = 8, 900 by targeting different growth rates
g that are achieved by reaching net-zero. We consider a range from 0.5% growth to 1.5%
growth. As the decarbonization becomes more effective, the amount of sustainable capital
 increases slightly, the firm-level mandate m decreases slightly, and so too does the cost-
of-capital wedge. But overall, there are not large differences in sustainable finance mandate
outcomes as we vary the effectiveness of decarbonization technology.
   In the next five rows, we increase the cost of decarbonization technology, i.e., suppose that

                                                          37
net-zero targets require spending 1.2% as opposed 0.6% of capital stock on decarbonization
measures. And then again vary the effectiveness of the decarbonization technology. Since
we need to spend more to achieve the same set of growth rates, 1 's are lower in these five
rows than the first five rows. Comparing g = 1% scenario across the to cost scenarios, the
amount of sustainable capital needed increases substantially from 37.6% of wealth to 60.48%
of wealth and so does the cost-of-capital wedge, rising from 0.90% to 1.15%. In other words,
the cost of decarbonization technology is critical in determining the size of sustainable finance
mandates.


6     Conclusion
Sustainable finance mandates have grown significantly in the last decade in lieu of government
failures to address climate disaster externalities. Firms that spend enough resources on
mitigation of these externalities qualify for sustainable finance mandates. These mandates
incentivize otherwise ex-ante identical unsustainable firms to become sustainable for a lower
cost of capital. We present and solve a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model to
address the welfare consequences. The model is highly tractable, including a simple formula
that characterizes the cost-of-capital wedge between sustainable and unsustainable firms as
the tax rate on firm value to subsidize mitigation. There are a number of testable implications
that can be taken to the data and potential implications for the design of optimal sustainable
finance mandates.




                                               38
References
Abatzoglou, J.T. and Williams, A.P., 2016. Impact of anthropogenic climate change on wild-
    fire across western US forests. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(42),
    pp.11770-11775.

Attanasio, O.P., and Vissing-Jørgensen (2003), A. and . Stock-market participation, intertemporal
    substitution, and risk-aversion. textitAmerican Economic Review, 93(2), pp.383-391.

Auffhammer, M., Hsiang, S.M., Schlenker, W. and Sobel, A., 2013. Using weather data and
    climate model output in economic analyses of climate change. Review of Environmental
    Economics and Policy, 7(2), pp.181-198.

Bansal, R., Ochoa, M. and Kiku, D., 2017. Climate change and growth risks (No. w23009).
    National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bansal, R. and Yaron, A., 2004. Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
    puzzles. Journal of Finance, 59(4), pp.1481-1509.

Barnett, M., Brock, W. and Hansen, L.P., 2020. Pricing uncertainty induced by climate change.
    The Review of Financial Studies, 33(3), pp.1024-1066.

Barro, R.J., 2006. Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century. Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 121, pp. 823-866.

Barro, R.J., and Jin, T., 2011. On the size distribution of macroeconomic disasters. Econometrica,
    79(5), pp.1567-1589.

Bolton, P. and Kacperczyk, M., 2020. Global pricing of carbon transition risks. Imperial Univer-
     sity Working Paper.

Broccardo, E., Hart, O.D. and Zingales, L., 2020. Exit vs. voice (No. w27710). National Bureau
    of Economic Research.

Burke, M., Hsiang, S.M. and Miguel, E., 2015. Global non-linear effect of temperature on economic
    production. Nature, 527(7577), pp.235-239.

Cai, Y. and Lontzek, T.S., 2019. The social cost of carbon with economic and climate risks.
     Journal of Political Economy, 127(6), pp.2684-2734.

Chang, Y.C., Hong, H. and Liskovich, I., 2015. Regression discontinuity and the price effects of
    stock market indexing. Review of Financial Studies, 28(1), pp.212-246.

Daniel, K.D., Litterman, R.B. and Wagner, G., 2019. Declining CO2 price paths. Proceedings of
    the National Academy of Sciences, 116(42), pp.20886-20891.

Dell, M., Jones, B.F. and Olken, B.A., 2014. What do we learn from the weather? The new
     climate-economy literature. Journal of Economic Literature, 52(3), pp.740-98.

de Pee, A., Pinner, D., Roelofsen, O., Somers, K., Speelman, E.,, and Witteveen, M., 2018.
    Decarbonization of industrial sectors: the next frontier. McKinsey Sustainability Report,
    Mckinsey and Company.

                                               39
Duffie, D. and Epstein, L.G., 1992. Stochastic differential utility. Econometrica, pp.353-394.
Eberly, J., Rebelo, S. and Vincent, N., 2012. What explains the lagged-investment effect? Journal
    of Monetary Economics, 59(4), pp.370-380.
Epstein, L.G. and Zin, S.E., 1989. Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of
    consumption. Econometrica, 57(4), pp.937-969.
Gabaix, X., 2009. Power laws in economics and finance. Annual Review Economics, 1(1), pp.255-
    294.
Gadzinski, G., Schuller, M. and Vacchino, A., 2018. The global capital stock: finding a proxy for
    the unobservable global market portfolio. Journal of Portfolio Management, 44(7), pp.12-23.
Gates, B., 2021. How to Avoid a Climate Disaster: The Solutions We Have and the Breakthroughs
    We Need. Knopf.
Gollier, C. and Pouget, S., 2014. The " washing machine": Investment strategies and corporate
     behavior with socially responsible investors.
Golosov, M., Hassler, J., Krusell, P. and Tsyvinski, A., 2014. Optimal taxes on fossil fuel in
    general equilibrium. Econometrica, 82(1), pp.41-88.
Grinsted, A., Ditlevsen, P. and Christensen, J.H., 2019. Normalized US hurricane damage esti-
    mates using area of total destruction, 1900-2018. Proceedings of the National Academy of
    Sciences, 116(48), pp.23942-23946.
Guvenen, F., 2006. Reconciling conflicting evidence on the elasticity of intertemporal substitution:
    A macroeconomic perspective. Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(7), pp.1451-1472.
Hall, R.E., 1988. Intertemporal substitution in consumption. Journal of Political Economy, 96(2),
     pp.339-357.
Heinkel, R., Kraus, A. and Zechner, J., 2001. The effect of green investment on corporate behavior.
    Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, pp.431-449.
Hong, H. and Kacperczyk, M., 2009. The price of sin: The effects of social norms on markets.
    Journal of Financial Economics, 93(1), pp.15-36.
Hong, H., Karolyi, G.A. and Scheinkman, J.A., 2020. Climate finance. Review of Financial
    Studies, 33(3), pp.1011-1023.
Hong, H. Wang N., and Yang, J., 2020. Mitigating disaster risks in the age of climate change.
    NBER Working Paper.
Jermann, U. J., 1998. Asset pricing in production economies. Journal of Monetary Economics,
    41(2), pp.257-275.
Jones, C.I., 1995. Time series tests of endogenous growth models. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    110(2), pp.495-525.
Kashyap, A.K., Kovrijnykh, N., Li, J. and Pavlova, A., 2018. The benchmark inclusion subsidy
    (No. w25337). National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                                40
Koijen, R.S. and Yogo, M., 2019. A demand system approach to asset pricing. Journal of Political
     Economy, 127(4), pp.1475-1515.

Lucas, R. E., and Prescott, E. C., 1971. Investment under uncertainty. Econometrica, 39: 659-681.

Matos, P., 2020. ESG and Responsible Institutional Investing Around the World: A Critical
    Review, CFA Institute Working Paper.

National Academy of Sciences (2016), Attribution of extreme weather events in the context of
    climate change. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.

Nordhaus, W.D., 2017. Revisiting the social cost of carbon. Proceedings of the National Academy
    of Sciences, 114(7), pp.1518-1523.

Oehmke, M. and Opp, M.M., 2020. A theory of socially responsible investment, Working Paper.

Pastor, L., Stambaugh, R.F. and Taylor, L.A., 2019. Sustainable Investing in Equilibrium (No.
    w26549). Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Pedersen, L.H., Fitzgibbons, S. and Pomorski, L., 2020. Responsible investing: The ESG-efficient
    frontier. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Pindyck, R. S., and Wang, N., 2013. The economic and policy consequences of catastrophes.
    American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4), pp.306-339.

Ricke, K., Drouet, L., Caldeira, K. and Tavoni, M., 2018. Country-level social cost of carbon.
    Nature Climate Change, 8(10), pp.895-900.

Rietz, T. A., 1988. The equity risk premium: a solution. Journal of Monetary Economics, 22(1):
     117-131.

Rogelj, J., D. Shindell, K. Jiang, S. Fifita, P. Forster, V. Ginzburg, C. Handa, H. Kheshgi, S.
    Kobayashi, E. Kriegler, L. Mundaca, R. Sfrian, and M.V.Vilario, 2018: Mitigation Pathways
    Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development. In: Global Warming of
    1.5C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial
    levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening
    the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to
    eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Prtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R.
    Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Pan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews,
    Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)].

Schlenker, W. and Roberts, M.J., 2009. Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe damages
     to US crop yields under climate change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
     106(37), pp.15594-15598.

Shleifer, A., 1986. Do demand curves for stocks slope down?. Journal of Finance, 41(3), pp.579-
     590.

Schmelz, W.J., Hochman, G. and Miller, K.G., 2020. Total cost of carbon capture and storage
    implemented at a regional scale: northeastern and midwestern United States. Interface
    Focus, 10(5), p.20190065.

                                              41
Stokey, N.L. and Rebelo, S., 1995. Growth effects of flat-rate taxes. Journal of Political Economy,
    103(3), pp.519-550.

Weil, P., 1990. Nonexpected utility in macroeconomics. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(1),
     pp.29-42.




                                               42
                                            Appendices

A      Details for Model Solution
A.1     Firm Value Maximization
Using the standard dynamic programming, we obtain the following HJB equation for Qn :

                                                    1
rn Qn = max      AK n - I n - X n + (I n , K n )Qn     n 2 n
                                                 K + (K ) QKK                  + E [Qn (ZK n ) - Qn (K n )] ,
        I n ,X n                                    2
                                                                                                       (A.58)
subject to the dividend yield constraint    AK n - X n - I n      cf K n .   And then substituting   Qn (K )
                                                                                                           =
q n K n into (A.58), we obtain

                      rn q n = max
                               n n
                                   A - in - xn + (in )q n +  [E(Z ) - 1] q n ,                         (A.59)
                              i ,x


subject to the dividend yield constraint A - xn - in  cf .
   The FOC for investment implied by (A.59) is
                                                     1
                                             qn =          ,                                           (A.60)
                                                     (in )

which is the standard Tobin's q formula (e.g., Hayashi, 1982). As xU  0 and xS  m, the optimal
mitigation spending is xU = 0 for a type-U firm and xS = m for a type-S firm. as no firm wants
to spend more than it has to on mitigation.
    We may rewrite (A.59) as

                                                          A - in - xn
                                     qn =      max                      ,                              (A.61)
                                            in A-xn -cf    rn - g (in )

where g (in ) = (in ) - (1 - E(Z )). Equation (A.61) implies (33).
   As all firms have the same Tobin's q in equilibrium, we have iS = iU = i  A - m - cf and
                                        A-i-m        A-i
                                q=       S
                                                  = U        .                                         (A.62)
                                        r - g (i)  r - g (i)

A.2     Household's Optimization Problem
Using the same procedure as in Pindyck and Wang (2013) and Hong, Wang, and Yang (2020), we
can show that both the optimal risk-free asset holding and the jump hedging demand for all levels
of Z are zero in equilibrium. Therefore, then may rewrite the household's wealth dynamics given
by (13) as follows

  dWt = Wt-     r + (rS - r)t
                            S       U          S
                              - + (r - r )(1 - t- ) dt + dBt - (1 - Z ) (dJt - dt) - Ct- dt ,
                                                                                        (A.63)


                                                     43
where  S = H S /(H S + H U ) = H S /W .
    The post-jump wealth is W J = W - (1 - Z ) W = ZW . The following HJB equation charac-
terizes the value function J (W ):

      0 = max f (C, J ) + rW + (rS - r) S + (rU - r)(1 -  S ) + (1 - E(Z )) W - C J (W )
         C, S
                                           1
                     2 W 2 J (W )
                +                 +            [J (ZW ) - J (W )]  (Z )dZ ,                     (A.64)
                          2            0

subject to  S  . The FOC for consumption C is the standard condition:

                                               fC (C, J ) = J (W ) .                            (A.65)

Because the S - and the U -portfolio have exactly the same (diffusion and jump) risk exposures with
probability one, the optimality for  S is positive infinity if rS > rU as we can see from (A.64).
This is not an equilibrium. In equilibrium, rS  rU and  S =  holds. We later pin down the
equilibrium relation between rS and rU .
   Let Jt = J (Wt ) denote the household's value function. We show that
                                                       1
                                       J (W ) =          (uW )1- ,                              (A.66)
                                                      1-
where u is a constant determined endogenously. Substituting (A.66) into the FOC (A.65) yields
the following linear consumption rule:

                                               C (W ) =  u1- W .                                (A.67)

A.3      Market Equilibrium
                                                                        X     S
First, a sustainable firm spends minimally on mitigation: xS = K          S.  Second, in equilibrium,
the household invests all wealth in the stock market and holds no risk-free asset, H = W and
W = QS + QU , and has zero disaster hedging position,  (Z ) = 0 for all Z . Third, the representative
agent's (dollar amount) investment in the S portfolio is equal to the total market value of sustainable
firms,  S =  and (dollar amount) investment for the U portfolio is equal to the total market value
of unsustainable firms,  U = 1 - . Finally, goods market clears.
     By using the preceding equilibrium conditions together with H = W = QS + QU = q S K S +
q U K U = q (K S + K U ) = qK , W J = ZW and  S = , we obtain

                     rS + (1 - )rU = r +  2 + E (1 - Z )(Z - - 1) = rM ,                        (A.68)
                                                 -
                                  p(Z ) = Z           (Z ) .                                    (A.69)

   Using rS + (1 - )rU = rM , x = m, and (A.62), we obtain
                     A-i-x            (A - i - m) + (1 - )(A - i)
                                  =
                     rM - g (i)         rS + (1 - )rU - g (i)
                                      q(rS - g (i)) + (1 - )q(rU - g (i))
                                  =                                       = q,                  (A.70)
                                      (rS - g (i)) + (1 - )(rU - g (i))

                                                         44
which implies (37). And solving

                                      A-i         A-i     A-i-x
                           q=                  = U       = M       ,                              (A.71)
                                rM     U
                                     +  - g(i)  r - g(i)  r - g(i)

subject to i  A - m - cf . we obtain (A - i)U = x(rU - g (i)) and U = x/q = m/q as shown
in (45).
    In addition, the optimal consumption rule given in (A.67) implies

                                           C   C
                                      c=     =   q =  u1- q .                                     (A.72)
                                           K   W
And then substituting c given by (A.72) and the value function given in (A.66) into the HJB
equation (A.64), and using  = ,  = 0, and H = W , we obtain

           1       c                     c                 2      
0 =                  -  + rS + (1 - )rU - + (1 - E(Z )) -    +         E(Z 1- ) - 1
        1 -  -1    q                     q                 2    1-
           1       c          c                 2      
   =                 -  + rM - + (1 - E(Z )) -    +       E(Z 1- ) - 1 .      (A.73)
        1 -  -1    q          q                2     1-

     The goods market clear condition implies c = (A - iS - xS ) + (1 - )(A - iU ) = q S (rS -
g (iS )) + (1 - )q U (rU - g (iU )) = q (rM - g (iS ) - (1 - )g (iU )) = q (rM - g (i)). By using (A.62),
we obtain
                                            c
                                              = rM - g (i) ,                                      (A.74)
                                            q

which implies (40). And then by substituting it into (A.73) and combining rM = r +  2 +
E [(1 - Z )(Z - - 1)], we obtain (42) for the equilibrium interest rate.




                                                   45
