                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 CAREER SPILLOVERS IN INTERNAL LABOR MARKETS

                                        Nicola Bianchi
                                        Giulia Bovini
                                            Jin Li
                                        Matteo Paradisi
                                       Michael L. Powell

                                      Working Paper 28605
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28605


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021


We thank Dan Barron, Tim Bond, Guillermo Caruana, Wouter Dessein, Michael Dinerstein,
Guido Friebel, Ben Friedrich, Eddie Lazear, Danielle Li, Niko Matouschek, Peter Orazem, Steve
Pischke, Andrea Prat, Jim Rebitzer, Catherine Thomas, Paolo Sestito, and Eliana Viviano, as well
as seminar participants at Columbia Business School, the CSEF-IGIER Symposium, the
Empirical Management Conference, Harvard Business School, London School of Economics, the
Madrid Workshop on Relational Contracts, Max Planck Institute, the MEA meeting, the NBER
Summer Institute, Northwestern University, RAND Corporation, the Society for Institutional and
Organizational Economics, and York University for their helpful comments. We thank Massimo
Antichi, Mariella Cozzolino, Edoardo Di Porto, and Paolo Naticchioni for help with the data. The
realization of the present article was possible thanks to the sponsorship and financial support to
the "VisitINPS Scholars" program. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors
and are not the responsibility of INPS, the Bank of Italy, or the Eurosystem. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Nicola Bianchi, Giulia Bovini, Jin Li, Matteo Paradisi, and Michael L. Powell. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Career Spillovers in Internal Labor Markets
Nicola Bianchi, Giulia Bovini, Jin Li, Matteo Paradisi, and Michael L. Powell
NBER Working Paper No. 28605
March 2021
JEL No. J21,J26,J31,M51,M52

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies career spillovers across workers, which arise in firms with limited promotion
opportunities. We exploit a 2011 Italian pension reform that unexpectedly tightened eligibility
criteria for the public pension, leading to sudden, substantial, and heterogeneous retirement
delays. Using administrative data on Italian private-sector workers, the analysis leverages cross-
firm variation to isolate the effect of retirement delays among soon-to-retire workers on the wage
growth and promotions of their colleagues. We find evidence of spillover patterns consistent with
older workers blocking the careers of their younger colleagues, but only in firms with limited
promotion opportunities.

Nicola Bianchi                                         Matteo Paradisi
Kellogg School of Management                           Einaudi Institute for Economics
Northwestern University                                and Finance (EIEF)
2211 Campus Drive                                      Via Sallustiana, 62
Evanston, IL 60208                                     00187, Rome
and NBER                                               Italy
nicola.bianchi@kellogg.northwestern.edu                matteo.paradisi@eief.it

Giulia Bovini                                          Michael L. Powell
Banca d'Italia                                         Kellogg School of Management
Via Nazionale 91                                       2211 Campus Drive
00184 Roma                                             Evanston, IL 60208
Italy                                                  mike-powell@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Giulia.bovini@bancaditalia.it

Jin Li
University of Hong Kong
jli1@hku.hk
1      Introduction
Workers of every generation fear that their careers are being held back by their elders.
Millennials worry that their careers are "stalled because older employees are staying in the
workplace longer,"1 and Gen Xers similarly complain about "boomers blocking their way to
the top as older workers delay retirement."2 When older workers linger in their positions,
the thinking goes, it has a negative spillover effect on the careers of younger workers. These
career spillovers are important not only for younger workers but also for their employers.
If employers attract, retain, and motivate workers by promising them careers rather than
jobs, they need to design personnel policies and make strategic decisions that enable them
to deliver on these promises.
    Despite the popular attention these career spillovers receive, there is no systematic ev-
idence that they actually matter. The vast empirical literature on internal labor markets,
dating back to at least Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstr¨    om (1994), neglects these spillovers, as it
                                         3
treats workers' careers independently. This empirical neglect is not necessarily an oversight
but rather a result of standard economic reasoning, as follows. When one qualified worker's
career appears to be blocked because a higher-level position is already occupied, the firm
always has the option of creating another higher-level position. And, even if the firm cannot
do so, the worker can always move to another firm that can. According to this logic, work-
ers' careers should therefore be determined only by their individual characteristics, such as
their human capital, and by broad market-level factors.4 However, if it is difficult for firms
to create positions and for workers to switch to another firm, then career spillovers should
matter: one worker's career success may indeed come at the expense of his or her coworkers'
success.
    In this paper, we show that career spillovers do matter by providing evidence that retire-
ment delays among older workers negatively impact the career progressions of their younger
coworkers. An ideal test for such career spillovers would randomly prevent older workers
in one firm from retiring while allowing older workers in another firm to retire, and would
compare the career progressions of younger workers between these two firms. While such a
test is not feasible, we argue that a recent reform to the Italian pension system, known as the
Fornero reform, created a reasonably close approximation of this ideal. This reform, swiftly

1
    https://www.hrdive.com/news/millennials-feel-boomer-and-gen-x-bosses-are-blocking-their-
    progress/504129/
2
    http://www.bbc.com/capital/story/20130710-the-forgotten-generation
3
    For a rare exception, see Friebel and Panova (2008), which uses personnel records from a large heavy-
    industry firm in Russia following privatization reforms and finds evidence that reduced turnover at the top
    led to blocked promotions for younger workers.
4
    See Gibbons and Waldman (1999), Rubinstein and Weiss (2006), Lazear and Oyer (2013), and Waldman
    (2013) for surveys on standard approaches to analyzing workers' careers.

                                                       1
implemented in December 2011 to contain public expenditures, led to an overall increase in
the minimum retirement-eligibility age. Grandfather clauses were limited, and the reform
unexpectedly caused retirement delays among senior employees who had been slated to re-
tire soon after December 2011. Moreover, the change in the eligibility criteria led otherwise
similar workers to face significantly different retirement delays based on small differences in
their ages and years of contribution to Social Security.
    The unanticipated nature of the reform and the differential treatment of otherwise similar
employees provide a clean empirical setting in which to study the effect of retirement delays
among senior workers on the careers of younger workers. Our main identification strategy
compares changes in wage growth and internal promotions of younger employees across
firms that have experienced different average retirement delays for senior workers, both
before and after the reform. We measure the exposure of each firm to the pension reform
as the average change in retirement eligibility caused by the reform among senior workers
close to retirement. Specifically, we exploit the variation in treatment that reflects small
differences in gender, age, and years of contribution to Social Security only among workers
close to retirement before the reform, while controlling for broader firm-level differences in
age and gender of the whole workforce. We choose this approach to avoid relying on cross-
firm differences in broad demographic composition, because those could affect internal career
trajectories through other channels.
    We leverage two sources of data, both provided by the Italian Social Security Insti-
tute (INPS). First, we use a panel of matched employer­employee records for all private,
nonagricultural firms with 10 to 200 workers in the first quarter of 2009. Drawing on these
records, we are able to compute monthly average contractual wage growth as well as categor-
ical promotions within the company between 2009 and 2015.5 Second, we use the complete
pension-contribution histories for all workers employed in these firms. These data allow us to
compute the retirement delays among workers who were slated to retire within three years
of 2011.
    Our main finding is that career spillovers do exist: longer retirement delays among older
workers cause larger decreases in wage growth for younger workers. A one-year increase in
the average retirement delay among close-to-retirement workers decreases the wage growth
of their younger colleagues by 2.5 percent per year relative to their pre-reform wage growth.
These effects persist throughout the four years of the treatment period. We also find that
career spillovers are larger in firms with larger shares of workers who are close to retirement.
    To better understand the underlying mechanism behind these career spillovers, we develop

5
    The contractual wage is the wage written into a worker's labor contract, not their take-home pay. As we
    explain in Section 2.2, contractual wages are closely related to job titles, which is a unique feature of the
    Italian labor market.

                                                        2
a model that describes when career spillovers are likely to matter most. The model allows
us to ask, and answer, the following three questions: First, does it matter whose retirement
is delayed? Second, are career spillovers stronger in firms that have more limited promotion
opportunities? Finally, do retirement delays affect the careers of different workers differently?
    Our findings show that, as the model predicts, retirement delays among older workers
reduce the promotion rates of younger workers, but only if the older worker is in a higher-level
position. Next, we show that career spillovers are most relevant for workers in slow-growth
firms. We divide firms into tertiles of pre-reform employment growth and look at how the
effects of the treatment differ by the growth rate of the firms. For every one-year increase in
the average retirement delay among workers who were close to retirement before the reform,
the decrease in annual wage growth is (i) 8 percent for younger workers in bottom-tertile
firms, which are all shrinking in size, and (ii) approximately zero for younger workers in top-
tertile firms, which are all expanding their ranks. Similarly, we show that career spillovers
are concentrated among firms with larger spans, measured as the pre-reform fraction of jobs
in the firm that are relatively highly paid. Finally, we find that retirement delays among
older workers have a bigger impact on the careers of their coworkers who are 55 years or
older than on their younger coworkers. This finding may reflect the firms' use of seniority as
one of the criteria for determining promotions.
    Our model also generates specific predictions about workers' and firms' extensive-margin
responses to retirement delays. For workers, our model predicts that, even if retirement delays
reduce promotion opportunities, workers will not leave for other firms, where they might
have to enter at a lower rung on the career ladder. Consistent with this prediction, we do
not observe younger workers responding to retirement delays among their older coworkers
by voluntarily leaving the firm. For firms, our model predicts that they will respond to
retirement delays by laying off some workers and hiring fewer new workers. Empirically, we
find that a one-year increase in retirement delays leads firms to increase layoffs by 10 percent
and reduce hiring by 2 percent.
    Are the career spillovers we document large? The reduced wage growth of younger workers
due to a one-year increase in retirement delays amounts to a monetary loss of up to B       C718
over the course of four years. However, workers who were 55 years or older but not close to
retirement in 2011 experienced monetary losses up to B   C2,951 over the course of four years.
The magnitudes of these latter losses are comparable to 87 percent of the median wage gain
associated with a promotion to a white-collar job and 29 percent of the median wage gain
associated with a promotion to a managerial position.
    We conclude the analysis by evaluating the extent to which our findings are consis-
tent with other career-spillover channels. For example, firms that are already financially
constrained when they face retirement delays may simply be unable to afford to promote

                                               3
their workers. Although we find evidence consistent with financial-constraint-driven career
spillovers, financial constraints alone cannot easily account for the full range of our findings.
    Our paper contributes to the literature on the theory of internal labor markets by high-
lighting the empirical relevance of slot constraints in determining a worker's career progres-
sion. Slot constraints, defined as limits on available slots for internal promotions and the
inability to easily add positions to the organization, have featured prominently in the litera-
ture in sociology and organizational theory.6 However, most leading models of internal labor
markets in economics ignore slot constraints, focusing instead on individual factors such as
human capital acquisition, learning, insurance, signaling, and incentives (see Gibbons and
Waldman (1999) and Waldman (2013) for surveys of the theoretical literature on internal
labor markets). As a result, most of the empirical work on internal labor markets has focused
on these worker-level factors.7 In contrast, our findings suggest the importance of incorpo-
rating firm-level factors, such as slot constraints, for better understanding workers' career
dynamics.8
    Our paper documents the impact on workers of career spillovers due to blocked promotion
opportunities. Other papers in the literature establish a number of other channels through
which career spillovers may occur. Hayes, Oyer, and Schaefer (2006) and J¨       ager and Heining
(2019) show, for example, that career spillovers can arise because of team production. While
several other papers emphasize the role of limited career opportunities, they focus on jobs
with strict institutional features that give rise to rigid slot constraints, such as bureaucracies
(Bertrand et al., 2018), academia (Borjas and Doran, 2012), sports (Brown, 2011; Gong,
Sun, and Wei, 2017), and firms in transitioning economies (Friebel and Panova, 2008).9 Our
paper shows that scarce career opportunities can lead to career spillovers in representative
private-sector firms in which there are no obvious institutional constraints to creating addi-
tional positions. Finally, we focus on the effect of limited career opportunities for the career
advancement of workers who have already been hired. This contrasts with several recent
papers that examine the implications of limited opportunities on whether workers are hired
to begin with and which occupations they decide to pursue (Liang, Wang, and Lazear, 2018;
Lazear, Shaw, and Stanton, 2018).
6
    For early conceptual work, see Simon (1951) and White (1970). See Stewman and Konda (1983) and
    Stewman (1986) for earlier surveys, and see Bidwell and Keller (2014) for recent empirical evidence on the
    importance of available slots for a firm's decision about whether to hire externally.
7
    Chiappori, Salani´ e, and Valentin (1999) focuses on learning; DeVaro and Waldman (2012) focuses on
    asymmetric information and signaling; and Benson, Li, and Shue (2019) focuses on job performance.
8
    For early theoretical work in this direction, see Lazear and Rosen (1981), and for more recent work, see
    DeVaro and Morita (2013), Ke, Li, and Powell (2018), and Li, Powell, and Ke (2019).
9
    The natural experiment we use could also be interpreted as an unexpected shock to labor supply. In
    contrast to other papers that study shocks to labor supply stemming from a large influx of outside workers
    (e.g., Card, 1990; Ottaviano and Peri, 2012; Dustmann, Sch¨  onberg, and Stuhler, 2017), our paper studies
    an increase in labor supply stemming from workers who were already employed by local firms.

                                                       4
    We also contribute to the growing literature that shows how workers' careers are shaped
by luck. Many studies have already documented how labor market conditions at the time
a worker is hired affect his or her entire career trajectory (Von Wachter and Bender, 2006;
Oyer, 2006; Kahn, 2010; Schmieder and Von Wachter, 2010; Shu, 2012). Lazear, Shaw, and
Stanton (2018) shows that idiosyncratic luck at the time of hiring can also play an important
role. We complement these findings by showing that luck matters throughout a worker's
career. Specifically, we show that a worker's career progression can be affected at any time
by whether or not senior workers leave their positions and thereby open up advancement
opportunities for others.
    Finally, we provide new evidence on the consequences of the Fornero reform, arguably the
most important Italian reform of the last decade. Two other recent papers (Boeri, Garibaldi,
and Moen (2017) and Carta, D'Amuri, and von Watcher (2020)) also study the effects of
the Fornero reform, using firm-level variation in the exposure to the reform to study how
pension reforms affect youth hiring and firm performance. There is some overlap between
these papers and ours, both in terms of the type of data used and the nature of the main
treatment variable. The primary way that our paper differs from those papers is one of
focus: we are interested mainly in understanding how career spillovers arise in internal labor
markets. Our model allows us to make specific predictions about when and where such
spillovers arise, which guides our empirical analysis.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional de-
tails and the data. Section 3 introduces a stylized theoretical model and develops several
predictions. Section 4 lays out the identification strategy. Section 5 presents the main re-
sults, while Section 6 investigates heterogeneous effects and turnover. Section 7 discusses
alternative mechanisms, and Section 8 concludes the paper.

2       Institutional Background and Data
2.1 The 2011 Reform of the Italian Pension System
On December 6, 2011, the Italian government enacted a reform of the pension system--known
as the Fornero reform--as part of a larger package of interventions called the "Save Italy"
decree.10 The reform became fully effective on January 1, 2012, only 26 days after its presen-
tation to the Parliament (Figure A1). The goal of the reform was to quickly reduce public
spending by raising the eligibility requirements for public pensions.
    The Fornero reform had three characteristics that are important for our empirical analy-

10
     The pension reform was the central component of the decree. Other interventions mainly in-
     creased taxation on real estate, cars, and consumption. The whole text of the law can be
     accessed at https://www.gazzettaufficiale.it/gunewsletter/dettaglio.jsp?service=1&datagu=
     2011-12-06&task=dettaglio&numgu=284&redaz=011G0247&tmstp=1323252589195.

                                                5
sis. First, many workers experienced a substantial increase in their retirement-eligibility age
(Table A1). Most workers in private-sector firms retire as soon as they become eligible for a
public pension (88 percent in our sample), so this increase in the retirement-eligibility age
led to many retirement delays. In Italy, private-sector employees become eligible to claim full
pension benefits based on one of two sets of criteria. One is based on age alone (age-based
criteria) and the other is based on a combination of age and years of contribution to Social
Security (seniority-based criteria). The Fornero reform raised the requirements to become
eligible under both sets of criteria. In the case of the age-based criteria, the minimum retire-
ment age was immediately increased by one year for men and two years for women (Figure
A2, panel A). In the case of seniority-based criteria, the minimum number of years of con-
tribution required for eligibility increased by two to seven years for men and one to six years
for women (Figure A2, panel B). Appendix B includes a more thorough description of the
changes induced by the Fornero reform.
    The second important feature of the reform is that grandfather clauses were very limited.
They applied only to workers who were eligible to claim a pension under the old rules
by December 31, 2011, and to workers in a few other specific categories.11 The paucity of
grandfather clauses meant the reform had an immediate effect on the retirement decisions
of most Italian workers.
    Finally, workers and firms could not have anticipated the detailed provisions of the re-
form. Even though Italy had been facing increasing financial difficulties prior to December
2011, the political events that led to the reform happened in rapid succession.12 The reform
was presented only 20 days after the appointment of a new technocratic government and
started being enforced 26 days after its presentation.13 Stock markets responded sharply on
December 6, when the reform was officially presented, suggesting that at least some aspects
of the reform had not been anticipated (Figure A3). We can therefore consider these in-
creases in the retirement-eligibility age as largely unexpected shocks to firms' internal labor
markets.
    The changes introduced by the reform provide a clean empirical setting to study career
trajectories within private-sector firms. Small differences in observable characteristics gen-
erated large differences in retirement delays (Figure A4). For instance, consider a group of
male workers born in 1951 and 1952, who started working at age 23 and contributed to
Social Security without interruption. In spite of being born only one year earlier, the 1951

11
   We list these rare exceptions in Appendix B.
12
   Specifically, the government lost its parliamentary majority on November 8, Prime Minister Berlusconi
   resigned four days later on November 12, and a new technocratic government took office without general
   elections on November 16.
13
   Moreover, the technocratic cabinet implemented the reform using the legal instrument of the "decree-law,"
   which does not require a public discussion in the Parliament.

                                                     6
cohort became eligible for a seniority-based pension in 2011 under the old rules, while the
1952 cohort faced a retirement delay of four years and seven months (Appendix B.3).
    To summarize, the reform represents an unexpected and substantial shock to the mini-
mum requirements for starting to receive one's public pension. Moreover, small demographic
differences led to large differences in retirement delays for individuals. The reform, therefore,
could have very different effects across firms whose workforces have similar demographic
characteristics. Our empirical analysis will exploit cross-firm differences in the retirement
delays of older workers that stem from individual variation in gender, age, and years of pen-
sion contribution but which are not correlated with other firm-level determinants of career
trajectories.

2.2 Data
Our empirical analysis uses confidential administrative data provided by the Italian Social
Security Institute (INPS). Specifically, we use seven years of matched employer­employee
data to build firm-level measures of career progression, and we use a separate dataset con-
taining the complete working history of workers to compute reform-induced retirement delays
at the individual level.
    The first dataset consists of matched employer­employee records for all private-sector,
nonagricultural firms with at least one salaried employee. The dataset combines (i) individual-
level information about workers, such as demographic characteristics, wage, type of contract
(full-time vs. part-time, open-ended vs. fixed-term), and position within the firm (blue-collar,
white-collar, and manager), with (ii) information about the firm, such as sector, location,
and age. In this dataset, we restrict our analysis to workers who were not eligible in 2011
to retire within the following three years. These are individuals not immediately affected by
changes to the pension system because they were relatively far from retiring at the time of
the reform.14 We further focus on full-time permanent employees because we want to study
the career trajectories of workers who are central to firm activities.
    We use this information to construct several measures of career progression. First, we com-
pute the average monthly contractual wage growth--an indirect measure of promotions--for
each firm and year in the sample. To do so, we use the monthly contractual wage for each
worker instead of the more commonly available take-home pay. The contractual wage is the
monthly wage that each employee should receive based on his or her labor contract. Unlike
take-home pay, it is not affected by transitory shocks, such as leaves of absence (for exam-
ple, maternity leave, sick leave, or disability leave) and bonuses. This greater stability is
one reason we choose to use the contractual wage, rather than take-home pay, in measuring

14
     The results are robust to focusing on workers who were eligible in 2011 to retire within the following two,
     four, or five years (Section 5.1).

                                                        7
career progression. The second reason we do so is that the contractual wage closely reflects
changes in job titles. Although job titles are not directly observable in the data, it happens
that Italian law (Art. 2103 c.c.) requires that when an employee is assigned a new job title,
his or her contractual wage must be modified to reflect the different responsibilities attached
to the new position. And thus, a new job title gained by a worker will often be accompa-
nied by a change in the contractual wage. In summary, our measure of monthly contractual
wage growth captures the more enduring changes in job titles instead of reflecting transitory
shocks to hours worked or one-time bonuses.
    Second, we create two direct measures of categorical promotions by computing the num-
ber of workers moving from blue- to white-collar jobs or from blue/white-collar jobs to
managerial positions for each firm and year. These variables capture substantial leaps within
the firm's hierarchy. The combination of contractual wage growth and categorical promotions
should provide a relatively complete description of internal promotions within the private-
sector firms in our dataset.
    The second dataset consists of the complete pension-contribution histories of individuals
who, between 2009 and 2015, worked in private-sector, nonagricultural firms that employed
between 10 and 200 employees in the first quarter of 2009.15 In this dataset, the unit of
observation is an event that generated a contribution to the pension system. Available in-
formation includes the type of event associated with the contribution (e.g., paid work, sick
leave, or maternity leave), its monetary value, and its duration. This rich dataset is essential
for identifying senior workers who were close to retirement under pre-reform rules and pre-
cisely determining the firm-level shock to the retirement decisions of these older employees,
which Section 4 discusses in greater detail.

2.3 Sample
We restrict the sample to firms that employed between 10 and 200 workers in the first
quarter of 2009. We impose the upper bound to comply with INPS's request to limit the
size of the data extraction. Moreover, we set the lower bound to remove very small firms
with organizational structures that are too simple to properly study career spillovers. Even
with these constraints in place, the sample is highly representative of the Italian productive
landscape, which is mostly populated by small to medium-large firms. Indeed, only 0.08
percent of firms have more than 250 employees.16 Furthermore, in order to have a balanced
sample, we consider only firms that operated every year between 2009 and 2015 and employed
at least one full-time permanent worker in each year.
15
   The restriction on firm size is due to constraints on the number of pension-contribution histories that could
   be extracted by INPS.
16
   Data between 2012 and 2016 are available from Istat at http://dati.istat.it/Index.aspx?
   DataSetCode=DICA_ASIAUE1P.

                                                       8
    Table A2 (columns 1 and 2) shows the main characteristics of the master sample, which
comprises 104, 182 firms, at the beginning of the sample period in 2009.17 The average firm
employed 26 workers and had been operational for 18 years. The majority of firms operated
in the service sector. The majority of workers were between 35 and 55 years old. Of all
employees, 59 percent were in blue-collar jobs, 33 percent held white-collar positions, 2
percent were managers, and the rest were apprentices. The vast majority of workers were
permanent and full-time.
    Firm-level summary statistics also indicate that the turnover of older workers decreased
after 2011, as did the wage growth and number of categorical promotions of younger workers
(Table 1). The number of workers retiring at a given firm and in a given year decreased by
18 percent in the post-reform period. The number of vacancies, measured as the number of
all workers leaving the firm (due to retirement, or voluntary or involuntary turnover), shows
a similar percentage drop. Together with the decrease in turnover, we observe a decline
both in average wage growth and in the number of promotions, whether from blue-collar to
white-collar jobs or from blue/white-collar jobs to managerial positions. As discussed above,
these last three career outcomes are computed without including workers who were within
three years of retirement in 2011. Of course, the comparison of pre- and post-reform averages
does not by itself identify the causal effect of retirement delays among senior workers on the
career trajectories of younger coworkers. In fact, many other factors--including macroeco-
nomic conditions--might have changed between the two periods. In Section 4, we outline
the empirical strategy we employ to isolate the effect of the reform.

3       A Stylized Model of Career Spillovers
Before analyzing the effects of retirement delays on the career progression of younger work-
ers, we provide a conceptual framework to explore how constraints on a firm's career capac-
ity--its ability to provide advancement opportunities to qualified workers--affect the career
progression of its employees.
    Our conceptual framework is related to the models of internal labor markets of Gibbons
and Waldman (1999), Ke, Li, and Powell (2018), and Li, Powell, and Ke (2019). The con-
tribution of our analysis is to incorporate into the Gibbons and Waldman (1999) framework
the idea of limited career capacity, which gives rise to career spillovers across workers.
    Our analysis yields eight empirical predictions that describe how retirement delays among
older workers affect the career progression of younger workers. We summarize these predic-
tions at the end of this section.


17
     In addition to the constraints just discussed, we limit the sample to firms that have nonmissing values for
     all measures of career progression. This step reduces the number of firms from 104,924 to 104,182.

                                                        9
3.1 Model Setup
A firm operates for two periods and in each period requires workers to perform two different
jobs, job 1 and job 2. Job 1 corresponds to a blue-collar job, and job 2 corresponds to a
white-collar job. Workers' productivity depends on their effort, their innate ability, and the
job to which they are assigned. The worker either exerts effort, ei = 1, or shirks, ei = 0,
and their effort costs depend on which job they are assigned to: if they are assigned to job
j , their effort costs are cj , where c2 > c1 . Effort is not directly observed--if a worker shirks
in a given period, the firm observes this with probability qj if they are assigned to job j ,
where q1 > q2 . The blue-collar job is therefore easier to do and easier to monitor. Workers
are heterogeneous, and their innate ability, i = L , H , is initially unknown to all parties.
Workers have high ability with probability , and their ability is revealed at the end of their
first period of employment. This innate ability affects their productivity in job 2 but not in
job 1. All parties discount future payoffs with discount factor  < 1.
Production. If worker i is assigned to job j in period t, and they shirk, their output is
zero, and if they exert effort, then they produce

                                         Yj,t = fj + hj i .

We assume that h1 = 0, so their output in job 1 does not depend on their ability. We also
assume that f1 > 0 > f2 and 0 > (1 - )(f2 + h2 L ) + (f2 + h2 H ), so if the worker's ability
is unknown, their expected productivity is negative if they are assigned to job 2. Finally, we
assume that f2 + h2 H > f1 , so if the worker is known to be of high ability, they are more
productive in job 2 than in job 1. The firm is capacity-constrained and can assign up to N j,t
workers to job j in period t; if it assigns Nj,t  N j,t workers to job j in period t and they all
exert effort, then it receives revenues Nj,t Yj,t . Throughout, we also assume that in the first
period the firm is endowed with N 2,1 high-ability workers, all of whom it assigns to job 2,
reflecting the idea that the results of the first period reflect past optimizing behavior on the
part of the firm. We will refer to such workers as legacy workers.
Personnel Policies. To motivate workers to exert effort, the firm has three instruments at
its disposal. First, the firm pays nonnegative wages wj,t to a worker assigned to job j at the
end of period t if they are not caught shirking. If the worker is caught shirking, we assume
without loss of generality that the worker will be paid zero and will be terminated. Next, the
firm chooses reassignment probabilities pk,j () between period 1 and period 2, where pk,j ()
is the probability that a worker of type  assigned to job k in period 1 is assigned to job j
in period 2 if they have not been caught shirking. Finally, if the firm hires new workers, it
has to decide what job to assign them in their first period of employment.


                                                10
Timing. The timing of the game is as follows. In each period t, the firm chooses the
number of workers to assign to each job Nj,t . The firm then offers each worker assigned to
job j a contract that specifies (i) a nonnegative wage wj,t  0 that the worker will receive if
they are not caught shirking, and (ii) a next-period assignment pk,j () if they continue their
employment at the firm. The worker then decides whether to accept the contract or reject
it in favor of an outside opportunity that yields a payoff of zero. If they accept the contract,
they choose whether to exert effort or to shirk, which the firm observes with noise. The firm
then makes payments to workers according to the contract. The worker's ability  is then
observed by both the firm and the worker, and the worker departs the firm for exogenous
reasons with probability dj .
The Firm's Problem. The firm's problem is to choose the number of workers it assigns
to each job in each period, (Nj,t )j,t , its wage policy (wj,t )j,t , its promotion policy (pk,j )k,j ,
and its second-period hiring policy (Hj )j in order to maximize its profits,



        N1,1 (Y1,1 - w1,1 ) + N1,2 (Y1,2 - w1,2 ) +  (N2,1 (Y2,1 - w2,1 ) + N2,2 (Y2,2 - w2,2 )),

subject to the constraint that each worker has the incentive to exert effort in each period
and to three additional sets of constraints. We explain these constraints below.
Incentive Constraints. The firm needs to motivate its workers to exert effort in both
the first and second periods. In the second period, workers assigned to job j have a choice
between (i) exerting effort, in which case they receive wj,2 - cj , and (ii) shirking, in which
case they do not incur their effort cost, and with probability 1 - qj they are not caught and
therefore are still paid wj,2 .
    In the first period, workers' incentives to exert effort depend on the probabilities with
which they will be assigned to each of the two jobs in the second period. If they remain at
the firm, the job they will be assigned in the second period depends on their ability and on
the firm's promotion policy. A worker who is found to have high ability, which occurs with
probability , will be assigned to job k in the next period with probability pj,k (H ), while
a low-ability worker will be assigned to job k in the next period with probability pj,k (L ).
Hence, a worker of unknown ability will receive an expected payoff of

            Vj = (pj,1 (H )v1,2 + pj,2 (H )v2,2 ) + (1 - )(pj,1 (L )v1,2 + pj,2 (L )v2,2 )

in the second period, where vk,2 is the utility they will receive in period 2 if they are assigned
to job k . Workers will therefore prefer to exert effort in the first period if



                                                   11
                     wj,1 - cj +  (1 - dj )Vj  (1 - qj )[wj,1 +  (1 - dj )Vj ].

That is, they will prefer to exert effort if their expected discounted payoffs are higher if they
work than if they shirk.
Other Constraints. In addition to satisfying workers' incentive constraints, the firm also
has to satisfy three additional sets of constraints: participation, flow, and slot constraints.
The participation constraints require that, in each period, each worker prefers to work at
the firm rather than to take their outside option.
    The flow constraints ensure that, in period 2, the number of workers assigned to job j
is equal to the sum of (i) the number of new hires into job j , Hj , and (ii) the number of
workers who were assigned to job k in period 1, who did not leave the firm exogenously, and
who were assigned to job j in period 2. That is, for j = 1, 2, we have



        Nj,2 = Hj + N1,1 (1 - d1 )(p1,j (H ) + (1 - )p1,j (L )) + N2,1 (1 - d2 )p2,j (H ),

where Hj is the number of workers the firm hires in period 2 and which it assigns to job j .
Finally, the firm has to satisfy slot constraints, Nj,t  N j,t for each job j and in each period
t.

3.2 Optimal Personnel Policies
In this model, optimal personnel policies resemble an internal labor market. There is a port
of entry in the sense that, except for legacy workers, new workers are assigned to job 1.
Optimal personnel policies also feature a well-defined career path. Workers are motivated by
a combination of the wages in their current job and, if they turn out to be high-ability, the
prospect of promotion to job 2, which is coupled with a wage increase. In addition, workers
are never demoted.
    The following proposition describes the firm's hiring policies and the expected wage
growth for workers assigned to job 1 in period 1, and shows that wage growth depends
on the promotion rate. For ease of exposition, we will assume that, in terms of the firm's
capacity, its organizational span, N 1,t /N 2,t , is fixed and equal to s. Denote the firm's growth
rate by g = (N 2,2 - N 2,1 )/N 2,1 , and define the variable Ri = (1 - qi )ci /qi , which is a measure
of the amount of rents required to motivate a worker assigned to job i. We also assume that
the output that workers in job 1 produce, f1 , is greater than c1 + R1 , so workers in job 1 in
the second period produce strictly positive profits for the firm. Proofs are in Appendix D.
 Proposition 1. Suppose f1 > c1 + R1 . A worker assigned to job 1 in period 1 will receive


                                                 12
an expected wage increase of

                                 w = w1
                                                                  
                                        ,2 - w1,1 + p1,2 (w2,2 - w1,2 ),

where

                                                        g + d2
                                       p1,2 = min                ,1 .
                                                      (1 - d1 )s
                                                                               
Moreover, the number of new hires in the second period satisfies H1 = N1 ,2 + N2.2 - (1 -
                      
d1 )N1 ,1 - (1 - d2 )N2,1 .

     The expression for wage growth in Proposition 1 describes the two sources of wage growth.
                                                      
The wage growth within job 1 is given by w1     ,2 - w1,1 , and the promotion premium is given by
            
w2 ,2 - w1,2 . The key result of Proposition 1 is that workers' promotion rates are determined
by p                                                                 
      1,2 , which is governed by two regimes. In particular, when p1,2 = 1, the firm has abundant
career capacity, so all high-ability workers are promoted in a given period. When p        1,2 < 1,
the firm has limited career capacity, and so not all high-ability workers are promoted.
     Which of the two regimes prevails depends, in part, on the firm's growth rate and its
span. A firm that grows quickly or has a low span will have abundant career capacity, while
a firm that grows slowly or has a high span will have limited career capacity.
     In firms with abundant career capacity, a change in the exogenous departure rate for
workers in job 2 has no effect on the promotion probability for other workers and therefore
no effect on the expected wage growth for workers in job 1. In contrast, in firms with limited
career capacity, a reduction in the departure rate for workers in job 2 means that fewer slots
are freed up for workers in job 1, which reduces their promotion probability. As a result, their
expected wage growth will also be lower. The same is true for within-job-1 wage growth.18
     Finally, the proposition shows that the firm always hires directly into the bottom job.
The number of new hires is equal to the total number of positions minus the number of
workers from the previous period who have not departed.
     Proposition 1 therefore allows us to make predictions regarding how expected wage
growth and promotion rates for younger workers will be affected by the pension reform.
If we think of the pension reform as primarily reducing the exogenous departure rate for
certain workers, then our model shows how the reform will affect workers' wage growth and
promotion rates within firms. Our model delivers several predictions, which we describe in
18
     In the model, second-period wages are determined by the worker's incentive constraint and are ci + Ri
     in job i. The promotion premium therefore does not depend on the departure rate d2 . Wage growth in
     job 1 does, however, because promotions and current wages, which act like bonuses, are substitutes (see,
     for example, Ekinci, Kauhanen, and Waldman, 2019): If the nonnegativity constraint does not bind, a
     reduction in d2 raises the wage that has to be paid to motivate workers in job 1 in the first period and
     therefore reduces within-job-1 wage growth.

                                                      13
the following corollary. We assume that g + d1 + d2 < 1 because that is the empirically
relevant case.
Corollary 1. Suppose g + d1 + d2 < 1. Then, the following are true:
  (i) w and p     1,2 are increasing in d1 and d2 ;
  (ii) p                
         1,2 /d2 > p1,2 /d1 ;
  (iii)  w /d1 and  w /d2 are decreasing in g and increasing in s;
         
  (iv ) H1 is increasing in d1 and d2 .
The first part of Corollary 1 shows that the expected wage growth and promotion rate for
younger workers are decreasing in retirement delays, as measured by a reduction in d1 and
d2 . The second part shows that the impact of retirement delays on promotion rates is higher
if the workers whose retirements are being delayed are in job 2. The third part shows that
the effect of retirement delays on expected wage growth is more pronounced in slow-growing
firms and firms with larger spans. The last part shows that retirement delays lead the firm
to reduce hiring in the second period.
     Our model is deliberately parsimonious, and additional elements could be incorporated,
generating additional implications. First, if workers' abilities are only gradually revealed
over time, those workers who have recently been hired at the firm may not have had the
opportunity to demonstrate that they are qualified for job 2. In this case, when a position in
job 2 is freed up, it is more likely to be filled by someone who has had longer tenure in job 1.
As a result, retirement delays will have a bigger impact on relatively more senior workers in
job 1. Second, the model suggests that workers receive rents at their employer, and these rents
are increasing over time. This result implies that even if promotion opportunities become
more limited because older workers delay retirement, younger workers are not necessarily
more likely to leave the firm voluntarily. Finally, vacancies created through layoffs can have
beneficial incentive effects for younger workers. These incentive effects are larger when the
firm has more limited career capacity. Firms may therefore lay off more workers to create
more promotion opportunities when older workers delay retirement.

3.3 Empirical Predictions
Our model illustrates how career spillovers can result when retirement delays block younger
workers' promotion prospects. Career spillovers are stronger in firms with limited career
capacity, where workers' promotion prospects are already low. These observations give rise
to a host of empirical predictions regarding the pattern of the resulting career spillovers. In
the subsequent sections, we test these eight key predictions:
    (1) The wage growth of young workers decreases in response to retirement delays.
    (2) Promotion rates are reduced more by retirement delays in higher-level positions.
    (3) The effect of retirement delays on wage growth is larger in slow-growing firms.

                                              14
    (4) The effect of retirement delays on wage growth is larger for firms with larger spans.
    (5) The effect of retirement delays on wage growth is larger for more-senior workers.
    (6) The voluntary departure rate is independent of retirement delays.
    (7) The number of layoffs rises in response to retirement delays.
    (8) The number of new hires falls in response to retirement delays.
Each of these theoretical predictions receives empirical support. We also discuss alternative
interpretations of our empirical results in Section 7.

4       Empirical Strategy
4.1 The Treatment Variable
This section describes how we isolate the effect of retirement delays among senior employees
on the career progression of their younger coworkers. The desired treatment variable should
measure the reform-induced retirement delays in each firm. To construct this variable, we
focus on senior workers, to whom we refer as CTR (close-to-retirement) workers, to isolate
the short-term effect of the reform. We classify a worker as a CTR worker if they are a
full-time permanent employee who, in December 2011, would have become eligible to retire
by December 2014 under the pre-reform rules. When compared to other employees, CTR
workers are older and more experienced, have a longer tenure at the firm, and earn a higher
wage (Table A3).
    To identify CTR workers, we use data on gender, age, and years of pension contribution
at the time of the reform, which are contained in the contribution histories provided by INPS.
We use this information to compute the retirement-eligibility date under the pre-reform rules
for each employee in the sample.19 We also compute the retirement-eligibility date under the
post-reform rules. We define the worker-level retirement delay as the difference between the
post- and pre-reform retirement-eligibility dates:

                   D = Years until retirementpost - Years until retirementpre ,

where  represents the worker's group, which depends on their gender, age, and years of
contribution as of December 2011. Even though all CTR workers were similarly close to
retirement under pre-reform rules, there is substantial variation in their reform-induced re-
tirement delays (Figure 1, panel A). The variable D has a mean of 1.36 years and standard
deviation of 1.42 years. As discussed in Section 2, these individual-level differences in retire-
ment delays arise from small variations in demographic characteristics (Figure A4).
    To construct the main firm-level treatment, we weight the retirement delay for each worker


19
     Appendix C includes more details on how the retirement dates are computed.

                                                    15
group by the share of CTR workers belonging to that group. Specifically, we compute:

                               Delayi =         ,i × D                                     (1)
                                             
                                            #CTR workers,i
                                  ,i =                     .
                                            #CTR workersi

Our treatment Delayi therefore measures the weighted average retirement delay of CTR
workers at firm i. Throughout the rest of the paper, we will refer to the weighted average
retirement delay among CTR workers at firm i simply as the "retirement delay" or the "firm-
level retirement delay." As with the worker-level variable D , there is substantial variation
in the firm-level retirement delay (Figure 1, panel B). The average retirement delay is 0.44
years, while the standard deviation is 0.97 years. Two-thirds of the firms in the sample did
not employ a single CTR employee, and for those firms, we set Delayi = 0. Among firms
with at least one CTR worker, the average retirement delay is 1.36 years, and the standard
deviation is 1.28 years.
    We perform a series of balance tests to estimate the correlation between the treatment
variable and a rich set of firm characteristics observed in 2009. Firms with larger retirement
delays are older and larger, and employ an older workforce (Table 2, column 1). These
findings are not surprising, as the sample includes firms that did not have any CTR workers
in 2011 and therefore have no retirement delays. Such firms tend to be smaller and younger,
and employ a younger workforce (Table A2, columns 2 and 3).
    We now address in two ways the potential concern that these imbalances may confound
our results. First, our main specifications include controls for nonlinear trends that differ
based on firm characteristics. Second, we also perform our analysis on the subset of firms
that had at least one CTR worker. In this restricted sample, the correlations between the
treatment variable and firm characteristics are much weaker (Table 2, column 3). Relative
to the full sample, these correlations are smaller because the treatment variable Delayi does
not depend on the presence of CTR workers, which is itself related to firm size and workforce
age.
    It is also important to note that the treatment variable does not predict large cross-firm
differences in the gender composition of the workforce in either the full or restricted samples
(Table 2, columns 1 and 3). As shown in Section 2, the reform led to different increases in
retirement-eligibility ages for men and women. This could in principle raise the concern that
the treatment variable was capturing differences in firms' gender compositions, which could
be correlated with other features of their internal labor markets. In addition to showing that
this correlation is weak, we also explicitly control for nonlinear trends in career progression
that are correlated with the share of male workers employed at baseline.


                                              16
    Our main treatment variable captures variation across firms in the average retirement
delays among their CTR workers. Isolating this variation has advantages for our identification
strategy, but it obscures another important source of variation: when Delayi is fixed, firms
with a larger CTR share are more exposed to the reform. We use this additional source of
variation in Section 5.2, where we estimate an alternative OLS specification to provide a
broader picture of the career spillovers created by the reform.

4.2 Specifications
Our analysis compares the contractual wage growth and the number of categorical promo-
tions of non-CTR workers across firms that experienced different retirement delays among
CTR workers, both before and after the implementation of the pension reform. For our
analysis of contractual wage growth, the baseline difference-in-differences specification is:

                 yit =        t · Delayi · timet + i + t +                 kt · t · Xki +    it ,            (2)
                          t                                       k    t


where the unit of observation is a firm i in year t  {2009, ..., 2015}.20
    The dependent variable yit measures the average monthly contractual wage growth of non-
CTR workers in firm i and year t. The treatment Delayi is interacted with a time variable:
either a post-reform dummy (Post 2011t ) to estimate the average treatment effect in the
post-reform period, or a full set of year fixed effects (t ) to evaluate how the treatment effect
changes over time. Prediction (1) from our model is that non-CTR workers will experience
lower contractual wage growth in firms with greater retirement delays. This corresponds to
negative post-reform coefficients.
    The coefficients i and t represent firm and year fixed effects, respectively. In all specifi-
cations, we control for nonlinear trends interacted with several firm characteristics that were
not balanced in the full sample before the reform (Section 4.1). We do so by including year
dummies (t ) interacted with firm characteristics measured in 2009: sector fixed effects and
multiple dummy variables that identify firms above the median in terms of average worker
age, share of workers who are male, firm age, number of employees, average daily wage, share
of workers with age  35, share of workers with age between 36 and 55, and share of workers
with age > 55 (Xki ).21
    We also study the effect of retirement delays on non-CTR workers' categorical promo-
tions. These outcomes identify relatively rare career-changing promotions. In the average

20
   As specified in Section 2.3, we use a balanced sample of firms that operated every year between 2009 and
   2015. Moreover, using data on all firms in the INPS data, we show that the main treatment variable does
   not predict firm exit after 2011 (Table A4).
21
   Our results are robust to the use of alternative nonlinear trends and to the inclusion of several controls for
   the share and characteristics of CTR workers (Section 5.1).

                                                       17
pre-reform year, there was a categorical promotion in one out of twenty firms (Table 1).
When we analyze categorical promotions to white-collar jobs, we estimate the following
difference-in-differences specification:

                                  BC                                        WC
      Promotion WCit =            t  · Delay BCi · timet +                  t  · Delay WCi · timet   (3)
                              t                                         t

                              + i + t +                     kt · t · Xki +   it .
                                               k       t


The dependent variable Promotion WCit measures the number of blue-collar workers pro-
moted to white-collar jobs in firm i and year t. This regression includes two sets of treatment
variables: Delay BCi is the average retirement delay among CTR blue-collar workers in firm
i, and Delay WCi is the average retirement delay among CTR white-collar workers in firm
i. Prediction (2) is that retirement delays among white-collar workers will have a larger ef-
fect on categorial promotions to white-collar jobs than retirement delays among blue-collar
                                 WC     BC
workers. This corresponds to t      < t     0 for t > 2011.
    Similarly, we can estimate the following difference-in-differences specifications to analyze
changes in the number of categorical promotions to managerial positions:

                                                   BW C
                Promotion MNGit =                  t    · Delay BWCi · timet                         (4)
                                           t
                                                       MNG
                                         +             t   · Delay MNGi · timet
                                                   t

                                         +i + t +                       kt · t · Xki +   it .
                                                                k   t


The dependent variable Promotion MNGit measures the number of blue- and white-collar
workers promoted to managerial jobs in firm i and year t. The variable Delay BWCi is
the average retirement delay of CTR blue-collar and white-collar workers in firm i, while
Delay MNGi is the average retirement delay of CTR managers in firm i. Again, Prediction
            MNG      BW C
(2) is that t     < t      0 for t > 2011.

4.3 Pre-Reform Trends in Wage Growth and Promotions
The identifying assumption in our main specifications is that the career progression of
younger workers in firms with differential exposure to the reform would have followed the
same trends absent the reform. Although this assumption is inherently untestable, we can
show that contractual wage growth and categorical promotions followed similar pre-reform
trends across firms with different retirement delays among CTR workers. The data indicate
that the treatment variable does not predict any changes in our career progression variables
prior to the implementation of the reform (Table A5). This result holds even if we control

                                                       18
for fewer confounding factors than those listed under equation (2); this shows that our iden-
tification strategy does not hinge upon the inclusion of a specific set of contemporaneous
trends.
     Specifically, we first regress contractual wage growth and the number of categorical pro-
motions on the interaction between the treatment and a full set of year dummies while
controlling for firm and year fixed effects only. The coefficients of the interaction terms are
close to zero and not jointly statistically significant at five percent in both the full and the
restricted sample (Table A5, panel A). Next, we add an increasing number of firm charac-
teristics measured in 2009 and we interact them with year fixed effects (panels B and C).
In these cases, the interactions between the treatment variables and the pre-reform year
dummies become even smaller.
     To provide further evidence of the lack of pre-reform effects, we estimate the changes in
contractual wage growth and categorical promotions had the reform been implemented in
either December 2009 or December 2010.22 If anticipatory responses are present, we should
be able to detect significant effects in 2011. As suggested by the hasty implementation of the
reform, the placebo treatment effects are all small and not statistically significant at the 5
percent level (Table A6).

5       Empirical Evidence of Career Spillovers
This section presents our main evidence on the existence of career spillovers on the con-
tractual wage growth and categorical promotions of younger workers. Section 5.1 focuses on
our primary source of variation: cross-firm differences in the average retirement delay among
CTR workers. Section 5.2 incorporates cross-firm variation in the share of CTR workers.

5.1 Do Career Spillovers Exist?
Effects on Contractual Wage Growth. We first estimate Equation (2) to analyze the
effects of retirement delays on the monthly contractual wage growth of non-CTR workers. We
find that contractual wage growth decreases by 0.016 percentage points after 2011 for each
one-standard-deviation (0.97 years; hereafter one- ) increase in retirement delays (Table 3,
column 1), which is consistent with Prediction (1). Compared with a baseline mean of 0.64
percent, these estimates indicate that contractual wage growth falls by 2.5 percent every
year after 2011. The results are quantitatively similar if we limit the sample to firms with at
least one CTR worker (Table 3, column 4).
    Year-specific difference-in-differences estimates allow us to evaluate how the effect changes
over time (Figure 2). The coefficients are small and not statistically significant in 2009 and
2010. The treatment effects are negative and statistically significant between 2012 and 2013

22
     Specifically, we change the timing of the reform without changing its effects on workers.

                                                       19
and are slightly closer to zero in 2014 and 2015. This U-shaped pattern is consistent with
the design of our empirical strategy. Once CTR workers started retiring under the new
rules, the cross-firm differences in the short-term exposure to the reform--measured by
Delayi --became less relevant.
Effects on Categorical Promotions. We then estimate Equation (3) to analyze changes
in the number of categorical promotions to white-collar jobs. In this regression, we include
two sets of treatment variables: the retirement delay among blue-collar workers and the
retirement delay among white-collar workers.
    The results are consistent with Prediction (2). Only retirement delays among those in
higher-level positions reduce the rate of promotions to those positions. A one- increase in
retirement delays among white-collar workers (0.7 years) leads to 0.007 fewer categorical
promotions to white-collar positions after 2011 (Table 3, column 2), which corresponds to a
reduction in such promotions by 14 percent. Moreover, retirement delays among blue-collar
workers do not have any effect on the number of categorical promotions to white-collar
positions.
    We repeat this analysis using the number of categorical promotions to managerial po-
sitions as the dependent variable. In this specification, we include two treatment variables
at the firm level: retirement delays among CTR blue- and white-collar workers and retire-
ment delays among CTR managers. Again, consistent with Prediction (2), only retirement
delays among managers affect the number of categorical promotions to managerial positions.
A one- increase in retirement delays among managers (0.3 years) decreases the number
of non-CTR workers promoted to manager by 0.008 or 16 percent (Table 3, column 3).
In contrast, retirement delays among lower-ranked workers have a small and statistically
insignificant effect.
    Year-specific coefficients show a pattern similar to the one we observe for contractual
wage growth. The main difference is that the estimates remain negative until 2015 (Figure
3). These results also hold if we limit the sample to firms with at least one CTR worker
(Table 3, columns 5 and 6).
Robustness Checks. The main results are robust to several modifications to the base-
line regressions. For example, instead of including indicators for firms with above-median
characteristics, we can interact year dummies with indicators for different tertiles, quartiles,
or quintiles of the distributions of firm characteristics observed in 2009 (Table A7). The
treatment effects are unchanged across these specifications..
    We also control for the share of CTR workers interacted with time dummies, and the
effects remain the same.23 In addition, we control for interactions between time dummies

23
     We perform two separate tests. In the first, we divide firms into three mutually exclusive groups based

                                                      20
and each of the three sets of characteristics for CTR workers (that is, age, years of pension
contribution, and gender) that determine their retirement-eligibility dates. While our main
empirical strategy leverages simultaneous cross-firm variation in age, years of contribution,
and gender of CTR workers, the results are the same when we exclude variation in only
a single characteristic. We can also extend this test to control for much finer cross-firm
differences in CTR workers. We divide the CTR workers into forty small groups based on
their age, years of contribution in 2011, and gender (four bins for age, five for years of
contribution in 2011, and two for gender). Then, we interact the firm-level share of CTR
workers in each of these forty groups with year fixed effects. The results are robust to the
inclusion of this large number of additional controls.
    Finally, we show that the findings are robust to the inclusion of nonlinear trends for each
province and two-digit NACE sector.
    In addition to including more controls, we can show that the results are robust to slight
changes to the sample. First, we repeat the main analysis including all non-CTR workers
instead of limiting the sample to full-time permanent employees (Table A8). Second, we
modify the definition of CTR workers in three ways, identifying them as those workers who
were eligible in 2011 to retire in the following two, four, or five years (Table A9). In all cases,
the main findings are robust.
    Finally, the results on categorical promotions are robust to modifications to the dependent
variables. Specifically, we can define promotions as the share of categorical promotions per
10 employees rather than using their level (Table A10). The treatment effects on the share
and number of categorical promotions are quantitatively similar.

5.2 The Effect of More Workers Facing Retirement Delays
Our analysis so far used cross-firm variation in the average retirement delays among CTR
workers. In this section, we allow firms' treatment intensities to scale with the CTR share
of their workforce, since a given average retirement delay will lead to a larger reduction in
career capacity in firms with a larger CTR share.
    Specifically, we can estimate an OLS specification that includes cross-firm variation in
both average retirement delays among CTR workers and share of CTR workers. We modify
our main treatment variable in Equation (1) by multiplying the variable Delayi by the share
of CTR workers in firm i, as follows:



 on their share of CTR workers: no CTR workers (only in the full sample), a below-median share of CTR
 workers conditional on having at least one CTR worker, and an above-median share of CTR workers
 conditional on having at least one CTR worker. We interact these dummies with year fixed effects. In the
 second test, we measure the actual share of CTR workers at baseline and we interact it with year fixed
 effects.

                                                  21
                                     #CTR workersi          #CTR workers,i × D
           Delay ALLi = Delayi ×     #ALL workersi
                                                     =                         .            (5)
                                                             #ALL workersi

The resulting variable divides the total retirement delays among a firm's CTR workers by the
total size of the firm workforce at baseline, instead of by the number of CTR workers. Unlike
our main treatment, this new specification takes into account the fact that firms in which
the CTR workers are a smaller share of the workforce might be able to better absorb long
retirement delays among those workers. Specifically, if firm A and B have the same average
retirement delay per CTR worker, but CTR workers are a smaller share of the workforce in
firm A, this alternative treatment variable will consider firm A as being less exposed to the
pension reform in the short run.
    Our results are robust to the adoption of this alternative treatment. The coefficient of
Delay ALLi is negative and statistically significant at the 1 percent level, indicating that
an increase in retirement delays per worker leads to lower wage growth among non-CTR
employees. Specifically, a 0.97 year increase in the baseline treatment variable Delayi (one
standard deviation) decreases the contractual wage growth by 0.016 percentage points (Table
3, column 1), while a 0.07 years per worker increase in this new alternative treatment vari-
able Delay ALLi (one standard deviation) decreases the contractual wage growth by 0.017
percentage points (Table 4, column 1).
    The results on categorical promotions follow a similar pattern. For example, in the case
of promotions to white-collar jobs, a four-percentage point increase (one standard deviation)
in Delay ALL WCi , which divides the retirement delays among white-collar CTR workers by
the size of the whole workforce, leads to 0.003 fewer categorical promotions to white-collar
positions after 2011 (Table 4, column 2), which is a six-percent reduction in such promotions.
In the case of promotions to managerial jobs, a 1.5-percentage point increase (one standard
deviation) in Delay ALL MNGi , which is the ratio between the retirement delays among
CTR managers and the size of the workforce, leads to 0.005 fewer categorical promotions
to managerial positions after 2011 (Table 4, column 3), which corresponds to a reduction in
such promotions by 10 percent.

6   Further Evidence of Career Spillovers
6.1 Where Do Career Spillovers Arise?
In this section, we first test Prediction (3), which states that career spillovers are larger in
slower-growing firms. In fast-growing firms, we would expect that retirement delays would be
less likely to limit the advancement opportunities for younger workers. The treatment effect
that we estimated in Section 5.1 should therefore be most prominent in firms that were not

                                              22
growing before the reform.
    To test this prediction, we compute the average yearly employment growth for every
firm in the sample between 2009 and 2011. We categorize firms as fast growing if they are
in the top tertile of the distribution. On average, employment in these firms increased by
13 percent in the three years leading up to the reform. All these firms were growing: the
minimum growth rate in the top tertile was 2.9 percent. Similarly, we categorize firms as
slow growing if they are in the bottom tertile. In this group, the average firm shrank by 10
percent in the three-year pre-reform period, and the minimum decline was 2.9 percent.
    We then compare the differences between fast-growing and slow-growing firms in the
effects of retirement delays on the contractual wage growth of non-CTR workers. We estimate
the following triple-difference specification:

                       s                                      f
          yit =        t Delayi × timet × Slowi +             t Delayi × timet × Fasti           (6)
                   t                                     t

                  +        s
                           t timet × Slowi +       f
                                                   t timet × Fasti +          t Delayi × timet
                       t                       t                          t

                  +  i + t +             kt · t · Xki +      it ,
                                 k   t


where the dummy variable Slowi is equal to 1 for firms in the bottom tertile of pre-reform
employment growth, while Fasti is equal to 1 for firms in the top tertile. The coefficients
              s        f
of interest, t  and t    , indicate whether retirement delays impacted the contractual wage
growth of non-CTR workers differently in slow- and fast-growing firms, as compared with
firms in the middle tertile of employment growth.
    Consistent with Prediction (3), the overall effect of retirement delays on contractual
wage growth is concentrated among slow-growing firms. Compared with firms in the middle
tertile, the contractual wage growth in slow-growing firms decreased by 0.042 additional
percentage points after 2011 for each one- increase (0.93 years) in average retirement delays
(Table A11, column 1; and Figure 4, panel A). This triple interaction corresponds to a 6.6
percent larger decrease in wage growth. We can now move from triple interactions back to
difference-in-differences estimates (Figure 4, panel B). In slow-growing firms, a one- increase
in retirement delays decreases contractual wage growth among non-CTR workers by up to
0.051 percentage points. This effect is more than three times larger than the estimate for the
average firm (Table 3, column 1). In contrast, retirement delays did not affect contractual
                                                                f
wage growth in fast-growing firms. In fact, the estimate of t     + t is positive, although it is
small in magnitude (Figure 4, panel B).
    Next, we test Prediction (4), which states that career spillovers are concentrated among
firms with larger spans, that is, firms in which a smaller share of jobs consist of high-level


                                                    23
jobs. In such firms, there are likely to be fewer available jobs at the top, and retirement
delays are thus more likely to slow the careers of younger workers.
    We measure the firm-level availability of high-level jobs with an indicator that is equal to
1 for firms with an above-median share of top earners. We define top earners as all workers
with an above-median wage, relative to a wage distribution calculated within a province,
two-digit sector, and firm-size category (that is, above- vs. below-median workforce size).
We estimate a triple-difference specification analogous to Equation (6) in which we interact
the baseline treatment variable with our indicator for firms with an above-median share of
high-level jobs (Table A11, column 2).
    Consistent with Prediction (4), retirement delays decrease the contractual wage growth
of non-CTR workers only among firms with a below-median share of high-level jobs. In these
firms, the contractual wage growth decreased by 0.021 additional percentage points for each
one- increase (0.96 years) in average retirement delays. In contrast, the treatment effect is
a precisely estimated zero in firms with an above-median share of high-level jobs.

6.2 Which Workers are Most Affected by Career Spillovers?
We now explore the patterns of career spillovers across different types of workers. Specifically,
we look at whether the careers of different sets of non-CTR workers are differentially impacted
by these career spillovers. Our prediction regarding the heterogeneity of career spillovers
across different non-CTR workers is Prediction (5), which states that the effects of retirement
delays on contractual wage growth are larger for those non-CTR workers who are relatively
more senior. In practice, if firms use seniority as one of the criteria to assign promotions,
retirement delays are more likely to immediately stall the career progressions of non-CTR
workers who are older and who have been with the firm longer.
    To test this prediction, we first divide employees into three age bins: workers who are 35
years or younger, workers who are between 36 and 55 years old, and workers who are above
55 years old. We then estimate Equation (2) (from Section 4.2) separately for each age group
and find that the effects are concentrated among workers in the two older age bins, that is,
36 years old and older.24
    In the full sample, contractual wage growth decreased by 0.02 percentage points after 2011
for each one- increase (1.14 years) in average retirement delays among non-CTR workers
aged 36 to 55 (Table A12, column 2; and Figure A5, panel B) and by 0.06 percentage points
for each one- increase (1.06 years) in average retirement delays among non-CTR workers
older than 55 (Table A12, column 3; and Figure A5, panel C). These estimates correspond
to decreases in contractual wage growth of 3.8 percent and 10.3 percent, respectively. The

24
     In this exercise, we use age as a proxy for tenure because the tenure variable in the dataset is heavily
     right-censored.

                                                      24
effects are not statistically or economically significant for workers who are 35 years old or
younger (Table A12, column 1; and Figure A5, panel A).

6.3 Turnover and Hiring
In this section, we study whether retirement delays have extensive-margin consequences on
turnover and hiring.
    We start by looking at voluntary turnover. One might expect that having to wait longer
to be promoted would lead some non-CTR workers to search for opportunities elsewhere.
The model, however, suggests two reasons this may not be the case. First, leaving a firm
erases firm-specific progress that has been made toward a promotion if firms use seniority
as one of the criteria to promote internally (Prediction (6)). Second, career spillovers have
larger impacts on non-CTR workers who are relatively older and have been with the firm
longer (Prediction (5) and Section 6.2). The combination of these two effects suggests that
the non-CTR workers who are most affected by career spillovers have the most to lose from
resigning. Retirement delays among CTR workers might therefore not be enough to push
workers to leave the company. Ultimately, whether retirement delays lead to an increase in
voluntary turnover is an empirical question whose answer depends on the extent to which
firms rely on seniority to promote internal candidates.
    We address this question by using voluntary turnover as the dependent variable in Equa-
tion (2). Specifically, the dependent variable is the number of non-CTR workers who vol-
untarily leave firm i in year t.25 Consistent with Prediction (6), retirement delays among
CTR workers do not increase voluntary turnover for non-CTR workers (Table 5, column 1;
Figure A6). If anything, the treatment effects are negative after 2011, although the estimates
are small in magnitude and not precisely estimated. The same result holds in the restricted
sample. Overall, the treatment effects correspond to changes in voluntary turnover between
-0.9 percent and 0 percent.26
    In addition to analyzing workers' responses, we study whether retirement delays had an
effect on firms' choices in regard to layoffs and hiring. As predicted by the model, firms value
promotion opportunities and may respond to retirement delays by increasing involuntary
turnover (Prediction (7)) and decreasing hiring (Prediction (8)). A one- increase (0.97
years) in retirement delays increased the number of layoffs by 0.049 non-CTR employees
and decreased the number of new hires by 0.097 job candidates (Table 5, columns 2 and
5). These estimates mean that involuntary turnover increased by 10 percent per firm and

25
   The INPS data include the reason behind any firm separation, allowing us to distinguish voluntary from
   involuntary turnover.
26
   We do not think that the recession Italy was going through at the time can fully explain these findings
   since the recession did not push turnover to zero. The average number of vacancies, net of retirees, per
   firm and year after 2011 was 1.12 positions or 4 percent of the workforce (Table 1).

                                                    25
year, while hiring decreased by 1.8 percent. If we include the layoffs of CTR workers in the
computation, involuntary turnover increased by 12 percent (Table 5, column 3). Moreover,
retirement delays within a given category (that is, blue-collar, white-collar, or managers)
led to more layoffs and fewer hires within the same category than when compared to other
categories (Table 5, columns 4 and 6). On net, a one- increase (0.97 years) in retirement
delays increased the total size of the workforce by 0.8 percent per firm and year (Table 5,
column 7).
    One might think that retirement delays slow the career progressions of younger workers
only in labor markets with strict employment protection laws, such as Italy.27 However, our
results show that Italian firms were able to respond by laying off part of their workforce de-
spite stringent employment protection. These responses did not fully offset the consequences
of the Fornero reform for the remaining non-CTR workers, but they potentially allowed Ital-
ian firms to partially ease the consequences of having limited career capacity.28 This fact
suggests that our results are not driven exclusively by the inability of firms to fire unneeded
employees, although one might expect the treatment effects to be smaller in more flexible
labor markets. Moreover, the magnitudes of the effects estimated in the Italian setting are
relevant to policy making in other settings, given that many other OECD countries have
similar, or even stricter, labor laws.29
    Finally, the policy reform we study was both unanticipated and persistent. Its short-run
effects may therefore differ from its long-run effects if most firms cannot quickly change
the number of slots they have. Our main results as well as the results on turnover and
hiring are consistent with the unanticipated nature of the shock. The persistent nature of
the shock implies that its effects on future retirement decisions will be anticipated. For this
reason, in the longer run, firms may make more comprehensive changes to their personnel
policies over time in order to change the availability of slots, and workers may make different
human-capital investments and labor-market choices.

6.4 Magnitudes
In this section, we discuss the magnitudes of the treatment effects we find (Table A14,
columns 1 to 3). We start by converting the estimated decreases in monthly contractual
wage growth to monetary annual losses. A one- increase (0.97 years) in retirement delays
decreases the annual contractual wage growth of non-CTR workers by B C62. This estimate


27
   Appendix E provides more details about employment protection in Italy.
28
   Overall, the effects of the reform on firms' financial performance are either zero or slightly negative,
   depending on the specific measure of financial performance (Table A13), and there are no effects on firm
   exit (Table A4).
29
   https://www.oecd.org/els/emp/oecdindicatorsofemploymentprotection.htm.

                                                    26
corresponds to a 2.5 percent decrease from an annual wage increase of B  C2,454.30
    It is also possible to compute the overall effect of the reform over the four post-reform
years in our sample. For the average non-CTR worker, the undiscounted four-year loss is
equal to B C718. Discounting future periods reduces this effect to a loss of between B   C592
and BC676, depending on the discount rate.31 In other words, the reform led to total wage
losses for non-CTR workers of between 24 percent and 28 percent of a year's wage growth.
These losses are much larger for non-CTR workers in slow-growing firms (between B      C1,589
and BC1,928) and for non-CTR workers older than 55 (between B    C2,435 and B        32
                                                                             C2,951). In the
latter group of workers, whose careers were penalized the most in the short run, monetary
losses amounted to between 72 percent and 87 percent of the median wage gain associated
with categorical promotions to white-collar jobs (B  C3,386) and to between 24 percent and
29 percent of the median wage gain associated with categorical promotions to managerial
positions (BC10,293).

7    Discussion of Alternative Career-Spillover Channels
In this section, we discuss the extent to which other wage-determination mechanisms can
explain our findings. As already noted, our key finding is that the career progression of non-
CTR workers is slowed when their senior colleagues face retirement delays, especially in slow-
growing firms. Many workhorse models of wage determination, in their most basic forms,
cannot capture the wage and promotion dynamics that arise from these career spillovers,
since they treat workers' careers independently,33 and so any explanation of our findings
must involve career spillovers. Aside from the blocked-promotions channel for career spillovers
that we describe in Section 3, there are at least three other potential career-spillover channels
that have been identified in the literature and that we will discuss: spillovers arising from
firm-level financial difficulties, team production spillovers, and informational spillovers.
    The first alternative channel through which career spillovers can arise is payroll shocks.
Unexpected retirement delays, combined with constraints on firing workers, might increase
the firm's future payroll costs and force financially constrained firms to postpone planned pro-
motions.34 A key distinction between this payroll-shock channel and our blocked-promotions
channel lies in the pattern of spillovers they imply. The effects of a payroll shock should

30
   We compute the average yearly wage in the sample as the average daily gross wage (102.83; Table A3,
   column 3) multiplied by 300, the average number of working days in the Italian labor market.
31
   The discount rates are 10 percent and 3 percent, respectively.
32
   Repeating the analysis on the restricted sample leads to quantitatively similar findings (Table A14, columns
   4 to 6).
33
   See, for example, Lazear (1979), Jovanovic (1979), Harris and Holmstr¨     om (1982), Prendergast (1993),
   Farber and Gibbons (1996), Gibbons and Waldman (1999), and Bose and Lang (2017).
34
   There is evidence that financial constraints matter for firms' employment decisions along several dimen-
   sions. See, for example, Caggese and Cu~  nat (2013), Hut (2019), and Giupponi and Landais (2020).

                                                      27
depend only on the overall magnitude of the increase in future payroll costs and not directly
on where in the organization payroll costs increase. In contrast, for the blocked-promotions
channel, where retirement delays occur within the firm does matter. To explore this distinc-
tion, we first look at where retirement delays occur and ask whether it affects promotion
opportunities differently. Second, we construct a measure of payroll shocks. We look at where
payroll shocks occur and whether that affects wage growth and categorical promotions.
    First, recall our findings in Section 5.1, where we find that retirement delays among blue-
collar workers do not affect the probability of non-CTR blue-collar workers being promoted
to white-collar jobs. Retirement delays among blue-collar workers, however, should increase
the firm's future payroll costs and thus reduce the firm's ability to afford promotions of its
non-CTR workers. Similarly, retirement delays among blue- and white-collar workers do not
decrease the number of internal promotions to managerial jobs, even though they too are
an unexpected financial burden for firms. These patterns conflict with a pure payroll-shock
account of our findings.
    Second, we examine the payroll-shock channel directly by measuring the effects of payroll
shocks on career progression. For this purpose, we create a new treatment variable, blocked
wages, that measures the predicted additional wages that each firm was expected to pay
to its average CTR worker as a result of retirement delays.35 If payroll shocks are the sole
driver of slower career progression, one additional dollar of blocked wages for CTR workers
in any job category or anywhere in the firm's wage distribution should have the same effect
on non-CTR workers' careers.
    To examine this hypothesis, we first regress the average contractual wage growth of non-
CTR workers on the average blocked wages of CTR workers in the top, middle, and bottom
tertiles of the firm's wage distribution (Table A15, column 1). The effects differ depending on
where in the wage distribution the blocked wages occur: Blocking B     C1 of wages in the middle
tertile has a more negative effect on the wage growth of non-CTR workers than blocking B     C1
of wages in the top or bottom tertile. Moreover, blocking B   C1 of wages at the top has a more
negative effect than blocking $1 of wages at the bottom, but these two coefficients are not
statistically different from each other.
    Next, we repeat this analysis using the number of categorical promotions as a dependent
variable (Table A15, columns 2 and 3). In this case, blocking B C1 of wages among CTR white-
collar workers has a negative effect on the number of non-CTR blue-collar workers being
promoted to white-collar jobs, but blocking B  C1 of wages among CTR blue-collar workers does
not have any effect. The findings are similar, albeit less precise, for categorical promotions
to managerial jobs.

35
     For each worker, we multiply their retirement delay by their wage (divided by B
                                                                                   C10,000). Then, we compute
     the average blocked wages at the firm level for different subgroups of workers.

                                                      28
     Taken together, these patterns indicate that where payroll shocks occur within a firm
does matter for the career progression of non-CTR workers. They also therefore conflict
with a pure payroll-shock account of our main findings.
     We carry out one additional exercise that focuses more on the financial-constraint side
of the payroll-shock channel. In particular, we conduct an industry-heterogeneity analysis,
using industry-level differences in firms' access to capital (Hut, 2019). To do so, we estimate
a quadruple-difference specification in which we interact the treatment variables in Equation
(6) with an indicator for four-digit NACE sectors with an above-median share of firms at
high risk of default. This variable, provided by one of the main credit rating agencies in
Italy (Cerved), measures the sector-level incidence of firms with serious problems in meeting
short-term financial commitments. It is commonly used by banks to make lending decisions.
Consistent with the presence of financial constraints, the effects of retirement delays tend to
be larger in sectors with a higher default risk and lower access to credit. We do, however,
also find that even in firms operating in sectors with high access to credit, our earlier finding
still holds: retirement delays decrease the contractual wage growth of non-CTR workers if
those firms are slow-growing (Table A16, column 1).
     The second potential alternative source of career spillovers is team production (Hayes,
Oyer, and Schaefer, 2006). For example, a worker's wages might increase if a coworker with
complementary skills stays longer at the firm, and they might decrease if that coworker has
substitute skills (J¨ager and Heining, 2019). Such a team-production explanation does not,
however, explain our finding that career spillovers arise only in shrinking firms. Our findings
are also inconsistent with the view that higher-ranked workers are complements for younger
workers. In our setting, CTR workers are older and tend to have higher wages than their
coworkers (Table A3). If higher-ranked workers were complements for younger workers, then
we would expect to find that the wage growth of non-CTR workers would increase when
CTR workers face longer retirement delays. In fact, we find the opposite.
     Finally, career spillovers can arise through informational channels (Gibbons and Katz,
1991; Acemoglu and Pischke, 1998; Li, 2013). For example, if the departure of a worker
systematically affects the labor market's perception of the skill distribution of the remaining
workers, it may affect their outside opportunities and hence their wages. In our setting, the
pension reform led to a sudden decrease in the departure rate of older workers, which is
plausibly exogenous to the skill of the individual workers affected.

8    Conclusions
This paper investigates whether and how career spillovers arise in internal labor markets.
If firms use promotion-based personnel policies but are limited in their ability to promote
qualified workers, then one worker's career success can come at the expense of the career


                                               29
progressions of their coworkers. We propose a theoretical framework that generates several
testable implications regarding the patterns of these career spillovers in internal labor mar-
kets. We test these implications using the 2011 Italian pension reform that abruptly and
substantially delayed impending retirements.
    We report four main findings. First, retirement delays among older workers in a firm
decrease both the contractual wage growth and the number of categorical promotions of
their younger coworkers. Second, the effects on categorical promotions occur in response
to retirement delays among hierarchical superiors but not in response to retirement delays
among hierarchical equals. Third, the career spillovers we identify are concentrated among
shrinking firms and firms with larger spans--firms that were more likely constrained in their
ability to create additional advancement opportunities. Finally, consistent with the use of
seniority as an important criterion for allocating promotion slots, the career advancement of
relatively more senior workers was relatively more affected.
    Taken together, our results suggest that career spillovers play an important role in indi-
vidual workers' career advancement, especially in firms with limited promotion opportunities.
These results have implications for our understanding of internal labor markets. Firms should
internalize the extent to which workers' careers become interdependent when their personnel
policies promise careers to attract, retain and motivate employees. Hence, they must ensure
that they can deliver on those promises. Our results also have implications for the design of
public policies. Policies that change eligibility requirements for public pensions might have
significant consequences on the career trajectories of younger workers and not just on the
older workers who are close to retirement. The gradual aging of the workforce in many OECD
countries is projected to make these issues increasingly consequential (OECD, 2017).


References
Acemoglu, Daron and J¨     orn-Steffen Pischke. 1998. "Why Do Firms Train? Theory and
  Evidence." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1): 79­119.
Baker, George P., Michael Gibbs, and Bengt Holmstr¨         om. 1994. "The Internal Eco-
  nomics of the Firm: Evidence from Personnel Data." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  109(4): 881­919.
Benson, Alan, Danielle Li, and Kelly Shue. 2019. "Promotions and the Peter Principle."
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Bertrand, Marianne, Robin Burgess, Arunish Chawla, and Guo Xu. 2018. "The
  Glittering Prizes : Career Incentives and Bureaucrat Performance." Review of Economic
  Studies, forthcoming.
Bidwell, Matthew and JR Keller. 2014. "Within or Without? How Firms Combine
  Internal and External Labor Markets to Fill Jobs." Academy of Management Journal,
  57(4): 1035­1055.



                                             30
Boeri, Tito, Pietro Garibaldi, and Espen Moen. 2017. "Closing the Retirement Door
  and the Lump of Labor." working paper.
Borjas, George J. and Kirk B. Doran. 2012. "The Collapse of the Soviet Union
  and the Productivity of American Mathematicians." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  127(3): 1143­1203.
Bose, Gautam and Kevin Lang. 2017. "Monitoring for Worker Quality." Journal of
  Labor Economics, 35(3): 755­785.
Brown, Jennifer. 2011. "Quitters Never Win: The (Adverse) Incentive Effects of Compet-
  ing with Superstars." Journal of Political Economy, 119(5): 982­1013.
Caggese, Andrea and Vicente Cu~      nat. 2013. "Financing Constraints and Fixed-Term."
  Economic Journal, 118(1998): 2013­2046.
Card, David. 1990. "The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market."
  Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 43(2): 245­257.
Carta, Francesca, Francesco D'Amuri, and Till von Watcher. 2020. "Workforce
  Aging, Pension Reforms, and Firm Outcomes." working paper, Bank of Italy.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andr´    e, Bernard Salani´ e, and Julie Valentin. 1999. "Early Starters
  versus Late Beginners." Journal of Political Economy, 107(4): 731­760.
DeVaro, Jed and Hodaka Morita. 2013. "Internal Promotion and External Recruitment:
  A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis." Journal of Labor Economics, 31(2): 227­269.
DeVaro, Jed and Michael Waldman. 2012. "The Signaling Role of Promotions: Further
  Theory and Empirical Evidence." Journal of Labor Economics, 30(1): 91­147.
Dustmann, Christian, Uta Sch¨     onberg, and Jan Stuhler. 2017. "Labor Supply Shocks,
  Native Wages, and the Adjustment of Local Employment." Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 132(1): 435­483.
Ekinci, Emre, Antti Kauhanen, and Michael Waldman. 2019. "Bonuses and promo-
  tion tournaments: Theory and evidence." Economic Journal, 129(622): 2342­2389.
Farber, Henry S. and Robert Gibbons. 1996. "Learning and Wage Dynamics." Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 111: 1007­1047.
Friebel, Guido and Elena Panova. 2008. "Insider Privatization and Careers: A Clinical
  Study of a Russian Firm in Transition." In The Analysis of Firms and Employees: Quan-
  titative and Qualitative Approaches. , ed. Stefan Bender, Julia Lane, Kathryn L. Shaw,
  Fredrik Andersson, and Till von Wachter, 253­266. University of Chicago Press.
Gibbons, Robert and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. "Layoffs and Lemons." Journal of Labor
  Economics, 9(4): 351­380.
Gibbons, Robert and Michael Waldman. 1999. "A Theory of Wage and Promotion
  Dynamics Inside Firms." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(4): 1321­1358.
Giupponi, Giulia and Camille Landais. 2020. "Subsidizing Labor Hoarding in Reces-
  sions: The Employment & Welfare Effects of Short Time Work." CEPR Discussion Paper
  13310.
Gong, Jie, Ang Sun, and Zhichao Wei. 2017. "Choosing the Pond: On-the-Job Expe-
  rience and Long-Run Career Outcomes." Management Science, 64(2): 860­872.
Harris, Milton and Bengt Holmstr¨        om. 1982. "A Theory of Wage Dynamics." The
  Review of Economic Studies, 49(3): 315.
Hayes, Rachel M., Paul Oyer, and Scott Schaefer. 2006. "Coworker Complementarity
  and the Stability of Top-Management Teams." Journal of Law, Economics, and Organi-
  zation, 22(1): 184­212.

                                           31
Hut, Stefan. 2019. "Cash Constraints and Labor Adjustments: Evidence from a Retirement
  Policy." Working Paper, Brown University.
INPS. 2016. "XV Rapporto Annuale."
J¨
 ager, Simon and J¨  org Heining. 2019. "How Substitutable Are Workers? Evidence from
  Worker Deaths." working paper.
Jovanovic, Boyan. 1979. "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover." Journal of Political
  Economy, 87(5): 972­990.
Kahn, Lisa B. 2010. "The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating From
  College in a Bad Economy." Labour Economics, 17(2): 303­316.
Ke, Rongzhu, Jin Li, and Michael Powell. 2018. "Managing Careers in Organizations."
  Journal of Labor Economics, 36(1): 197­252.
Lazear, Edward P. 1979. "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political
  Economy, 87(6): 1261­1284.
Lazear, Edward P. and Paul Oyer. 2013. "Personnel Economics." In Handbook of Or-
  ganizational Economics. , ed. Robert Gibbons and John Roberts. Princeton University
  Press.
Lazear, Edward P. and Sherwin Rosen. 1981. "Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum
  Labor Contracts." Journal of Political Economy, 89(5): 841­864.
Lazear, Edward P., Kathryn L. Shaw, and Christopher T. Stanton. 2018. "Who
  Gets Hired? The Importance of Finding an Open Slot." In Firms and the Distribution
  of Income: The Roles of Productivity and Luck. , ed. Edward P. Lazear and Kathryn L.
  Shaw, S133­S181.
Liang, James, Hui Wang, and Edward P. Lazear. 2018. "Demographics and En-
  trepreneurship." Journal of Political Economy, 126(S1): S140­S196.
Li, Jin. 2013. "Job Mobility, Wage Dispersion, and Technological Change: An Asymmetric
  Information Perspective." European Economic Review, 60: 105­126.
Li, Jin, Michael Powell, and Rongzhu Ke. 2019. "Promotion Opportunities and Firm
  Growth." working paper.
OECD. 2011. Pensions at a Glance 2011: Retirement-Income Systems in OECD and G20
  Countries.
OECD. 2017. Preventing Ageing Unequally.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P. and Giovanni Peri. 2012. "Rethinking the Effect of Im-
  migration on Wages." Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(1): 152­197.
Oyer, Paul. 2006. "Initial Labor Market Conditions and Long-Term Outcomes for
  Economists." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(3): 143­160.
Prendergast, Canice. 1993. "The Role of Promotion in Inducing Specific Human Capital
  Acquisition." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(2): 523­534.
Rubinstein, Yona and Yoram Weiss. 2006. "Post Schooling Wage Growth: Investment,
  Search and Learning." In Handbook of the Economics of Education. Vol. 1, , ed. Eric A.
  Hanushek and Finis Welch, 1­67. Elsevier B.V.
Schmieder, Johannes F. and Till Von Wachter. 2010. "Does Wage Persistence Matter
  For Employment Fluctuations? Evidence From Displaced Workers." American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3): 1­21.
Shu, Pian. 2012. "The Long-Term Impact of Business Cycles on Innovation: Evidence from
  the Massachusetts Institute of Technology." working paper.
Simon, Herbert. 1951. "The Analysis of Promotion Opportunities." Personnel, 27: 282­

                                          32
  285.
Stewman, Shelby. 1986. "Demographic Models of Internal Labor Markets." Administrative
  Science Quarterly, 31(2): 212­247.
Stewman, Shelby and Suresh L. Konda. 1983. "Careers and Organizational Labor Mar-
  kets: Demographic Models of Organizational Behavior." American Journal of Sociology,
  88(4): 637­685.
Von Wachter, Till and Stefan Bender. 2006. "In the Right Place at the Wrong Time:
  The Role of Firms and Luck in Young Workers' Careers." American Economic Review,
  96(5): 1679­1705.
Waldman, Michael. 2013. "Classic Promotion Tournaments Versus Market-Based Tour-
  naments." International Journal of Industrial Organization, 31(3): 198­210.
White, Harrison. 1970. Chains of Opportunity: System Models of Mobility in Organiza-
  tions. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.




                                         33
Figures and Tables

                         Figure 1: Worker- and Firm-Level Treatment




                       1.5
                       1
                       .5
                       0




                             -2        0             2                4               6    8
                                               Years until retirement eligibility


                             A. Distribution of worker-level retirement delays
                       4
                       3
                       2
                       1
                       0




                             -2        0                2                4             6   8
                                       Years until retirement eligibility per CTR worker


                      B. Distribution of average firm-level retirement delays

Notes: These graphs show the distribution of retirement delays among CTR (close-to-retirement)
workers due to the reform. Workers are considered CTR if they were within three years of retirement
in 2011. Panel A shows the distribution of retirement delays at the worker level among CTR workers.
The average CTR worker experienced a retirement delay of 1.36 years with a standard deviation of
1.42 years. Panel B shows the distribution of average retirement delays at the firm level. The mean
firm-level average retirement delay is 0.44 years, and the standard deviation is 0.97 years.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                           34
     Figure 2: Effect of Increased Retirement Delays on Contractual Wage Growth of
                                    non-CTR Workers


          .02



          .01



            0



         -.01



         -.02



         -.03



         -.04
                2009      2010         2011         2012        2013         2014         2015
                                                    Year


Notes: This graph shows the effect of a one-year increase in the average retirement delay among a
firm's CTR (close-to-retirement) workers on the average monthly contractual wage growth of the
firm's non-CTR workers. Workers are considered CTR if they were within three years of retirement
in 2011. The dependent variable is the average monthly contractual wage growth of workers who
were not within three years of retirement in 2011. The treatment variable measures the average
retirement delay of CTR workers within each firm. The regressions include firm fixed effects, year
fixed effects, and year dummies interacted with baseline firm characteristics measured in 2009
(sector dummies, multiple dummy variables that identify firms above the median in terms of average
worker age, share of male workers, firm age, number of employees, average daily wage, share of
workers with age  35, share of workers with age between 36 and 55, share of workers with age
> 55). Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Number of observations: 729,274 firm-year
pairs. Firms in the sample: 104,182. Mean wage growth in the pre-reform period: 0.64.
Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were active
every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories, Istituto
Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                               35
        Figure 3: Effect of Increased Retirement Delays on Categorical Promotions of
                                      non-CTR Workers

      .02                                                                                  .06

     .015                                                                                  .04

      .01
                                                                                           .02

     .005
                                                                                             0
        0
                                                                                           -.02
     -.005
                                                                                           -.04
      -.01

                                                                                           -.06
     -.015

      -.02                                                                                 -.08


     -.025                                                                                  -.1
             2009       2010        2011      2012      2013       2014        2015               2009      2010       2011   2012          2013        2014        2015
                                              Year                                                                            Year

               +1 year per CTR white collar          +1 year per CTR blue collar                    +1 year per CTR manager          +1 year per CTR blue/white collar


                    A. Promotion to white collar                                                          B. Promotion to manager
Notes: This graph shows the effect of a one-year increase in the average retirement delay among
a firm's CTR (close-to-retirement) workers on the number of categorical promotions of the firm's
non-CTR workers. Workers are considered CTR if they were within three years of retirement in
2011. In panel A, the dependent variable is the number of categorical promotions from blue-collar
to white-collar positions per firm and year. This regression estimates the effects of retirement delays
among blue-collar (red dashed line) and white-collar CTR workers (black solid line). In panel B,
the dependent variable is the number of categorical promotions to managerial jobs per firm and
year. This regression estimates the effects of retirement delays among blue- and white-collar CTR
workers (red dashed line) and CTR managers (black solid line). The regressions include firm fixed
effects, year fixed effects, and year dummies interacted with baseline firm characteristics measured
in 2009 (sector dummies, multiple dummy variables that identify firms above the median in terms
of average worker age, share of male workers, firm age, number of employees, average daily wage,
share of workers with age  35, share of workers with age between 36 and 55, share of workers with
age > 55). Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Number of observations: 729,274 firm-
year pairs. Firms in the sample: 104,182. Mean outcomes in the pre-reform period: 0.05 categorical
promotions per firm and year for both panels.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                                                      36
            Figure 4: Differential Effects of Increased Retirement Delays by Pre-Reform
                                        Employment Growth

      .08                                                                                  .06

      .06                                                                                  .04

      .04                                                                                  .02

      .02
                                                                                             0
       0
                                                                                           -.02
     -.02
                                                                                           -.04
     -.04
                                                                                           -.06
     -.06
                                                                                           -.08
     -.08

      -.1                                                                                   -.1

     -.12                                                                                  -.12
            2009       2010         2011    2012        2013         2014      2015               2009   2010        2011        2012    2013         2014   2015
                                            Year                                                                                 Year

                   Top vs. middle tertile          Bottom vs. middle tertile                                    Bottom tertile          Top tertile


                         A. Triple differences                                                            B. Double differences
Notes: These graphs show the effects of a one-year increase in average retirement delays among a
firm's CTR (close-to-retirement) workers on the average monthly contractual wage growth of the
firm's non-CTR workers, distinguishing between firms with different employment growth between
2009 and 2011. Workers are considered CTR if they were within three years of retirement in
2011. The treatment variable measures the average retirement delay of CTR workers in each firm.
These regressions include the interaction between the treatment variable, year fixed effects, and two
dummy variables that identify firms in the top and bottom tertile of employment growth before
2011. Panel A shows the estimates of these triple interactions. Panel B shows the difference-in-
differences effect of the treatment on wage growth separately for firms in the bottom and top tertile
of employment growth before 2011. The regressions include firm fixed effects, year fixed effects,
and year dummies interacted with baseline firm characteristics measured in 2009 (sector dummies,
multiple dummy variables that identify firms above the median in terms of average worker age,
share of male workers, firm age, number of employees, average daily wage, share of workers with
age  35, share of workers with age between 36 and 55, share of workers with age > 55). Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level. Number of observations: 729,274 firm-year pairs. Firms in the
sample: 104,182. The average monthly contractual wage growth in the pre-reform period is 0.64
percent.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                                                      37
                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                               2009-2011         2012-2015
                                                                  (1)                  (2)


             Turnover (all employees)

             Retirees                                            0.067             0.055
                                                                (0.384)           (0.437)

             Vacancies                                           1.370             1.114
                                                                (2.805)           (2.874)

             Contractual wage growth and categorical promotions
             (only workers not within three years of retirement eligibility in 2011)

             Contractual wage growth (percentage                 0.641             0.484
             points)
                                                                (2.233)           (2.848)

             Promotions blue to white collar                    0.048              0.039
                                                               (0.4723)           (0.475)

             Promotions blue/white collar to manager             0.052             0.045
                                                                (0.499)           (0.574)

             Observations                                       312,546           416,728


Notes: This table shows averages per firm and year before and after the December 2011 reform.
Standard deviations in parentheses. Retirees measures the number of workers retiring per firm and
year. Vacancies measure the total number of positions left available by employees leaving the firm
(voluntarily or involuntarily): retirements, deaths, layoffs, and quits. Contractual wage growth and
categorical promotions are measured only for workers who were not within three years of retirement
in 2011. The contractual wage is the monthly wage that each employee should receive based on
her labor contract. Unlike take-home pay, it is not affected by transitory shocks such as leaves of
absence (maternity, injury, sick) and bonuses. It is, instead, closely related to job titles. Assigning
a new job title to an employee, in fact, often requires by law a modification of the contractual wage
to reflect the different responsibilities attached to the new position (Art. 2103 c.c.). Firms in the
sample: 104,182.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                    38
      Table 2: Relationships between Pre-Reform Characteristics and the Treatment

                                                   Full      Mean        Restricted     Mean
                                                 sample     outcome       sample       outcome
                                                   (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)


  Firm age                                       1.604***    18.12          -0.107      21.66
                                                  (0.052)                  (0.065)
  Number of employees                            6.596***    26.23        1.046***      38.99
                                                  (0.195)                  (0.155)
  Average worker age                             1.141***    39.24          -0.001      41.66
                                                  (0.018)                  (0.019)
  Average daily wage                             2.907***    90.69           0.139      96.71
                                                  (0.697)                  (0.949)
  Share of male workers                            0.000     0.640       -0.022***      0.670
                                                  (0.002)                  (0.002)
  Share of full-time workers                     0.014***    0.870       -0.005***      0.910
                                                  (0.001)                  (0.001)
  Share of blue-collar workers                     0.001     0.590       -0.009***      0.600
                                                  (0.002)                  (0.002)
  Share of white-collar workers                  0.005***    0.330        0.009***      0.330
                                                  (0.002)                  (0.002)
  Share of managers                              0.004***    0.020         0.001*       0.030
                                                  (0.000)                  (0.000)
  Share of workers with age  35                 -0.041***    0.380          -0.000      0.300
                                                  (0.001)                  (0.001)
  Share of workers with age between 36 and 55    0.022***    0.550       -0.005***      0.600
                                                  (0.001)                  (0.001)
  Share of workers with age > 55                 0.019***    0.070       0.005***       0.100
                                                  (0.000)                  (0.000)
  Average worker experience                      0.900***    14.18       -0.214***      16.35
                                                  (0.023)                  (0.025)

  Observations                                  104,182                    33,896
  Treatment mean                                 0.44                       1.36
  Treatment std. dev.                            0.97                       1.28


Notes: Each row shows the estimated coefficient               ^1 from a different regression:
Pre-2011 characteristicf ip = 0 + 1 · Delayf + ip + f ip in year 2009 for firm f in sector i
and province p (ip denotes sector­province fixed effects). The variable Delayf measures the
average retirement delay among firm f 's CTR (close-to-retirement) workers. A worker is considered
close to retirement if she was within three years of retirement in 2011. The restricted sample
includes only firms with at least one CTR worker in 2011. Firms in the full sample: 104,182. Firms
in the restricted sample: 33,896. Standard errors clustered by province and sector are displayed in
parentheses, *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                       39
    Table 3: Effects of Increased Retirement Delays on Career Progression of non-CTR
                                         Workers

                           Wage      Promotion   Promotion        Wage       Promotion    Promotion
                          growth      to white   to manager      growth       to white    to manager
                            (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)



 Delay x Post 2011       -0.016***                              -0.014**
                          (0.005)                                (0.007)
 Delay BC x Post 2011                  0.003                                   0.002
                                      (0.003)                                 (0.003)
 Delay WC x Post 2011                -0.010***                               -0.012***
                                      (0.003)                                 (0.004)
 Delay BWC x Post 2011                              0.002                                    0.002
                                                   (0.001)                                  (0.002)
 Delay MNG x Post 2011                             -0.024*                                  -0.022*
                                                   (0.013)                                  (0.012)

 Sample                    Full          Full         Full      Restricted   Restricted    Restricted
 Observations            729,274       729,274      729,274      237,272       237,272       237,272
 R2                       0.26          0.19         0.26          0.29         0.19          0.28
 Mean outcome             0.64          0.05         0.05         0.53          0.07          0.09
 Treatment mean           0.44       0.17 (WC)   0.04 (MNG)       1.36       0.53 (WC)    0.14 (MNG)
 Treatment std. dev.      0.97       0.68 (WC)   0.34 (MNG)       1.28       1.12 (WC)    0.59 (MNG)
 P-value WC<BC                         <0.001                                  <0.001
 P-value MNG<BWC                                   0.019                                     0.027


Notes: This table shows the effect of a one-year increase in average retirement delays among a
firm's CTR (close-to-retirement) workers on the average monthly contractual wage growth and
number of categorical promotions of the firm's non-CTR workers. Workers are considered CTR if
they were within three years of retirement in 2011. Delay measures the average retirement delay for
all CTR workers, for white-collar CTR workers (WC), for blue-collar CTR workers (BC), for blue-
and white-collar CTR workers (BWC), or for CTR managers (MNG). The dependent variables
are the average monthly contractual wage growth (columns 1 and 4), the number of categorical
promotions from blue to white collar (columns 2 and 5), and the number of categorical promotions
from blue/white collar to manager (columns 3 and 6). They are computed on workers who were
not within three years of retirement in 2011. The regressions include firm fixed effects, year fixed
effects, and year dummies interacted with baseline firm characteristics measured in 2009 (sector
dummies, multiple dummy variables that identify firms above the median in terms of average worker
age, share of male workers, firm age, number of employees, average daily wage, share of workers
with age  35, share of workers with age between 36 and 55, share of workers with age > 55).
The restricted sample includes only firms with at least one CTR worker in 2011. Firms in the full
sample: 104,182. Firms in the restricted sample: 33,896. Standard errors are clustered at the firm
level, *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                   40
  Table 4: Alternative Definition of Retirement Delays: Averaged Over Entire Workforce

                               Wage      Promotion   Promotion       Wage       Promotion    Promotion
                              growth      to white   to manager     growth       to white    to manager
                                (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)



 Delay ALL x Post 2011       -0.248***                             -0.260**
                              (0.085)                               (0.105)
 Delay ALL BC x Post 2011                  0.065*                                 0.076*
                                          (0.037)                                (0.046)
 Delay ALL WC x Post 2011                -0.077***                              -0.091***
                                          (0.029)                                (0.034)
 Delay ALL BWC x Post 2011                            0.042***                                 0.051***
                                                       (0.011)                                  (0.017)
 Delay ALL MNG x Post 2011                             -0.340*                                   -0.270
                                                       (0.189)                                  (0.178)

 Sample                        Full          Full         Full     Restricted   Restricted     Restricted
 Observations                729,274       729,274      729,274     237,272       237,272       237,272
 R2                           0.26           0.19         0.26       0.29          0.19           0.28
 Mean outcome                 0.64           0.05         0.05       0.53          0.07           0.09
 Treatment mean               0.03       0.01 (WC)   0.002 (MNG)     0.08       0.03 (WC)    0.005 (MNG)
 Treatment std. dev.          0.07       0.04 (WC)   0.015 (MNG)     0.10       0.07 (WC)    0.026 (MNG)
 P-value WC<BC                              0.001                                 <0.001
 P-value MNG<BWC                                          0.022                                 0.036


Notes: This table uses an alternative definition of retirement delays. Specifically, it measures the
firm-level exposure to the reform by dividing the retirement delays among a firm's CTR (close-
to-retirement) workers by the total size of the workforce, instead of the number of CTR workers.
Unlike our main treatment variable, this alternative specification assigns a lower exposure to firms
with a larger share of non-CTR workers, keeping fixed the retirement delays among CTR workers.
In other words, it takes into account that the effect of long retirement delays among a firm's CTR
workers might be better absorbed if CTR workers do not represent a large share of the workforce.
Workers are considered CTR if they were within three years of retirement in 2011. As in the main
specification, retirement delays are computed for all CTR workers, for white-collar CTR workers
(WC), for blue-collar CTR workers (BC), for blue- and white-collar CTR workers (BWC), or for
CTR managers (MNG). The dependent variables are the average monthly contractual wage growth
(columns 1 and 4), the number of categorical promotions from blue to white collar (columns 2 and
5), and the number of categorical promotions from blue/white collar to manager (columns 3 and
6). They are computed on workers who were not within three years of retirement in 2011. The
regressions include firm fixed effects, year fixed effects, and year dummies interacted with baseline
firm characteristics measured in 2009 (sector dummies, multiple dummy variables that identify
firms above the median in terms of average worker age, share of male workers, firm age, number of
employees, average daily wage, share of workers with age  35, share of workers with age between
36 and 55, share of workers with age > 55). The restricted sample includes only firms with at least
one CTR worker in 2011. Firms in the full sample: 104,182. Firms in the restricted sample: 33,896.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level, *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                     41
              Table 5: Effects of Increased Retirement Delays on Turnover and Hiring
                             Voluntary    Layoffs           Layoffs             Layoffs       Hires         Hires         Total
                               quits                                                                                    employment
                                (1)         (2)               (3)                 (4)          (5)           (6)            (7)

                                                     Panel A: Full sample

 Delay x Post 2011           -0.010**    0.051***          0.059***                         -0.100**                     0.222**
                              (0.005)     (0.006)           (0.006)                          (0.044)                     (0.093)
 Delay Inside x Post 2011                                                      0.043***                    -0.087*
                                                                                (0.006)                    (0.048)
 Delay Outside x Post 2011                                                     0.013***                     -0.017
                                                                                (0.003)                    (0.024)
 Observations                 729,274     729,274           729,274            1,133,265     729,274      1,133,265      729,274
 Mean outcome                  0.92        0.47              0.48                 0.14        5.28           1.86         26.5
 Treatment mean                0.44        0.44              0.44                 0.15        0.44           0.15         0.44
 Treatment std. dev.           0.97        0.97              0.97                 0.59        0.97           0.59         0.97
 P-value Inside>Outside                                                         <0.001
 P-value Inside<Outside                                                                                     0.109

                                                  Panel B: Restricted sample

 Delay x Post 2011             -0.001    0.035***          0.039***                          -0.086*                       0.120
                              (0.006)     (0.008)           (0.008)                          (0.045)                      (0.116)
 Delay Inside x Post 2011                                                      0.035***                   -0.114***
                                                                                (0.007)                    (0.041)
 Delay Outside x Post 2011                                                     0.010***                     -0.043
                                                                                (0.004)                    (0.040)
 Observations                 237,272     237,272           237,272            536,760       237,272      536,760        237,272
 Mean outcome                  1.04        0.43              0.45               0.14          5.90         2.19           39.51
 Treatment mean                1.36        1.36              1.36               0.32          1.36         0.32           1.36
 Treatment std. dev.           1.28        1.28              1.28               0.82          1.28         0.82            1.28
 P-value Inside>Outside                                                        <0.001
 P-value Inside<Outside                                                                                     0.091

 Workers                     Non-CTR     Non-CTR              All                All        Non-CTR       Non-CTR          All
 Unit of observation         Firm-year   Firm-year         Firm-year        Firm-job-year   Firm-year   Firm-job-year   Firm-year


Notes: This table shows the effect of a one-year increase in average retirement delays among a
firm's CTR (close-to-retirement) workers on hiring and turnover. Workers are considered CTR if
they were within three years of retirement in 2011. The dependent variables measure the number
of non-CTR workers voluntarily leaving a firm in each year (column 1), the number of layoffs of
non-CTR workers (column 2), the number of layoffs of CTR and non-CTR workers (columns 3
and 4), the number of new hires of non-CTR workers (columns 5 and 6), and the total number
of employees (column 7). The unit of observation is a firm-year pair in columns 1, 2, 3, 5, and
7, and a firm-job category (blue collar, white collar, or managers)-year combination is columns 4
and 6. Delay measures the average retirement delay for all CTR workers, Delay Inside measures
the average retirement delay for CTR workers within a job category, Delay Outside measures the
average retirement delay for CTR workers outside a job category. The regressions include firm fixed
effects, year fixed effects, and year dummies interacted with baseline firm characteristics measured
in 2009 (sector dummies, multiple dummy variables that identify firms above the median in terms
of average worker age, share of male workers, firm age, number of employees, average daily wage,
share of workers with age  35, share of workers with age between 36 and 55, share of workers with
age > 55). The specifications at the level of firms, job categories, and years also include firm-job
category fixed effects. The restricted sample includes only firms with at least one CTR worker in
2011. Firms in the full sample: 104,182. Firms in the restricted sample: 33,896. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level, *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).

                                                              42
                   Online Appendix - Not For Publication
A     Additional Figures and Tables

                               Figure A1: Timeline of Fornero Pension Reform

     - Thinning majority                                           20 days                      26 days
       for Berlusconi IV

     - Increasing interests                                           "Save Italy" decree
        on public debt                   PM Berlusconi                 including pension                          First effects of
                                           resigns                           reform                               pension reform
     - Pressure of EU for
       structural reforms

                               08/11/2011                16/11/2011                             22/12/2011


 06/2010             11/2011                12/11/2011                    06/12/2011                                01/01/2012



                            Government does         Technocratic Monti                      "Save Italy" decree
                            not have majority        Cabinet sworn in                         becomes law
                               to approve
                              State Budget


Notes: This figure describes the introduction of the 2011 pension reform in Italy.




                                                              A1
          Figure A2: Fornero Reform Changes to the Pension-Eligibility Criteria

                                        68




                                        66
               Age



                                        64




                                        62




                                        60
                                             11




                                                   12




                                                          13




                                                                          14




                                                                                        15




                                                                                                       16




                                                                                                                17




                                                                                                                      18
                                         20




                                                  20




                                                        20




                                                                       20




                                                                                       20




                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                Year

                                                           Men pre-reform           Women pre-reform
                                                           Men post-reform          Women post-reform



                                                               A. Age-based critera



                                        42
               Years of contributions




                                        40




                                        38




                                        36




                                        34
                                             11




                                                   12




                                                          13




                                                                          14




                                                                                        15




                                                                                                       16




                                                                                                                17




                                                                                                                      18
                                         20




                                                  20




                                                        20




                                                                       20




                                                                                       20




                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                Year

                                                        Pre-reform (quota 96)          Pre-reform (quota 40)
                                                        Men post-reform                Women post-reform



                                                         B. Seniority-based criteria

Notes: This graph shows how requirements for claiming an age-based (Panel A) or a seniority-
based (Panel B) pension changed after 2011. Panel A shows the change in age requirements for
age-based pensions by gender. The requirement on years of retirement contributions (20 years) is
constant before and after the reform and across genders. Panel B shows the change in contribution
requirements for seniority-based pensions. Before the reform was implemented, man and women
had the same requirements. Quota 40 had no additional requirement on age, while quota 96 required
more than 60 years of age. After the reform, there is no requirement on age.
Source: Authors' elaborations based on information from Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale
(INPS).

                                                                               A2
                               Figure A3: Selected Headlines


 12/06/2011 - "Stock markets up, spread down"            12/06/2011 - "The 1952 cohort in shock"




Notes: Headlines of the national newspaper La Stampa , http://archivio.lastampa.it/.




                                               A3
                                                  Figure A4: Effect of the Reform on Different Workers

                                        WOMEN                                                                          MEN
                                   40                                                                             40




                                   36                                                                             36
   Contributions in 2011 (Years)




                                                                                  Contributions in 2011 (Years)
                                                                                                                                                                              5

                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                   32                                                                             32
                                                                                                                                                                              3

                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                   28                                                                             28
                                                                                                                                                                              1

                                   24                                                                             24
                                                                                                                                                                              0

                                                                                                                                                                              -1

                                   20                                                                             20
                                        55   56       57       58       59   60                                        55   56   57   58   59   60   61   62   63   64   65
                                                  Age in 2011 (Years)                                                                 Age in 2011 (Years)


Notes: This heatmap shows how retirement delays differ by gender, age, and years of contribution
for CTR workers.
Source: Authors' elaborations based on information from Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale
(INPS).




                                                                                              A4
  Figure A5: Effects of Increased Retirement Delays among CTR Workers on Different
                                      Age Groups

         .04                                                                         .01


         .03
                                                                                       0
         .02

                                                                                     -.01
         .01

          0
                                                                                     -.02

        -.01
                                                                                     -.03
        -.02

        -.03                                                                         -.04

        -.04
                                                                                     -.05
        -.05

        -.06                                                                         -.06
               2009   2010    2011   2012     2013        2014      2015                    2009     2010     2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                     Year                                                                            Year



                             A. Age35                                                                B. 35<Age55

                                            .08

                                            .06

                                            .04

                                            .02

                                              0

                                            -.02

                                            -.04

                                            -.06

                                            -.08

                                             -.1

                                            -.12
                                                   2009     2010      2011    2012     2013        2014     2015
                                                                              Year



                                                                   C. Age>55
Notes: These graphs show the effect of a one-year increase in average retirement delays among a
firm's CTR (close-to-retirement) workers on the average monthly contractual wage growth of the
firm's non-CTR workers, distinguishing by age group. Workers are considered CTR if they were
within three years of retirement in 2011. The treatment variable measures the average retirement
delay of CTR workers. The dependent variable is the average contractual wage growth of non-CTR
workers in different age groups. Panel A focuses on workers who are 35 years old or younger, panel
B on workers aged between 36 and 55 years old, and panel C on workers who are older than 55. The
regressions include firm fixed effects, year fixed effects, and year dummies interacted with baseline
firm characteristics measured in 2009 (sector dummies, multiple dummy variables that identify
firms above the median in terms of average worker age, share of male workers, firm age, number of
employees, average daily wage, share of workers with age  35, share of workers with age between
36 and 55, share of workers with age > 55). Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Number
of observations: 401,630 (panel A), 402,722 (panel B), or 351,343 (panel C) firm-year pairs. The
average monthly wage growth in the pre-reform period is 0.81 (panel A), 0.52 (panel B), or 0.58
(panel C) percent.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                                             A5
  Figure A6: Effect of Increased Retirement Delays among CTR Workers on Voluntary
                                       Turnover

                                                                  .02
     .015

      .01
                                                                  .01
     .005

       0
                                                                    0

    -.005

     -.01                                                         -.01


    -.015
                                                                  -.02
     -.02

    -.025
                                                                  -.03
     -.03

    -.035                                                         -.04
            2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015               2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                 Year                                                          Year



                      A. Full sample                                            B. Restricted sample
Notes: These graphs show the effects of a one-year increase in retirement delays among a firm's
CTR (close-to-retirement) workers on the number of the firm's non-CTR workers who voluntarily
leave in each year. Workers are considered CTR if they were within three years of retirement in
2011. The regressions include firm fixed effects, year fixed effects, and year dummies interacted
with baseline firm characteristics measured in 2009 (sector dummies, multiple dummy variables
that identify firms above the median in terms of average worker age, share of male workers, firm
age, number of employees, average daily wage, share of workers with age  35, share of workers
with age between 36 and 55, share of workers with age > 55). Panel B limits the sample to firms
with at least one CTR worker in 2011. Firms in the full sample: 104,182. Firms in the restricted
sample: 33,896. Number of observations: 729,274 (panel A) and 237,272 (panel B) firm-year pairs.
The average number of voluntary separations in the pre-reform period is 0.92 in panel A and 1.04
in panel B. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                             A6
                              Table A1: Eligibility Rules for Pensions

                                   Panel A: Age-based criteria
                                     Men                                     Women
                  Pre-reform            Post-reform              Pre-reform     Post-reform

                                         Age requirement
          2011     65 y.o.             Not in place               60 y.o.       Not in place
          2012     65 y.o.               66 y.o.                  60 y.o.         62 y.o.
          2013    65.25 y.o.            66.25 y.o.               60.25 y.o.      62.25 y.o.
          2014    65.25 y.o.            66.25 y.o.               60.33 y.o.      63.75 y.o.
          2015    65.25 y.o.            66.25 y.o.               60.50 y.o.      63.75 y.o.
          2016    65.58 y.o.            66.58 y.o.               61.08 y.o.      65.58 y.o.
          2017    65.58 y.o.            66.58 y.o.               61.42 y.o.      65.58 y.o.
          2018    65.58 y.o.            66.58 y.o.               61.83 y.o.      66.58 y.o.

                                      Contribution requirement
                    20 y.c.              20 y.c.                   20 y.c.           20 y.c.

                                           Waiting window
                  12 months                None                  12 months           None


                                Panel B: Seniority-based criteria
                                  Pre-reform                            Post-reform
                               Men and Women                        Men              Women

          2011    Quota   96 (min 60 y.o. and 35 y.c.)                 Not in place
          2012    Quota   96 (min 60 y.o. and 35 y.c.)           42.08 y.c.    41.08 y.c.
          2013    Quota   97.3 (min 61.25 y.o. and 35 y.c.)      42.42 y.c.    41.42 y.c.
          2014    Quota   97.3 (min 61.25 y.o. and 35 y.c.)      42.50 y.c.    41.50 y.c.
          2015    Quota   97.3 (min 61.25 y.o. and 35 y.c.)      42.50 y.c.    41.50 y.c.
          2016    Quota   97.6 (min 61.58 y.o. and 35 y.c.)      42.83 y.c.    41.83 y.c.
          2017    Quota   97.6 (min 61.58 y.o. and 35 y.c.)      42.83 y.c.    41.83 y.c.
          2018    Quota   97.6 (min 61.58 y.o. and 35 y.c.)      42.83 y.c.    41.83 y.c.

                                         Waiting window
                                  12 months                                   None

Notes: This table shows the age-based and seniority-based eligibility criteria under the old and new
rules. Age-based eligibility also requires at least 20 years of contribution to social security, both
under the old and new rules. In the table, "y.o." stands for "years old," "y.c." stands for "years of
contribution." Under the old rules, workers also became eligible under the seniority-based criteria
after 40 years of contribution, regardless of age. The waiting window is the number of months
between retirement eligibility and actual pension disbursement.
Source: Authors' elaborations based on information from Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale
(INPS).


                                                 A7
                     Table A2: Summary Statistics of Firms in Sample

                                           All            Firms with             Firms with
                                          Firms           1 CTR worker         no CTR workers
                                     mean          sd     mean         sd      mean          sd
                                      (1)          (2)     (3)         (4)      (5)          (6)
  Firm size                          26.23      26.62     38.99      36.56     20.08      17.00
  Firm age                           18.12      12.03     21.66      12.86     16.41      11.22
  Share in manufacturing             0.45       0.50      0.52       0.50       0.41      0.49
  Share in services                  0.54       0.50      0.46       0.50      0.58       0.49
  Share male                          0.64      0.29       0.67      0.27       0.63       0.30
  Avg. workforce age                 39.24       4.63     41.66      3.79      38.06       4.54
  Share aged  35                      0.38      0.20       0.30      0.16       0.42      0.21
  Share aged (35-55]                  0.55      0.18       0.60      0.15       0.53      0.19
  Share aged > 55                     0.06      0.08       0.10      0.08       0.05      0.07
  Avg. workforce tenure               7.07       4.21      8.61       4.42      6.32       3.89
  Avg. workforce experience          14.66      4.30      16.74      3.68      13.65      4.21
  Share blue collar                   0.59      0.32       0.60      0.30       0.58      0.33
  Share white collar                  0.33      0.30       0.33      0.27       0.33      0.31
  Share manager                       0.02      0.07       0.03      0.07       0.02      0.07
  Share full-time contracts           0.87      0.18       0.91      0.13       0.86      0.19
  Share temporary contracts           0.09      0.14       0.07      0.11       0.10      0.15
  Avg. real daily wage               90.69     133.24     96.71     178.10     87.79     104.85
  Share CTR workers                   0.02       0.04      0.06       0.05      0.00       0.00

  Observations                           104,182              33,896                70,286

Notes: This table shows summary statistics in 2009 for firms in the sample. Tenure and experience
are censored before 1983. Columns 1 and 2 show means and standard deviations for all 104,182
firms in the full sample, which includes all private-sector non-agricultural firms that (1) employed
between 10 and 200 employees in 2009, (2) were active every year between 2009 and 2015, and
(3) employed at least one full-time permanent worker in every year. The remaining columns divide
these firms into two subgroups: (1) firms with at least one CTR (close-to-retirement) worker in 2011
and (2) firms with no CTR workers in 2011. Columns 3 and 4 show means and standard deviations
for all 33,896 firms that employed at least 1 CTR worker in 2011. Columns 5 and 6 show means
and standard deviations for all 70,286 firms that employed no CTR workers in 2011.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                  A8
                    Table A3: Summary Statistics of Workers in Sample

                                                 CTR workers        Non-CTR workers
                                                 mean       sd      mean       sd
                                                  (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)

                  Male                            0.71      0.45     0.71     0.45
                  Age                             57.68     2.80     40.29    9.64
                  Tenure                         15.09      9.22     8.76     6.92
                  Experience in private sector   24.55      7.93    15.01     9.37
                  Years in labor market          39.72     10.40    19.72    15.36
                  Blue collar                     0.64      0.48     0.56     0.50
                  White collar                    0.29      0.46     0.36     0.48
                  Manager                          0.06     0.24     0.04     0.20
                  Daily gross real wage          113.71    113.72   102.83   114.40
                  Observations                         87,354           2,736,586

Notes: This table shows summary statistics in 2009 for workers in the sample, that is, workers who
work for private-sector non-agricultural firms that (1) employed between 10 and 200 employees in
2009, (2) were active every year between 2009 and 2015, and (3) employed at least one full-time
permanent worker every year. Tenure and experience are censored before 1983. Columns 1 and 2
show means and standard deviations for CTR (close-to-retirement) workers. Columns 3 and 4 show
means and standard deviations for non-CTR workers.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                  A9
                 Table A4: Correlation of Retirement Delays and Firm Exit

                                                       Firm                Firm
                                                       exit                exit
                                                       (1)                  (4)

                 Delay x Post 2011                   -0.00009             -0.00016
                                                    (0.00013)            (0.00017)
                 Sample                                Full              Restricted
                 Observations                        732,606              239,022
                 Mean outcome (post 2011)             0.007                0.007
                 Treatment mean                       0.44                 1.39
                 Treatment std. dev.                  0.97                  1.28

Notes: This table shows the effect of a one-year increase in average retirement delays among a
firm's CTR (close-to-retirement) workers on the firm's probability of exiting the market. Workers
are considered CTR if they were within three years of retirement in 2011. Delay measures the
average retirement delay of CTR workers. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if a
firm was not operating in a given year. The regressions include firm fixed effects, year fixed effects,
and year dummies interacted with baseline firm characteristics measured in 2009 (sector dummies,
multiple dummy variables that identify firms above the median in terms of average worker age,
share of male workers, firm age, number of employees, average daily wage, share of workers with
age  35, share of workers with age between 36 and 55, share of workers with age > 55). The
restricted sample includes only firms with at least one CTR worker in 2011. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level, *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                 A10
           Table A5: Pre-Reform Trends in Contractual Wage Growth and Categorical
                                        Promotions

                                              Wage             Promotion         Promotion                     Wage          Promotion     Promotion
                                             growth             to white         to manager                   growth          to white     to manager
                                               (1)                 (2)               (3)                        (4)                 (5)       (6)

                                                  Panel A: Controlling for firm and year fixed effects only
  Delay x 2009                                -0.006              -0.007           -0.042*                     0.004            -0.006      -0.041*
                                             (0.007)             (0.005)           (0.022)                    (0.009)          (0.006)      (0.022)
  Delay x 2010                                -0.009              0.001             -0.001                     0.001             0.001       -0.004
                                             (0.006)             (0.008)           (0.024)                    (0.008)          (0.008)      (0.024)
  P-value for joint significance              0.369               0.355             0.091                     0.911                0.492     0.113

                              Panel B: Adding some controls for firm baseline characteristics interacted with year fixed effects
  Delay x 2009                                0.001               -0.006            -0.032                     0.003            -0.004       -0.023
                                             (0.007)             (0.005)           (0.020)                    (0.009)          (0.005)      (0.020)
  Delay x 2010                                0.001                0.001             0.003                     0.001             0.001        0.001
                                             (0.006)             (0.008)           (0.022)                    (0.008)          (0.007)      (0.023)
  P-value for joint significance              0.999               0.408             0.186                     0.938                0.668     0.433

                               Panel C: Adding all controls for firm baseline characteristics interacted with year fixed effects
  Delay x 2009                                -0.002              -0.006            -0.031                     0.003            -0.004       -0.022
                                             (0.007)             (0.005)           (0.020)                    (0.009)          (0.005)      (0.020)
  Delay x 2010                                0.003                0.001             0.003                     0.001             0.001        0.001
                                             (0.007)             (0.007)           (0.022)                    (0.008)          (0.007)      (0.023)
  P-value for joint significance              0.741               0.433             0.203                     0.932                0.704     0.450

  Sample                                       Full               Full               Full                  Restricted        Restricted    Restricted
  Observations                               312,546            312,546            312,546                  101,688           101,688       101,688
  Mean outcome                                0.64               0.05               0.05                      0.53             0.07          0.09
  Treatment mean                              0.44               0.17               0.04                     1.36              0.53          0.14
  Treatment std. dev.                         0.97               0.68               0.34                     1.28              1.12          0.59


Notes: Delay measures the average retirement delay among all CTR workers in columns 1 and 4, the
average retirement delay among white-collar CTR in columns 2 and 5, and the average retirement
delay among CTR managers in columns 3 and 6. The dependent variables are the average monthly
contractual wage growth (columns 1 and 4), the number of categorical promotions from blue to
white collar (columns 2 and 5), and the number of categorical promotions from blue/white collar
to manager (columns 3 and 6). They are computed on workers who were not within three years of
retirement in 2011. In panel A, the regressions include firm and year fixed effects. In panel B, they
include the controls in panel A, as well as year dummies interacted with baseline firm characteristics
measured in 2009 (sector dummies, dummy variables that identify firms above the median in terms
of share of male workers, firm age, and average daily wage). In panel C, they include the controls
in panel B, as well as year dummies interacted with more baseline firm characteristics measured
in 2009 (dummy variables that identify firms above the median in terms of average worker age,
number of employees, share of workers with age  35, share of workers with age between 36 and
55, and share of workers with age > 55). The restricted sample includes only firms with at least
one CTR worker in 2011. Firms in the full sample: 104,182. Firms in the restricted sample: 33,896.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level, *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories, Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza
Sociale (INPS).




                                                                            A11
                                  Table A6: Placebo Reforms

                         Wage      Promotion       Promotion              Wage       Promotion    Promotion
                        growth      to white       to manager            growth       to white    to manager
                          (1)          (2)             (3)                   (4)        (5)          (6)


                                  Panel A: Placebo reform in December 2009

  Delay x Post 2009      0.004        0.004          0.004*               -0.003       0.003        0.002
                        (0.007)      (0.002)         (0.002)             (0.009)      (0.003)      (0.003)

                                  Panel B: Placebo reform in December 2010

  Delay x Post 2010      -0.001       0.001           0.001               -0.002       0.000        0.002
                        (0.006)      (0.003)         (0.002)             (0.008)      (0.003)      (0.003)

  Sample                  Full         Full            Full             Restricted   Restricted   Restricted
  Observations          312,546      312,546         312,546             101,688      101,688      101,688
  Mean outcome           0.64         0.05            0.05                0.53         0.07         0.09
  Treatment mean         0.44         0.17            0.04                1.36         0.53         0.14
  Treatment std. dev.    0.97         0.68            0.34                1.28         1.12         0.59


Notes: These regressions estimate the effect of a placebo reform that would have been implemented
in December, 2009 (panel A) or December, 2010 (panel B), instead of December, 2011. We include
only data from 2009, 2010, and 2011. Delay measures the average retirement delay among CTR
(close-to-retirement) workers. The dependent variables are the average monthly contractual wage
growth (columns 1 and 4), the number of categorical promotions from blue to white collar (columns
2 and 5), and the number of categorical promotions from blue/white collar to manager (columns 3
and 6) for non-CTR workers. The regressions include firm fixed effects, year fixed effects, and year
dummies interacted with baseline firm characteristics measured in 2009 (sector dummies, multiple
dummy variables that identify firms above the median in terms of average worker age, share of male
workers, firm age, number of employees, average daily wage, share of workers with age  35, share
of workers with age between 36 and 55, share of workers with age > 55). The restricted sample
includes only firms with at least one CTR worker in 2011. Firms in the full sample: 104,182. Firms
in the restricted sample: 33,896. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level, *** p < 0.01, **
p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                   A12
                        Table A7: Additional Controls to Baseline Specifications

                               Wage      Promotion    Promotion          Wage       Promotion    Promotion
                              growth      to white    to manager        growth       to white    to manager
                                (1)         (2)          (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)

 Baseline                    -0.016***    -0.010***     -0.024*        -0.014**     -0.012***      -0.022*
                               (0.005)      (0.003)     (0.013)         (0.007)       (0.004)      (0.012)
 Tertiles                    -0.016***   -0.0093***     -0.023*        -0.014**     -0.011***      -0.022*
                               (0.005)      (0.003)     (0.013)         (0.007)       (0.003)      (0.012)
 Quartiles                   -0.016***   -0.0091***     -0.023*        -0.014**     -0.011***      -0.022*
                               (0.005)      (0.003)     (0.013)         (0.007)       (0.003)      (0.012)
 Quintiles                   -0.016***   -0.0092***     -0.022*        -0.014**     -0.011***      -0.021*
                               (0.005)      (0.003)     (0.013)         (0.007)       (0.003)      (0.012)
 High vs. low CTR             -0.013**    -0.011***     -0.025*        -0.014**     -0.012***      -0.022*
                              (0.0065)     (0.0036)     (0.013)        (0.0065)      (0.0036)      (0.012)
 Share CTR                   -0.025***    -0.011***     -0.025*        -0.014**     -0.012***      -0.022*
                               (0.007)      (0.003)     (0.013)         (0.007)       (0.004)      (0.012)
 CTR features                -0.018***    -0.011***    -0.025**         -0.012*     -0.012***      -0.023*
                               (0.007)      (0.003)     (0.013)         (0.007)       (0.004)      (0.012)
 Detailed CTR groups          -0.018**    -0.012***     -0.024*         -0.017*     -0.014***      -0.021*
                              (0.0080)     (0.0037)     (0.013)         (0.010)      (0.0045)      (0.012)
 Province-sector-year        -0.017***   -0.0089***      -0.017        -0.015**     -0.012***       -0.010
                               (0.006)      (0.003)     (0.011)         (0.006)       (0.003)      (0.011)

 Sample                         Full        Full         Full         Restricted    Restricted    Restricted
 Observations                 729,274     729,274      729,274         237,272       237,272       237,272
 Mean outcome                  0.64        0.05         0.05            0.53          0.07          0.09
 Treatment mean                0.44        0.17         0.04            1.36          0.53          0.14
 Treatment std. dev.           0.97        0.68         0.34            1.28          1.12          0.59


Notes: Each cell contains the estimated coefficient of Delay x Post 2011 (columns 1 and 4),
Delay WC x Post 2011 (columns 2 and 5), or Delay MNG x Post 2011 (columns 3 and 6) from separate
regressions. Baseline: The regressions include firm fixed effects, year fixed effects, and year dummies inter-
acted with baseline firm characteristics measured in 2009 (sector dummies, multiple dummy variables that
identify firms above the median in terms of average worker age, share of male workers, firm age, number of
employees, average daily wage, share of workers with age  35, share of workers with age between 36 and 55,
share of workers with age > 55). Tertiles: Instead of dummies for firms above the median, these regressions
include dummy variables that identify different tertiles of average worker age, share of male workers, firm age,
number of employees, average daily wage, share of workers with age  35, share of workers with age between
36 and 55, and share of workers with age > 55. Quartiles: These regressions include dummy variables that
identify different quartiles of the distributions of the same variables. Quintiles: These regressions include
dummy variables that identify different quintiles of the distributions of the same variables. High vs. low
CTR: In addition to all the controls in the baseline, these regressions include a dummy for no CTR workers
in 2011 (only in the full sample) and a dummy for a below-median share of CTR workers in 2011 (conditional
on having at least one CTR worker), both interacted with year fixed effects. Share CTR: In addition to
all the controls in the baseline, these regressions include the share of CTR workers in 2011 interacted with
year fixed effects. CTR features: In addition to all the controls in the baseline, these regressions include
three variables describing the CTR workers in each firm (mean age, mean years of contribution in 2011, and
male share) interacted with year fixed effects. Detailed CTR groups: In addition to all the controls in
the baseline, these regressions include even more detailed variables describing the CTR workers in each firm.
Specifically, we compute the share of CTR workers in forty groups defined using four bins for age (< 54,
54 - 59, 60 - 65, > 65), five bins for years of contribution in 2011 (< 25, 25 - 29, 30 - 34, 35 - 39,  40), and
two bins for gender. These variables are also interacted with year fixed effects. Province-sector-year: In
addition to all the controls in the baseline, these regressions include province-sector (two-digit NACE Rev.
2)-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level, *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were active every
year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories, INPS.


                                                      A13
                                    Table A8: All non-CTR Workers

                           Wage         Promotion   Promotion       Wage       Promotion    Promotion
                          growth         to white   to manager     growth       to white    to manager
                            (1)            (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)



 Delay x Post 2011       -0.016***                                -0.023***
                          (0.006)                                  (0.007)
 Delay BC x Post 2011                     0.004                                  0.003
                                         (0.003)                                (0.004)
 Delay WC x Post 2011                   -0.013***                              -0.014***
                                         (0.004)                                (0.004)
 Delay BWC x Post 2011                                0.002                                   0.002
                                                     (0.002)                                 (0.002)
 Delay MNG x Post 2011                               -0.024*                                 -0.022*
                                                     (0.013)                                 (0.013)

 Sample                     Full           Full        Full       Restricted   Restricted   Restricted
 Observations             729,274        729,274     729,274       237,272      237,272      237,272
 R2                        0.44           0.20        0.26          0.43         0.20         0.28
 Mean outcome              1.10           0.07        0.06           0.87        0.10         0.09
 Treatment mean            0.44           0.17        0.04          1.36         0.53         0.14
 Treatment std. dev.       0.97           0.68        0.34          1.28         1.12         0.59
 P-value WC<BC                           <0.001                                 <0.001
 P-value MNG<BWC                                      0.023                                    .032


Notes: This table shows the effect of a one-year increase in average retirement delays among a
firm's CTR workers on the average monthly contractual wage growth and number of categorical
promotions of the firm's non-CTR workers. Workers are considered CTR if they were within three
years of retirement in 2011. Delay measures the average retirement delay for all CTR workers, for
white-collar CTR workers (WC), for blue-collar CTR workers (BC), for blue- and white-collar CTR
workers (BWC), or for CTR managers (MNG). The dependent variables are the average monthly
contractual wage growth (columns 1 and 4), the number of categorical promotions from blue to
white collar (columns 2 and 5), and the number of categorical promotions from blue/white collar
to manager (columns 3 and 6) for non-CTR workers. They are computed on the same baseline
sample of firms, but using data on all non-CTR workers, including those who were not
employed full-time or did not have permanent contracts. The regressions include firm fixed
effects, year fixed effects, and year dummies interacted with baseline firm characteristics measured
in 2009 (sector dummies, multiple dummy variables that identify firms above the median in terms
of average worker age, share of male workers, firm age, number of employees, average daily wage,
share of workers with age  35, share of workers with age between 36 and 55, share of workers with
age > 55). The restricted sample includes only firms with at least one CTR worker in 2011. Firms
in the full sample: 104,182. Firms in the restricted sample: 33,896. Standard errors are clustered at
the firm level, *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                    A14
                         Table A9: Alternative Definitions of CTR Workers

                              Wage      Promotion      Promotion                  Wage           Promotion    Promotion
                             growth      to white      to manager                growth           to white    to manager
                               (1)         (2)             (3)                     (4)              (5)          (6)


                                          Panel A: CTR workers within two years of retirement in 2011

 Delay x Post 2011          -0.017***                                            -0.013*
                             (0.006)                                             (0.007)
 Delay WC x Post 2011                   -0.008**                                                  -0.008**
                                         (0.004)                                                   (0.004)
 Delay MNG x Post 2011                                   -0.033**                                              -0.003**
                                                          (0.015)                                               (0.015)
 Observations               729,274      729,274         729,274                 184,702          184,702      184,702
 P-value WC<BC                            0.030                                                    0.025
 P-value MNG<BWC                                          0.026                                                 0.048

                                          Panel B: CTR workers within four years of retirement in 2011

 Delay x Post 2011          -0.018***                                            -0.015**
                             (0.005)                                              (0.006)
 Delay WC x Post 2011                   -0.008***                                                -0.009***
                                         (0.002)                                                  (0.002)
 Delay MNG x Post 2011                                  -0.027***                                             -0.029***
                                                         (0.009)                                               (0.009)
 Observations               729,274      729,274         729,274                 288,869          288,869      288,869
 P-value WC<BC                           <0.001                                                   <0.001
 P-value MNG<BWC                                         <0.001                                                <0.001

                                          Panel C: CTR workers within five years of retirement in 2011

 Delay x Post 2011          -0.013***                                             -0.009
                             (0.005)                                             (0.006)
 Delay WC x Post 2011                   -0.008***                                                -0.009***
                                         (0.002)                                                  (0.002)
 Delay MNG x Post 2011                                  -0.025***                                             -0.026***
                                                         (0.006)                                               (0.007)
 Observations               729,274      729,274         729,274                 331,716          331,716      331,716
 P-value WC<BC                           <0.001                                                   <0.001
 P-value MNG<BWC                                         <0.001                                                <0.001

 Sample                       Full        Full             Full                 Restricted       Restricted   Restricted


Notes: This table shows the effect of a one-year increase in average retirement delays among a
firm's CTR workers on the average monthly contractual wage growth and number of categorical
promotions of the firm's non-CTR workers. The definition of CTR workers changes across panels. In
the baseline specification, workers are considered CTR if they were within three years of retirement
in 2011. Panel A: Workers are considered CTR if they were within two years of retirement in
2011. Panel B: Workers are considered CTR if they were within four years of retirement in 2011.
Panel C: Workers are considered CTR if they were within five years of retirement in 2011. The
regressions include firm fixed effects, year fixed effects, and year dummies interacted with baseline
firm characteristics measured in 2009 (sector dummies, multiple dummy variables that identify
firms above the median in terms of average worker age, share of male workers, firm age, number of
employees, average daily wage, share of workers with age  35, share of workers with age between
36 and 55, share of workers with age > 55). Firms in the full sample: 104,182. Firms in the restricted
sample: 33,896. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level, *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).

                                                      A15
     Table A10: Categorical Promotions as Number of Promotions per 10 Employees

                         Promotions to white   Promotions to mng   Promotions to white   Promotions to mng
                          per 10 employees      per 10 employees    per 10 employees      per 10 employees
                                 (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)



 Delay BC x Post 2011           0.002*                                    0.002
                               (0.001)                                   (0.001)
 Delay WC x Post 2011         -0.002***                                 -0.002***
                               (0.001)                                   (0.001)
 Delay BWC x Post 2011                             0.001***                                   0.001*
                                                    (0.000)                                   (0.000)
 Delay MNG x Post 2011                              -0.006*                                  -0.007**
                                                    (0.003)                                   (0.003)

 Sample                          Full                 Full             Restricted            Restricted
 Observations                  729,274              729,274             237,272               237,272
 R2                              0.17                0.23                 0.17                 0.26
 Mean outcome                    0.02                0.01                 0.02                  0.02
 Treatment mean                 0.17                 0.04                0.53                  0.14
 Treatment std. dev.            0.68                 0.34                1.12                  0.59
 P-value WC<BC                  0.001                                    0.001
 P-value MNG<BWC                                     0.033                                     0.015


Notes: This table shows the effect of a one-year increase in average retirement delays among a
firm's CTR (close-to-retirement) workers on the number of categorical promotions of the firm's
non-CTR workers scaled by total employment divided by 10. Workers are considered CTR if they
were within three years of retirement in 2011. Delay measures the average retirement delay for
white-collar CTR workers (WC), for blue-collar CTR workers (BC), for blue- and white-collar
CTR workers (BWC), or for CTR managers (MNG). The dependent variables are the number
of categorical promotions from blue to white collar per 10 employees (columns 1 and 3) and the
number of categorical promotions from blue/white collar to manager per 10 employees (columns 2
and 4). They are computed on workers who were not within three years of retirement in 2011. The
regressions include firm fixed effects, year fixed effects, and year dummies interacted with baseline
firm characteristics measured in 2009 (sector dummies, multiple dummy variables that identify
firms above the median in terms of average worker age, share of male workers, firm age, number of
employees, average daily wage, share of workers with age  35, share of workers with age between
36 and 55, share of workers with age > 55). The restricted sample includes only firms with at least
one CTR worker in 2011. Firms in the full sample: 104,182. Firms in the restricted sample: 33,896.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level, *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                        A16
        Table A11: Treatment Effects by Employment Growth and Span of Control

                                           Wage              Wage            Wage          Wage
                                          growth            growth          growth        growth
                                            (1)               (2)             (3)           (4)



 Delay x Post 2011                         -0.006          -0.022***         -0.013      -0.022**
                                          (0.007)           (0.007)         (0.009)       (0.009)
 Delay x Post 2011 x Fast                 0.023**                             0.013
                                          (0.010)                           (0.013)
 Delay x Post 2011 x Slow                -0.045***                           -0.024
                                          (0.013)                           (0.017)
 Delay x Post 2011 x Share top earners                     0.020**                         0.019
                                                           (0.010)                        (0.012)

 Sample                                     Full             Full          Restricted    Restricted
 Observations                             729,274          724,451           237,272      236,817
 R2                                         0.27            0.27               0.30         0.29
 Mean outcome                               0.64            0.62               0.53         0.52
 Treatment effect--Fast growing           0.017**                             0.002
                                          (0.008)                            (0.009)
 Treatment effect--Slow growing          -0.051***                          -0.035**
                                          (0.011)                            (0.141)
 P-value Slow<Fast                        <0.001                              0.016
 Treatment effect--Share top earners                         -0.002                        -0.003
                                                            (0.007)                       (0.009)


Notes: We estimate triple differences in which the treatment variable is further interacted with two
sets of variables that measure the ability of firms to add positions to their organizations. In columns
1 and 3, the treatment variable is interacted with two dummy variables measuring employment
growth in the years leading to the 2011 reform: "Fast" is 1 for firms in the top tertile of employment
growth between 2009 and 2011; "Slow" is 1 for firms in the bottom tertile of employment growth
between 2009 and 2011. In columns 2 and 4, the treatment variable is interacted with a measure of
span of control. "Share top earners" is a dummy equal to 1 for firms with an above-median share of
top earners in their workforce in 2011. Top earners are defined as workers with above-median wage
relative to wage distributions computed within a province, two-digit sector (NACE Rev. 2), and
category of firm size (above vs. below median workforce). The dependent variable is the average
monthly contractual wage growth for workers who were not within three years of retirement in
2011. The regressions include firm fixed effects, year fixed effects, and year dummies interacted
with baseline firm characteristics measured in 2009 (sector dummies, multiple dummy variables
that identify firms above the median in terms of average worker age, share of male workers, firm
age, number of employees, average daily wage, share of workers with age  35, share of workers
with age between 36 and 55, share of workers with age > 55). The restricted sample includes only
firms with at least one CTR worker in 2011. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level, ***
p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                     A17
                         Table A12: Treatment Effects by Age Group

                        Wage          Wage        Wage           Wage         Wage         Wage
                       growth        growth      growth         growth       growth       growth
                         (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)



 Delay x Post 2011      -0.004      -0.017***   -0.056***       -0.024*     -0.022***    -0.057***
                       (0.011)       (0.006)     (0.016)        (0.013)      (0.007)      (0.020)

 Sample                  Full         Full         Full        Restricted   Restricted   Restricted
 Age group               35         (35 , 55]     > 55            35         (35 , 55]     > 55
 Observations          401,630      402,722      351,343        199,563      200,009      157,462
 R2                     0.29          0.35        0.31            0.29         0.36        0.30
 Mean outcome           0.81          0.52        0.58           0.70          0.46        0.46
 Treatment mean         0.69          0.69        0.61           1.39          1.39        1.36
 Treatment std. dev.    1.14          1.14        1.06           1.28          1.28        1.23


Notes: This table shows the effect of a one-year increase in average retirement delays among a firm's
CTR (close-to-retirement) workers on the average monthly contractual wage growth of the firm's
non-CTR workers. Workers are considered CTR if they were within three years of retirement in
2011. Delay measures the average retirement delay of CTR workers. The dependent variables are
the average monthly contractual wage growth of non-CTR employees with age  35 (columns 1
and 4), with age between 36 and 55 (columns 2 and 5), and with age > 55 (columns 3 and 6). The
regressions include firm fixed effects, year fixed effects, and year dummies interacted with baseline
firm characteristics measured in 2009 (sector dummies, multiple dummy variables that identify
firms above the median in terms of average worker age, share of male workers, firm age, number of
employees, average daily wage, share of workers with age  35, share of workers with age between
36 and 55, share of workers with age > 55). The restricted sample includes only firms with at least
one CTR worker in 2011. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level, *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05,
* p < 0.1.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                A18
                        Table A13: Treatment Effects on Firm Performance

                            Revenues     Value added       EBIT         ROE       ROI         ROA
                           over assets    over assets    over assets
                              (1)            (2)              (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)



 Delay x Post 2011           0.003          -0.000         -0.000       -0.288   -0.205**   -0.098***
                            (0.002)        (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.205)    (0.091)    (0.033)

 Sample                       Full           Full           Full         Full      Full       Full
 Observations               542,127        542,127        542,127      521,279   391,296    542,133
 R2                          0.64           0.51           0.21         0.34      0.40       0.55
 Mean outcome                1.31           0.44           0.04         0.76      4.94       4.87
 Treatment--mean             0.47           0.47           0.47         0.48      0.51       0.47
 Treatment--std. dev.        0.97           0.97           0.97         0.98      0.98       0.97


Notes: This table shows the effect of a one-year increase in average retirement delays among a firm's
CTR (close-to-retirement) workers on different measures of firm performance. A worker is considered
CTR if she was within three years of retirement in 2011. Delay measures the average retirement
delay for all CTR workers. The dependent variables are: total revenues over total assets (column
1); value added over total assets (column 2); earnings before interests and taxes (EBIT) over total
assets (column 3); return on equity (ROE), computed as net income divided by shareholders' equity
(total assets minus debt; column 4); return on interest (ROI), computed as net income divided by
the cost of investments (column 5); return on assets (ROA), computed as net income divided by
total assets (total assets minus debt; column 6). The regressions include firm fixed effects, year fixed
effects, and year dummies interacted with baseline firm characteristics measured in 2009 (sector
dummies, multiple dummy variables that identify firms above the median in terms of average worker
age, share of male workers, firm age, number of employees, average daily wage, share of workers
with age  35, share of workers with age between 36 and 55, share of workers with age > 55). The
restricted sample includes only firms with at least one CTR worker in 2011. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level, *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees that were active every
year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS, Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale
(INPS). Cerved data on firm performance: https://www.cerved-online.com/.




                                                        A19
                                              Table A14: Magnitudes


                                               (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)

 Average wage                                B
                                             C30, 849    B
                                                         C30, 849     B
                                                                      C34, 113   B
                                                                                 C30, 849      B
                                                                                               C30, 849     B
                                                                                                            C34, 113
 Average one-year wage increase              B
                                             C2, 454     B
                                                         C2, 454      B
                                                                      C2, 451    B
                                                                                 C2, 020       B
                                                                                               C2, 020      B
                                                                                                            C1, 931
 Annual effect of one  increased treatment    -B
                                               C62       -BC166       -BC258      -B
                                                                                   C70         -BC118       -BC301
 Effect over 4 years
 A. Not discounted                           -B
                                              C718       -B
                                                          C1, 928     -B
                                                                       C2, 951    -B
                                                                                   C797        -B
                                                                                                C1, 342     -B
                                                                                                             C3, 334
 B. Discounted at 3 percent                  -B
                                              C676       -B
                                                          C1, 814     -B
                                                                       C2, 777    -B
                                                                                   C750        -B
                                                                                                C1, 264     -B
                                                                                                             C3, 139
 C. Discounted at 5 percent                  -B
                                              C650       -B
                                                          C1, 745     -B
                                                                       C2, 671    -B
                                                                                   C722        -B
                                                                                                C1, 215     -B
                                                                                                             C3, 020
 D. Discounted at 10 percent                 -B
                                              C592       -B
                                                          C1, 589     -B
                                                                       C2, 435    -B
                                                                                   C658        -B
                                                                                                C1, 108     -B
                                                                                                             C2, 754
 Sample                                        Full         Full       Full      Restricted    Restricted   Restricted
 Age group                                     All          All        > 55         All           All         > 55
 Firms                                         All      Slow growth    All          All       Slow growth      All


Notes: This table computes the reform-induced wage loss for the average non-CTR worker. The
annual effect of a one- increase in the treatment computes the wages lost over one year resulting
from the reduced contractual wage growth from a one- increase in retirement delays among a
firm's CTR workers. We also compute this annual effect over the four years of our post-reform
period. We provide this computation for different values of the discount rate.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).




                                                            A20
     Table A15: Effects of CTR Wage Bill on Career Progression of non-CTR Workers
                                  Wage      Promotion   Promotion      Wage       Promotion    Promotion
                                 growth      to white   to manager    growth       to white    to manager
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)



 Blocked wages TOP x Post 2011     -0.001                              -0.002
                                  (0.001)                             (0.001)
 Blocked wages MID x Post 2011   -0.008**                            -0.009**
                                  (0.004)                             (0.004)
 Blocked wages BOT x Post 2011     0.002                               0.002
                                  (0.004)                             (0.005)
 Blocked wages BC x Post 2011                 0.002                                 0.002
                                             (0.001)                               (0.002)
 Blocked wages WC x Post 2011               -0.003***                             -0.004***
                                             (0.001)                               (0.001)
 Blocked wages BWC x Post 2011                           0.002***                               0.003***
                                                          (0.001)                                (0.001)
 Blocked wages MNG x Post 2011                             -0.001                                 -0.000
                                                          (0.003)                                (0.002)

 Sample                            Full        Full        Full      Restricted   Restricted   Restricted
 Observations                    662,908     729,274     729,274      226,882      237,272      237,272
 R2                               0.34        0.18        0.25          0.33        0.19         0.28
 Mean outcome                     0.60        0.05        0.05          0.51        0.07         0.09
 Treatment std. dev.--TOP         2.33                                 3.66
 Treatment std. dev.--MID         0.96                                 1.54
 Treatment std. dev.--BOT         0.65                                 1.07
 Treatment std. dev.--BC                      1.23         1.23                      1.88         1.88
 Treatment std. dev.--WC                      1.49         1.49                      2.48         2.48
 Treatment std. dev.--BWC                     1.85         1.85                      2.69         2.69
 Treatment std. dev.--MNG                     1.61         1.61                      2.78         2.78
 P-value TOP=MID                  0.076                                0.090
 P-value TOP=BOT                  0.531                                0.475
 P-value MID=BOT                  0.097                                0.090
 P-value WC<BC                                0.001                                 0.001
 P-value MNG<BWC                                          0.136                                  0.144


Notes: This table shows the effect of a BC10,000 increase in the total wages of the average CTR
(close-to-retirement) worker blocked by the reform (yearly wage x retirement delay) on the average
monthly contractual wage growth and number of categorical promotions of the firm's non-CTR
workers. For each worker, we multiply her retirement delay by her wage (divided by BC10,000). Then,
Blocked wages is the average "blocked wages" at the firm level for different subgroups of workers.
We first distinguishing between CTR workers in the top tertile of the firm's wage distribution
(TOP), in the second tertile (MID), and in the bottom tertile (BOT). For categorical promotions,
we distinguish between white-collar CTR workers (WC), blue-collar CTR workers (BC), blue- and
white-collar CTR workers (BWC), or CTR managers (MNG). The dependent variables are the
average monthly contractual wage growth (columns 1 and 4), the number of categorical promotions
from blue to white collar (columns 2 and 5), and the number of categorical promotions from
blue/white collar to manager (columns 3 and 6). They are computed on workers who were not
within three years of retirement in 2011. The regressions include firm fixed effects, year fixed
effects, and year dummies interacted with baseline firm characteristics measured in 2009 (sector
dummies, multiple dummy variables that identify firms above the median in terms of average worker
age, share of male workers, firm age, number of employees, average daily wage, share of workers
with age  35, share of workers with age between 36 and 55, share of workers with age > 55).
The restricted sample includes only firms with at least one CTR worker in 2011. The sample is
smaller in columns 1 and 4 because we consider only firms with at least one worker in each tertile
of the wage distribution. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level, *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05,
* p < 0.1. Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009
that were active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working
histories, INPS.                                A21
                      Table A16: Treatment Effects by Access to Credit

                                                                  Wage                  Wage
                                                                 growth                growth
                                                                   (1)                   (2)



  Delay x Post 2011 for slow-growing high-risk firms             -0.07***             -0.05***
                                                                   (0.02)              (0.02)
  Delay x Post 2011 for fast-growing high-risk firms               0.02**                0.02
                                                                   (0.01)              (0.01)
  Delay x Post 2011 for slow-growing low-risk firms               -0.04**               -0.02
                                                                   (0.02)              (0.02)
  Delay x Post 2011 for fast-growing low-risk firms                 0.01                -0.01
                                                                   (0.01)              (0.02)

  Sample                                                           Full              Restricted
  Observations                                                   713,391              230,006
  R2                                                               0.26                 0.29
  Mean outcome                                                     0.64                 0.52
  Treatment std. dev.--Slow-growing high-risk firms                0.88                 1.21
  Treatment std. dev.--Fast-growing high-risk firms                0.95                1.37
  Treatment std. dev.--Slow-growing low-risk firms                 0.96                 1.29
  Treatment std. dev.--Fast-growing low-risk firms                 0.99                1.35
  P-value Slow<Fast for high-risk firms                          <0.001                0.002
  P-value Slow<Fast for low-risk firms                            0.007                0.34

Notes: We estimate quadruple differences in which the treatment variables in equation (6) are
further interacted with a variable that measures access to credit. Specifically, we interact the treat-
ment variables in equation (6) with a variable that is equal to 1 if the four-digit sector of a firm
has an above-median share of firms at high risk of default. This measure of default risk for each
four-digit sector is provided by Cerved, one of the main credit rating agencies in Italy. High-risk
firms have a credit rating in the bottom three categories, out of 13 total (https://ratingagency.
cerved.com/sites/ratingagency.cerved.dev/files/CRA_MetodologiaRating_0.pdf; page 4).
These are firms that present serious or extremely serious problems that jeopardize their ability to
meet commitments. Firms in these categories are unlikely to be able to receive loans from banks.
In addition to all the necessary triple and double interactions, the regressions include firm fixed
effects, year fixed effects, and year dummies interacted with baseline firm characteristics measured
in 2009 (sector dummies, multiple dummy variables that identify firms above the median in terms
of average worker age, share of male workers, firm age, number of employees, average daily wage,
share of workers with age  35, share of workers with age between 36 and 55, share of workers
with age > 55). The restricted sample includes only firms with at least one CTR worker in 2011.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level, *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: Universe of workers employed by firms with 10 to 200 employees in Q1 2009 that were
active every year between 2009 and 2015. Database UNIEMENS and complete working histories,
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS).



                                                  A22
B        Additional Details on the 2011 Pension Reform
B.1 The Italian Pension System
The Italian social security tax rate is 33 percent, a third of which is paid by the employee
and the remaining fraction by the employer.
    Two methods for computing social security benefits coexist. The first is an earning-based
method, whereby entitlements are a function of the average salary that the worker earned
in the final stages of the career. The second is a notional contribution-based method: social
security contributions are credited into a notional account, earn a return that depends on
the performance of the Italian economy, and are then converted into a stream of benefits.
The conversion factor is more favorable the longer the workers delay claiming benefits.
    The 2011 Fornero pension reform expanded the adoption of the contribution-based method.
Before the reform, it was used only for workers who had less than 18 years of contribution
in 1995. Moreover, it only applied to their pension contributions from 1996. After the re-
form, the contribution-based method started being used to compute the benefits also for the
more experienced workers with more than 18 years of contribution in 1995. However, it only
applied to the pension contributions paid from 2012 onward.
    Retirement in the private sector is not mandatory and working past retirement is allowed,
although workers rarely choose to do so.
B.2 Additional Details on the 2011 Pension Reform
Why was the pension system changed? The government specifically targeted the
pension system because it was one of the main drivers of the increase in the national debt.
In 2011, public pension spending amounted to 14 percent of the GDP, twice as much as the
OECD average of 7 percent (OECD, 2011). This discrepancy between Italy and other OECD
countries was due to a combination of more generous pension benefits and a more rapidly
aging population. In 2011, 33 percent of the Italian population was over age 65, compared
with only 23.6 percent among other OECD countries. Moreover, it was normal for retired
workers to rely exclusively on public pensions. In 2009, only 12.5 percent of the working age
population (16-64 years old) invested in private pension funds (OECD, 2011).
Main changes. The right to claim full benefits is based either on age (age-based pension)
or on years of contribution (seniority-based pension).
    In regard to age-based pensions, the reform gradually increased the age requirement,
while maintaining a 20-year contribution prerequisite.36 The dashed lines in Panel A of
Figure A2 plot how the pre-reform age requirement would have increased over the period
2012-2018, absent the reform. Men (women) could have claimed an age-based pension upon
turning 65 (60) years old in 2012, and the minimum retirement age would have gradually
reached 65.6 (61.8) in 2018. The continuous lines plot the evolution of the age requirement
under post-reform rules. The minimum retirement age increased slightly for men, from 66 in
2012 to 66.6 in 2018. The change was far larger for women, as the age requirement jumped
to 62 in 2012 and then quickly rose to 66.6 by 2018.
    In regard to seniority-based pensions, the reform simultaneously raised and simplified
eligibility rules (Figure A2, Panel B). Before the reform, seniority-based pensions could be
claimed either upon totaling 40 years of contribution or as soon as the sum of age and years
36
     The comparison between pre- and post-reform rules is also displayed in Table A1.

                                                     A23
of contribution reached a certain threshold (the so-called quota system). Absent the reform,
in 2012 the quota would have been set at 96, conditional on being at least 60 years old and
having 35 years of contribution. The reform abolished the quota system, based eligibility
exclusively on years of contribution, and raised the contribution requirement differentially
for men and women. In 2012, it was set to 42.08 for men and 41.08 for women.37
Early retirement. There is only one option to claim pension benefits before meeting the
eligibility criteria for either an age-based or a seniority-based pension. It is called opzione
donna and is available only to women.
    Until 2011, it allowed female employees to claim benefits three years before they became
eligible for an age-based pension (i.e., at age 57). The take-up, however, was very low,
due to the fact that opzione donna reduced benefits by a sizable amount. This reduction
is driven by two main factors. First, early retirement leads to fewer years of contribution
and, all else equal, lower pension wealth. Second, choosing opzione donna implies that the
contribution-based formula applies to all contribution years. For workers who retire relatively
young, the adoption of the contribution-based method on their whole contribution history
usually translates into lower entitlements; the average cut is estimated to be 35 percent of
the seniority-based pension (INPS, 2016).
    After 2011, the number of women choosing early retirement through opzione donna in-
creased because the Fornero reform significantly raised eligibility requirements for a public
pension for women. However, the take-up of opzione donna remained low, reaching at most
20 percent in 2015 within our sample period. Furthermore, job-to-retirement transitions ac-
counted for only 80 percent of the cases, while the rest were cases in which the early retirees
were unemployed or not part of the labor force at the time of retirement (INPS, 2016).
    In summary, most workers could not or chose not to retire early even after the Fornero
reform. As a consequence, they could not undo the effects of the reform.
Grandfather clauses. The reform did not apply to workers who could have claimed an
age-based or a seniority-based pension by December 31, 2011 under pre-reform rules. More-
over, a limited group of workers on short-time work or redundancy schemes were grandfa-
thered in. All other workers, the vast majority of the Italian workforce in 2011, were subject
to the new retirement rules.
B.3 The Example in Section 2
Here, we provide more details on the example described in Section 2. Consider two male
workers born in 1951 and 1952. If these individuals started working at 23 and contributed
to social security without interruptions, they would each have accumulated 37 years of con-
tribution upon turning 60. Even if these workers were born only one year apart, they would
have faced drastically different consequences after 2011. The 1951 worker was grandfathered,
while the 1952 worker faced a 4-year and 7-month delay in retirement.
    The explanation for these calculations follows. The 1951 cohort could claim a seniority
pension in 2011 and was therefore grandfathered. Workers born in 1952 could have claimed a
seniority pension at age 60 in 2012 under pre-reform rules. Under post-reform rules, however,
they had to be at least 64 years and 7 months old to retire with an age-based pension. Their
retirement delay is therefore equal to 4 years and 7 months.
37
     Men and women who would have qualified for quota 96 under pre-reform rules could exceptionally retire
     at 64.25 in 2013-2015 and at 64.6 from 2016 onward.

                                                    A24
   As a second example, consider two women born in August 1951. Due to different inter-
ruptions in their careers, they accrue 20 years of contribution--the minimum contribution
requirement for an age-based pension--in December 2013 and January 2014, respectively.
At this time, pre-reform rules would have allowed them both to claim an age-based pension.
Under the new rules, the former worker faces no changes: she satisfies the higher age require-
ment prevailing in 2013 by turning 62 years and 4 months old in December 2013. The latter
worker, however, has her pension eligibility delayed by 1 year and 4 months. She, in fact,
can no longer claim an age-based pension in January 2014, but has to wait until May 2015.
This delay is due to the fact that the minimum age requirement was further raised in 2014
and 2015 to 63 years and 9 months.
C     The Computation of Predicted Retirement Dates
To predict retirement dates under pre- and post-reform rules, we rely on information about
gender, age and years of contribution in 2011. For each worker, we start from the contribution
history up to 2011. Moreover, we make two assumptions on the behavior of the worker after
the reform:

    i) There are no gaps in the post-reform contribution history, from January, 2012 to the
       retirement date;

    ii) Employees retire as soon as they can claim either an age-based or a seniority-based
        pension.

The first assumption requires that individuals continue making monthly contributions to
social security until they retire without any gap. This assumption is supported by the data.
The median annual contributions for workers aged 60 or above is 52 weeks and the average is
45 weeks. The second assumption requires that most workers do not further delay retirement
after becoming eligible for a public pension. Again, this assumption is consistent with the
available evidence. In the data, 88 percent of workers retire as soon as they can. When
computing the predicted retirement date under pre-reform rules, we take into account the
existence of the "waiting window" (the so-called finestra mobile ): abolished by the Fornero
reform, it made it possible to claim the first pension benefit only 12 months after becoming
eligible for either type of public pension.
D      Proofs of Propositions
Lemma 1. Suppose N2,2 > (1 - d2 )N2,1 . Then, in an optimal personnel policy, the following
are true:
       
(i.) H2    = 0, so no period-2 hires are assigned to job 2;
                                                                      
(ii.) w2  ,t > w1,t , so job 2 pays more than job 1, and w1,2 > w1,1 , so wages increase with
tenure;
(iii.) p 1,2 (H ) > 0, so high-ability workers assigned to job 1 in the first period may be
promoted;
(iv.) p 1,2 (L ) = 0, so low-ability workers assigned to job 1 in the first period will not be
promoted;
(v.) p 2,1 = 0, so workers assigned to job 2 in the first period will not be demoted.




                                            A25
 Proof of Lemma 1. For part (i.), if the firm hires a new worker and assigns her to job 2,
it receives (1 - )(f2 + h2 L ) + (f2 + h2 H ), which we assumed to be negative, so the firm
will never assign second-period new hires to job 2. Part (iv.) holds for the same reason.
    For parts (ii.), (iii.), and (v.), we will take {Ni,t } as given. Optimal personnel policies
therefore minimize the rents that are paid to new hires. Below, we first establish a lower
bound on the total rents the firm pays, and then we construct a personnel policy satisfying
(i.) - (v.) attains this lower bound.
    To establish this lower bound, notice that the total rents paid to new hires consist of
three parts. First, N2,1 R2 is the lower bound for the rents paid to new hires into job 2 in
period 1. Next, the firm will hire at least N1,2 + N2,2 - (1 - d1 )(N1,1 + N2,1 ) new workers into
job 1 in the second period, and these workers will get at least R1 . Finally, workers hired into
the bottom job in the first period will not be promoted if they are low ability, and they will
be promoted with probability (N2,2 - (1 - d2 )N2,1 )/((1 - d1 )N1,1 ) if they are high ability. If
they are paid a wage of 0 in their first period of employment, they will therefore receive a
rent of at least max{R1 , R  ~ 1 }, where


        ~ 1 = -c1 +  (1 - d1 )[(1 - )R1 + ((N2,2 - (1 - d2 )N2,1 )/((1 - d1 )N1,1 ))R2 ].
        R

Taken together, these results establish that a lower bound on the total rents paid to new
hires is

                                   ~ 1 +  (N1,2 + N2,2 - (1 - d1 )(N1,1 + N2,1 ))R1 .
           N2,1 R2 + N1,1 max R1 , R

For the last part of the proof, consider a personnel policy with p        1,2 (H ) = (N2,2 - (1 -
                                                                    
d2 )N2,1 )/((1 - d1 )N1,1 ) and p2,1 = 0, and let wj,2 = cj + Rj , w2,1 = c2 + (1 -  (1 - d2 ))R2 ,
and

                                                            N2,2 - (1 - d2 )N2,1
         w1 ,1 = max c1 + R1 -  (1 - d1 )[(1 - )R1 +                             R2 ], 0 .
                                                               (1 - d1 )N1,1
                                                          
The expression for w1     ,1 reflects the idea that if p1,2 (H ) is sufficiently high, the limited-
liability constraint will bind in the first period for period-1 new hires into job 1, and they
                                                                                                   
will be paid w1 ,1 = 0. And if p1,2 (H ) is sufficiently low, then they will be paid the wage w1,1
at which their first period rents are equal to R1 . Such a personnel policy satisfies the firm's
                                                                                                
flow constraints and each worker's incentive constraints. Moreover, it satisfies w2     ,t > w1,t for
t = 1, 2. This establishes the proposition. The result described in footnote 17 follows from
the fact that w1                                                    
                                                                                              P
                  ,1 is decreasing in d2 , while w1,2 , w2,1 , and w2,2 are independent of d2 .



 Proposition 1. Suppose f1 > c1 + R1 . A worker assigned to job 1 in period 1 will receive
an expected wage increase of

                             w = w1
                                                              
                                    ,2 - w1,1 + p1,2 (w2,2 - w1,2 ),

where




                                                A26
                                                      g + d2
                                     p1,2 = min                ,1 .
                                                    (1 - d1 )s
                                                                               
Moreover, the number of new hires in the second period satisfies H1 = N1 ,2 + N2.2 - (1 -
                      
d1 )N1 ,1 - (1 - d2 )N2,1 and is increasing in d1 and d2 .

  Proof of Proposition 1. Given the optimal personnel policies described in Lemma 1, we
only need to show that high-ability workers are optimally promoted with probability p                1,2 .
Doing so requires that we establish that the firm optimally operates at capacity in the first
                                        
period, that is, N1  ,1 = N 1,1 and N2,1 = N 2,1 . The result that the firm fills all its job-2 slots
in the first period follows directly from the assumption that the firm has N 2,1 high-ability
legacy workers, and high-ability workers generate strictly positive profits for the firm when
assigned to job 2.
    Next, since f1 > c1 + R1 , job-1 workers in the second period produce strictly positive
                                                                 
profits for the firm, so the firm will optimally choose N1         ,2 = N 1,2 . In the first period, the
firm could hire new workers into job 1 and not rehire them in the second period. This would
require paying them w1,1 = c1 + R1 in the first period, which by the argument above, the firm
is willing to do. The firm could of course do better by retaining these workers and paying
                                                                         
them less in the first period, but in any case, it will choose N1        ,1 = N 1,1 .
    The expression for the number of new hires in the second period follows directly from
result (i.) in Lemma 1. It remains to show the comparative-static result. There are two
                                                                                             
cases. First, if the firm has limited career capacity, so N2        ,2 = N 2,2 , we have H1 = N 1,2 +
N 2,2 - (1 - d1 )N 1,1 - (1 - d2 )N 2,1 , which is increasing in d1 and d2 . Second, if the firm has
                                       
abundant career capacity, then N2        ,2 = N 2,1 (1 - d2 ) + N 1,1 (1 - d1 ). In this case, we have
   
H1 = N 1,2 - (1 - d1 )(1 - )N 1,1 , which is increasing in d1 and (weakly) in d2 .          P
E     Additional Details on the Italian Labor Market
A quick look at the size of the Italian labor market. Italy has the third largest labor
market among euro-area countries, totaling almost 22.7 million employees in 2019.38 It has a
record-high number of enterprises (close to 3.7 million in 2018), although most of them tend
to be small. Firms with at least ten employees account for 57 percent of total employment,
despite making up less than 6 percent of businesses.39
Employment protection in the Italian labor market. According to OECD Employ-
ment Protection Legislation (EPL) indicators, Italy can be classified as a country with high
regulatory protection for workers. For example, the indicator that measures the overall strict-
ness of regulations against individual and collective layoffs was equal to 2.86 in 2019, placing
Italy among the ten countries with the most stringent regulations. In 2019, the same in-
dicator was equal to 1.31 in the United States (the minimum in the OECD area), 1.90 in
the United Kingdom, 2.33 in Germany, 2.68 in France, 2.71 in Belgium, and 2.88 in the
Netherlands.40 In short, employment protection in Italy is high, especially compared to the
38
   Source: Eurostat, European Union Labour Force Survey. 15-64 age bracket.
39
   Source: Eurostat, Structural Business Statistics. The data refer to total business economy and repairs of
   computer, personal, and household goods with the exception of financial and insurance activities.
40
   Source: OECD Employment Protection Legislation Database. The indicator on individual dismissals is the
   synthesis of 4 sub-indicators on: procedural requirements; notice and severance pay; regulatory framework

                                                   A27
United States and other Anglo-Saxon countries. However, it is only marginally higher than
employment protections in other major European counties, such as France.
Recent trends in employment protection. Another thing to consider is that the degree
of protection in the Italian labor market has significantly declined in the 2013-2019 period
after a few labor-market reforms. Specifically, the 2015 Jobs Act modified Article 18 of the
Workers' Charter, which regulates layoffs in businesses with more than 15 employees. It
narrowed the circumstances in which unfair individual dismissals are sanctioned with the
reinstatement of the workers in their pre-layoff positions. Moreover, in addition to reducing
the probability of reinstatements, it standardized the amount of monetary compensation to
be paid by firms to unfairly dismissed workers. In fact, it made monetary compensations a
deterministic function of workers' tenure, reducing the leeway that the courts enjoyed before
the Jobs Act.41 On the contrary, the 2018 labor-market reform increased the total amount
of monetary compensations owed to unfairly dismissed workers. It is possible to track these
legislative changes with the OECD EPL indicator on dismissals of regular workers. In Italy,
this indicator declined from 3.1 in 2013 to 2.76 in 2018 and then it moved back up to 2.86
in 2019.
Protections for temporary workers. In 2019, almost 17 percent of salaried employees
had temporary contracts. To discourage the overuse of temporary employment, some limita-
tions are in place: for example, the obligation to provide a rationale for offering temporary
rather than regular contracts, as well as caps on the contract duration and on the number of
renewals. According to the OECD EPL indicators, these restrictions make Italy the OECD
county with the third strictest regulations on hiring temporary workers. In 2018, the afore-
mentioned labor-marker reform strengthened or reintroduced some restrictions that had been
relaxed by previous reforms. According to the OECD, due to this reform, Italy witnessed
the largest increase in the stringency of regulations on temporary contract between 2018 and
2019.




   for unfair dismissals; enforcement of unfair dismissal regulation. For a detailed description of the methodol-
   ogy, see: https://www.oecd.org/employment/emp/oecdindicatorsofemploymentprotection.htm. For
   details on Italian EPL, see: https://www.oecd.org/els/emp/Italy.pdf.
41
   These changes applied to workers hired on regular contracts after March 7, 2015. For a detailed review of
   the Jobs Act, see: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/economy-finance/dp072_en.pdf.

                                                      A28
