                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     ADDRESSING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC:
                  COMPARING ALTERNATIVE VALUE FRAMEWORKS

                                     Maddalena Ferranna
                                         JP Sevilla
                                      David E. Bloom

                                      Working Paper 28601
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28601


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




This paper was finalized in December 2020, and reflects information about COVID-19, its
impacts, and the steps taken to respond to the pandemic, as of that date. The paper was prepared
for inclusion as a chapter in a forthcoming Cambridge University Press volume entitled
"Prioritarianism in Practice" edited by Matthew Adler and Ole Norheim. We thank the editors,
James Hammitt, Nicolas Treich and participants at the "Prioritarianism in Practice" meeting on
May 21­22, 2020 for extremely thoughtful comments. This work was supported by the Value of
Vaccination Research Network (VoVRN) through a grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation (Grant OPP1158136). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does
not necessarily reflect the views of the VoVRN or the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Maddalena Ferranna, JP Sevilla, and David E. Bloom. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Addressing the COVID-19 Pandemic: Comparing Alternative Value Frameworks
Maddalena Ferranna, JP Sevilla, and David E. Bloom
NBER Working Paper No. 28601
March 2021
JEL No. D6,I1,I3

                                         ABSTRACT

The COVID-19 pandemic has forced countries to make difficult ethical choices, e.g., how to
balance public health and socioeconomic activity and whom to prioritize in allocating vaccines or
other scarce medical resources. We discuss the implications of benefit-cost analysis,
utilitarianism, and prioritarianism in evaluating COVID-19-related policies. The relative
regressivity of COVID-19 burdens and control policy costs determines whether increased
sensitivity to distribution supports more or less aggressive control policies. Utilitarianism and
prioritarianism, in that order, increasingly favor income redistribution mechanisms compared
with benefit-cost analysis. The concern for the worse-off implies that prioritarianism is more
likely than utilitarianism or benefit-cost analysis to target young and socioeconomically
disadvantaged individuals in the allocation of scarce vaccine doses.

Maddalena Ferranna                                 David E. Bloom
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health          Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
Department of Global Health and Population         Department of Global Health and Population
665 Huntington Ave.                                665 Huntington Ave.
Building 1, 1202-B                                 Building 1, Suite 1202
Boston, MA 02115                                   Boston, MA 02115
mferranna@hsph.harvard.edu                         and IZA
                                                   and also NBER
JP Sevilla                                         dbloom@hsph.harvard.edu
Department of Global Health and Population
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
665 Huntington Avenue
Boston, Mass 02115
jsevilla@hsph.harvard.edu
1. Introduction

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), which is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), was first reported in Wuhan, China, in December 2019. Since then,
COVID-19 has spread explosively around the world, with catastrophic health, social, and
economic effects. Through mid-December 2020, roughly 72 million cases had been detected
worldwide, including nearly 1.7 million deaths. 1 The socioeconomic costs of the COVID-19
pandemic (and of the nonpharmaceutical interventions adopted to control its spread) are
staggering. 2 The International Monetary Fund estimates that COVID-19 is associated with an
expected 4.4% contraction of the world economy in 2020 (IMF 2020). By comparison, the 2009
global financial crisis caused a 0.1% contraction of the world economy (Gopinath 2020).

Several factors underlie the dramatic consequences of COVID-19. SARS-CoV-2 is a novel virus
with many features that remain substantially unknown. However, it appears to be very infectious,
lethal, and geographically unconstrained. In comparison, the World Health Organization reports
that the seasonal flu has an infection fatality rate (i.e., the proportion of deaths among all infected
individuals) of 0.1% (WHO 2020), whereas the infection fatality rate of COVID-19 is estimated
to be in the range of 0.5%­1% (Levin et al. 2020; Perez-Saez et al. 2020; Streek et al. 2020; Yang
et al. 2020), although much uncertainty remains (Ioannidis 2020). Lack of adequate health sector
responses (i.e., testing, treatment, and vaccination) has undermined effective efforts to contain the
pandemic. However, the pandemic has also spurred an unprecedented innovations race (Bloom et
al. 2021). For example, more than 270 vaccines against COVID-19 are under development around
the world, with more than 60 already in the clinical testing phase, and eight already approved for
full or emergency use in several countries. 3 Absent effective treatments and a vaccine, countries
have implemented social and physical distancing policies to curb the infections (e.g., quarantine,
masks, staying 6 feet apart, and economic shutdowns), which have proven to be socially, culturally,
economically, and politically severe and burdensome and which have required a drastic and
perhaps permanent reorganization of large segments of society (e.g., social norms about
handshakes, hugging, and kissing; patterns of working from home; virtual instead of in-person
meetings; air travel; and building planning).

1
  https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
2
  The World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic on March 11, 2020.
3
  https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html


                                                       3
The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated existing inequalities through patterns of infections,
sickness, and deaths that disproportionately affect disadvantaged populations; socioeconomic
differences in healthcare access and in ability to invest resources to tackle the pandemic; and
inadequate redistribution mechanisms to equitably share the economic burden of the pandemic and
nonpharmaceutical interventions to control it (Avent 2020). Lack of global leadership, coupled
with rising nationalism and populism, has hampered a timely, effective, and globally fair solution
to the COVID-19 crisis (Hafner et al. 2020).

Management of the pandemic raises many policy questions, the answers to which depend on the
ethical framework that is used to evaluate reductions in deaths and morbidity against
socioeconomic costs. For example, to what extent and for how long should we restrict social
interactions and limit economic activities? When is it safe to reopen schools and businesses? How
much should countries spend on research and development (R&D) for a vaccine against COVID-
19? How should the financing burden be divided among countries and stakeholders? How should
scarce healthcare resources such as ventilators, intensive care unit beds, vaccine doses, or drugs
be allocated among the population?

This chapter explores how utilitarian and prioritarian social welfare function (SWF) frameworks
can help answer some of these questions. In particular, we will focus on two issues: disease control
and vaccine allocation. We discuss these value frameworks in the context of simplified and
stylized      examples,        which       aim       to demonstrate how pandemic           response
requires addressing distributional issues of the kind that SWF frameworks can inform rather than
to generate real-world policy conclusions. Section 2 describes some of the core pieces of the
analytical frameworks and discusses the main issues at stake in the COVID-19 crisis. We will
focus on the value of policies to control the spread of the pandemic (e.g., economic lockdowns)
and of prioritizing different groups in allocating scarce vaccine supplies. Section 3 qualitatively
discusses the main differences among benefit-cost analysis (BCA), utilitarianism, and
prioritarianism. Section 4 presents a stylized example of control interventions, and Section 5 a
stylized example of vaccine prioritization strategies supported by the three value frameworks.
Section 6 concludes. Although we focus on the COVID-19 pandemic, the lessons we draw
generalize to other epidemics and to any intervention with health and non-health impacts.




                                                 4
The analysis draws two main sets of conclusions. When deciding the strength of the control policy,
what counts is the relative regressivity of COVID-19 burdens and policy costs. The more
regressive the burdens of COVID-19 are, the more the distribution sensitivity of the value
framework raises the value of strict control policies (i.e., increased regressivity increases the value
of control for prioritarianism more than it does for utilitarianism, and for utilitarianism more than
it does for BCA). The more regressive the costs of strict control policies are, the more the
distribution sensitivity of the value framework will lower the value of strict control policies. Thus,
the net impact of the value framework's distribution sensitivity on the value of control depends on
the relative strength of the two patterns of regressivity. The sensitivity of utilitarianism and
prioritarianism to the distribution of policy costs implies that they will strongly support income
redistribution mechanisms (e.g., unemployment benefits).

The second set of conclusions concerns vaccine allocation. None among BCA, utilitarianism, and
prioritarianism prioritizes specific groups based solely on the size of the risk of severe health
outcomes from COVID-19 that they face. BCA tends to favor the wealthy because they have the
larger ability to pay and thus the larger willingness to pay (although, in practice, benefit-costs
analysts often use unit values that are invariant to income). Utilitarianism and prioritarianism skew
the allocation toward the poor because they bear a disproportionate burden of COVID-19. Because
the young and the poor are among the worse-off in the population, prioritarianism is more likely
to target young, socioeconomically disadvantaged populations in allocating COVID-19 vaccines
than are utilitarianism and BCA. However, because the difference in COVID-19 mortality risks
between the old and the young is so high, even prioritarianism will rank socioeconomically
disadvantaged elderly at the top of the vaccine priority list (even though wealthy elderly may be
ranked lower than the socioeconomically disadvantaged young).

A note of caution before we proceed. The current chapter was completed in December 2020.
Although the evaluation tools discussed herein have enduring relevance, their application to
COVID-19 is based on the information available as of December 2020 and should be read and
understood in that light.




                                                  5
2. Background

2.1 Concept of well-being

The main goal of the chapter is to discuss the evaluation of COVID-19 interventions through the
lens of SWFs, specifically utilitarian and prioritarian ones. Under the SWF approach, assessing
the value of an intervention involves two steps: (i) estimating the intervention's impacts on all the
attributes of individual well-being and (ii) aggregating individuals' well-being gains and losses to
assess the intervention's impact on overall social welfare. The specific aggregation rule depends
on the adopted SWF (Adler 2019).

We start by specifying a measure of individual well-being. We assume individual well-being
depends on attributes including consumption/income, longevity, and health status. Specifying a
well-being measure and its dependence on its attributes can be done in several ways. Adler and
Decancq (forthcoming) review the most common methods. We rely on utility functions that
represent individuals' preferences and risk attitudes regarding alternative probability distributions
of attributes over a lifetime. We interpret the period and lifetime utility functions of
microeconomic theory as interpersonally comparable ratio-scale indices of individual well-being
(with meaningful zeros and defined up to a common multiplicative constant). We therefore treat
"well-being" and "utility" interchangeably.

We assess policy impact on lifetime rather than sub-lifetime utility, which is standard in the
literature and in this volume. We assume that lifetime utility is additive in period (e.g., annual)
utility, there is no time discounting, and the marginal utility of income (or consumption) is
diminishing so that a dollar raises the utility of the poor more than it does that of the rich. The time
additivity and zero discounting assumptions jointly imply that marginal utility is linear in
(expected or realized) longevity. Therefore, all else equal, longevity increments have the same
positive effect on lifetime utility independently of the age of the individual. 4 The time additivity




4
  Suppose that a 20-year-old and a 70-year-old are going to die soon, but they can both live five more years if they
take an experimental treatment. The quality of life of those additional five years is the same for both individuals. Time
additivity and zero discounting imply that the two individuals attach the same value to the life-extension treatment. If
marginal utility were decreasing in longevity, then the value of the treatment for the 20-year-old would be larger than
the value of the treatment for the 70-year-old on the grounds that the life of the former is shorter.



                                                           6
assumption, although standard in the literature, bears on the comparison between utilitarianism
and prioritarianism and, in particular, on the weight given to the young in policy evaluation. 5



2.2 Impact of COVID-19 on well-being

The COVID-19 pandemic has health and non-health negative impacts on individuals' well-being.
The health burden includes the probability and severity of infections, which can lead to death,
temporary and long-term physical disability, and temporary or long-term mental health burdens in
patients and in friends and family. Health-system-related burdens include treatment and other
costs; congestion of intensive care units and other resources leading to rationing, delay, and
disruption of medical and public health services (including immunization programs critical to the
health and the cognitive and physical development of children around the world, especially in
developing countries); and out-of-pocket expenditures on health. The non-health impacts of
COVID-19 include the potential loss of income due to work stoppage, unemployment, furlough,
or sickness.

The health impacts of COVID-19 are strongly associated with pre-existing health and
socioeconomic status. Some demographic groups seem to be disproportionately exposed to risks
of COVID-19 complications and deaths, particularly the elderly, those with underlying health
conditions, and males (e.g., Guan et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2020; Chow et al. 2020). Risk of infection
seems higher for low-socioeconomic (SES) individuals and communities due to their
overrepresentation in essential jobs and service jobs requiring physical presence (and disallowing
working from home), more crowded living arrangements, higher probability of using public
transportation, and lower financial ability to stockpile food (Blundell et al. 2020; Brown and
Ravallion 2020). Risk of infection also seems to be higher in polluted neighborhoods (Wu et al.
2020) and in areas with less access to healthcare resources. In the United States, COVID-19 deaths
are overrepresented among African Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans (Subbaraman
2020).


5
  As discussed later, if we retain the time additivity and zero discounting assumptions, under utilitarianism a given
increase in longevity for the young has the same value as an equal increase in longevity for the old, while that is not
true for prioritarianism. If we remove the time additivity and zero discounting assumptions, both utilitarianism and
prioritarianism would give greater priority to increases in longevity for the young, although more for the latter than
for the former.


                                                           7
COVID-19 can have direct negative economic impacts on infected individuals and their families,
e.g., through medical bills, salary losses due to sick days or to taking care of sick family members,
and decreased productivity due to the onset of a long-term disability. Social distancing to control
infections or reduce exposure, whether mandated or voluntary, creates profound macroeconomic
costs. People who can afford to do so will spend more work and leisure time at home, which can
shift the pattern of demand (e.g., from restaurant meals to online groceries, or from office space to
home office supplies). Overall levels of consumption and demand may also fall if income is
reduced (e.g., among the unemployed) or if people are saving for precautionary reasons or in
anticipation of spending more after the pandemic. In turn, such reduced demand can lead to
unemployment or furloughs, particularly in some contact-intensive sectors (e.g., restaurants);
bankruptcy and business closures; and increased exposure to socioeconomic strains and the risk of
poverty among the most vulnerable groups. Moreover, outbreaks in the workplace will prevent
normal functioning of the locale, possibly threatening its own existence and the health and well-
being of its employees. In addition, outbreak-induced interruptions in global supply chains can
have worldwide negative effects, even in regions not directly affected by the outbreak (UNIDO
2020).



2.3. Control policies

2.3.1. Flattening the curve, suppression, and mitigation: disease control basics

Since the worldwide outbreaks of COVID-19 began in winter 2019/2020, epidemiologists have
warned that the best immediate course of action to reduce the burden of COVID-19 is to "flatten
the infection curve" through social and physical distancing (Roberts 2020). Figure 1 depicts the
idea. The steep curve represents the projected number of infections over time without any measure
to control the spread of the disease (e.g., handwashing or economic lockdown), while the flat curve
represents the projected number of infections over time when social and physical distancing
measures are enforced. Absent any intervention, existing epidemiological models predict a steep
surge of infections well beyond countries' healthcare system capacity for treatment, represented
by the thick horizontal line (e.g., Ferguson et al. 2020, Giordano et al. 2020, Kissler et al. 2020).
Measures to control the spread of the disease aim to reduce this surge and thereby contain the




                                                 8
demand for scarce healthcare resources. Implementing these measures results in a curve with a
flatter slope, denoting a slower rate of infection extended over a longer time.



Figure 1. Number of COVID-19 cases over time with and without nonpharmaceutical
interventions and projected rationing




Note: The steep curve represents the projected number of cases over time without nonpharmaceutical intervention to
control the spread of the disease (such as handwashing or economic lockdown); the flat curve represents the projected
number of cases over time with those measures. The horizontal lines represent the healthcare system capacity
constraints, and the arrows represent the peak rationing of healthcare resources (i.e., the number of cases that cannot
receive treatment). Implementing nonpharmaceutical interventions and relaxing the healthcare system capacity
constraint are both useful strategies to reduce the required rationing. 6



Flattening the curve achieves three main goals. First, it reduces the daily number of positive cases,
thereby preventing the healthcare system from being overwhelmed with cases; allowing more
people to get treatment; and, hopefully, reducing the number of deaths. Second, flattening the
curve diminishes the total number of cases and deaths throughout the pandemic by allowing more
people to get treated daily and by reducing the probability of spreading the disease. Therefore, not


6
    We thank Daniel Cadarette for creating the picture.


                                                          9
only will fewer cases and deaths occur per day, but the total number of cases and deaths is also
expected to reduce, despite the longer time that the epidemic takes to be resolved. Finally,
flattening the curve buys some time to develop and test a vaccine or new therapeutic drugs.
Expanding the supply of scarce healthcare resources (i.e., moving from the thick horizontal line to
the dotted one) is a complementary strategy to flattening the curve. Interventions to relax the
healthcare system capacity constraint include, for example, developing faster and more accurate
tests for COVID-19 and for COVID-19 antibodies, postponing elective procedures, and easing
supply chain bottlenecks and financial constraints to improve the distribution of resources.

Strategies to control the course of the pandemic can be divided into two broad categories:
suppression and mitigation (Yglesias 2020). Suppression aims at keeping the number of infections
as close to zero as possible. Mitigation allows a controlled outbreak to occur, with the aim of
keeping the number of cases within the healthcare system capacity. Stay-at-home orders and
economic lockdowns suppress the infection as long as they are in place. Contact tracing, quarantine
of positive cases, and social distancing of the elderly are examples of measures to mitigate the
infection without completely suppressing it. A useful reference point for delineating the control
strategy has been the so-called reproduction number, labeled R, which measures the expected
number of infections that one case directly generates (Adam 2020). When  < 1, the outbreak is
shrinking. Mitigation strategies that aim at slowing down transmission without necessarily ending
it may have  > 1; suppression strategies always result in  < 1.

Suppression measures could delay the outbreak, spare many lives, and buy time until a vaccine or
treatment is developed. However, suppression strategies are also very costly, potentially triggering
massive unemployment, business closures, educational setbacks, and worsening mental health. In
addition, if suitable mitigation policies do not follow once they are lifted, a new surge of cases is
likely to occur as herd protection has typically not yet been achieved. 7 Mitigation strategies, which
may be used with or instead of suppression, are less invasive as they do not rely on complete
economic shutdown. However, they require extensive testing and contact tracing to control the




7
 Herd protection occurs when the number of immune individuals in a population is sufficiently large that
nonimmune individuals are also protected from infection thanks to reduced likelihood of transmission. For COVID-
19, the herd protection threshold is estimated to be at least 60% in the absence of any intervention (Fontanet and
Cauchemez 2020).


                                                        10
pandemic successfully and the political and technological capacity to quickly revert to more
aggressive suppression strategies if the outbreak gets out of control.

After the initial outbreak of COVID-19, most countries around the world implemented economic
shutdowns and placed strict limitations on individuals' mobility to suppress the pandemic and ease
overloaded healthcare systems. 8 Once the outbreak was considered under control, countries started
lifting stay-at-home orders and slowly reopening their economies, with the underlying goal of
moving from a suppression to a mitigation phase. Sweden is the famous outlier, with its decision
to not suppress the outbreak through school and business closures, instead relying on social
distancing and non-mandatory guidance to reach herd protection in a controlled way (Vogel 2020).
As we write this chapter, the relative success of these alternative strategies is unclear.



2.3.2. Health-income trade-offs

Some argue that a critical issue in COVID-19 control is how to trade off health and income, while
others argue that effectively no such trade-off exists (Mahoney 2020). Under the trade-off view,
societies must choose between a "low-health, high-income" state achieved with less aggressive
control and a "high-health, low-income" state achieved with more aggressive control. The
preferred state depends on the distribution of gains and losses in health and income produced by
the control policies required to get to those states.

In contrast, under the no-trade-off view, an uncontrolled pandemic will ultimately lead to
economic unravelling, so the surest way to protect income is to protect health first. In such a case,
the only two states to choose from are a "high-health, high-income" state brought about by
aggressive control and a "low-health, low-income state" from less aggressive control. The
plausibility of the no-trade-off view rises if the economic costs of inaction are high, if individuals
stringently self-protect, and if the policy horizon is long.

The experience in the first few months of the pandemic showed that control measures can
meaningfully reduce the number of infections and deaths due to COVID-19, often at the expense




8
    https://www.imf.org/en/Topics/imf-and-covid19/Policy-Responses-to-COVID-19


                                                      11
of staggering social and economic costs. The more aggressive the control is, the higher the costs
seem to be, suggesting a trade-off.

However, this appearance of a trade-off can be misleading for several reasons. First, it fails to
recognize that the "do nothing" scenario (i.e., a policy of uncontrolled spread of the virus) can also
have huge negative economic impacts beyond the dreadful burden of many fatalities. As described
earlier, these costs relate to the endogenous social distancing implemented by individuals for fear
of infection and the disruptions in global supply chain. If we account for the economic costs of
inaction, the stark trade-off between health and income (or between "saving lives" and "saving
livelihoods") is mitigated, if not completely gone.

The length of the policy horizon matters as well. A stringent control policy enacted at the beginning
of the pandemic (e.g., with school and business closures and shelter-at-home orders) allows
countries to gain quick control over the spread of the virus and to transition to more lenient
mitigation policies in the medium run (based, e.g., on extensive testing, contact tracing and
quarantine, physical distancing, and adoption of protective behaviors like wearing masks and
washing hands) while keeping the economy open. Such a policy scenario entails staggering
economic losses in the short run when the economy shuts down, but much lower costs in the
medium to long term when the economy is open and the pandemic is under control. Specifically,
the overall costs are likely to be lower than in a no-action scenario with a lot of fatalities and a
recession triggered by the panic and the burden of disease. The overall costs are also likely to be
lower than in a scenario where virus spread is initially left uncontrolled, panic spreads, and
aggressive policies are later introduced to stop the virus and to control the economic downturn. A
short-sighted policy maker will focus only on the short-run stark trade-off between lives and
livelihoods. However, for any reasonably long policy horizon, saving lives is also good for the
economy and for preserving individuals' livelihoods.

The effectiveness of such a narrative depends on many factors. The virus can be kept under control
without resorting to lockdowns (or limiting economic lockdowns to short periods of time) only if
a country has an efficient testing, contact tracing, and quarantine system; constraints on healthcare
system capacity have been relaxed (e.g., the number of hospital beds); and access to healthcare
resources is constant and equitably shared (e.g., easy and affordable access to testing). The
compliant behavior of the population matters as well, particularly the spread of precautionary



                                                 12
measures such as handwashing and wearing a mask. Additionally, complementary redistributive
measures such as higher unemployment benefits and recovery grants for businesses can relieve the
economic burden of control strategies on individuals and businesses and ensure that no effective
trade-off between saving lives and saving livelihoods occurs.

In particular, as the burden of COVID-19 is likely to exacerbate pre-existing inequities in health,
income, and education, so do the policies to control its spread. Younger workers, women, and low-
SES individuals have primarily felt the costs of economic lockdowns and social distancing because
they are more likely to work in the high-contact sectors that the policies mainly affect (Dingel and
Neiman 2020). Women tend also to bear the brunt of childcare and home schooling. In many
places, school closures are likely to widen the educational gap between high- and low-SES pupils,
due to the difficulties in effective online learning that the latter face (Andrew et al. 2020). Retired
people may have been protected from the economic hardships of control policies, but they suffer
from social isolation and deteriorating physical and mental health (Armitage and Nellums 2020).
These inequities are going to be even more apparent in low-resource settings.

Thus, context also matters. How best to handle the pandemic and its health and economic costs
has no single recipe. The best compromise between saving lives and saving livelihoods depends,
among other factors, on the amount of healthcare resources available to a country, its capacity to
provide economic relief, overall access to sanitation, and the ability to practice social and physical
distancing effectively (e.g., the state of living arrangements). 9 Aggressive lockdown policies
coupled with a poorly equipped social security system and overcrowded living arrangements may
have moderate effects on the number of infections, shrink the economy, cause extreme food
insecurity, and prevent people from accessing basic healthcare services, threatening not only the
livelihoods but also the lives of the poorest populations. In this case, saving livelihoods seems to
be a precondition for saving lives (e.g., Brown et al. 2020; Cash and Patel 2020).



2.4 The value of vaccines

The staggering health and non-health burdens of COVID-19 and of the interventions to control its
spread highlight the broad benefits of having a vaccine for COVID-19 (Bloom et al. forthcoming).


9
    As well as the evaluation framework, of course.


                                                      13
The vaccine will reduce the morbidity and mortality impacts of the disease. It will also avert the
implementation of control measures and their associated costs, e.g., massive unemployment,
business closures, disruptions in global supply chains, and increased learning gaps between rich
and poor children.

As of December 2020, more than 270 R&D efforts have been undertaken around the world to find
a vaccine against SARS-CoV-2, with more than 60 vaccines in human trials and eight candidate
vaccines approved for full or limited use in several countries, including Canada, China, Russia,
Singapore, the United Kingdom, and the United States. 10 Such a race raises several issues, from
the trade-off between safety and speed to the most efficient and fair way of organizing the
development, manufacture, and distribution of vaccines (Bloom et al. 2021).

An important topic concerns the allocation of vaccine doses among the population, given that
manufacturing capacity constraints will make it a scarce resource, at least at the beginning of the
distribution process. The COVID-19 crisis has seen growing "vaccine nationalism," in which
countries take a "my nation first" approach to developing, manufacturing, and distributing a
vaccine and other treatments against COVID-19. Against that has been a surge of appeals to
overcome nationalistic forces and to make the vaccine available everywhere in the world and to
all socioeconomic groups, independently of countries' and individuals' ability to pay for it
(Emanuel et al. 2020a). 11

Several guidelines for COVID-19 vaccine prioritization strategies within countries have been
proposed (e.g., JCVI 2020; NASEM 2020; Toner et al. 2020). 12 These guidelines share the ethical
objective of maximizing some kind of overall good (e.g., individuals' aggregate well-being, or
cumulative health and non-health benefits), while accounting for the specific epidemiological

10
   https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html
Two of these vaccines (the Pfizer-BioNTech one and the Moderna one) use novel technologies that have never been
approved for use in humans before (messenger RNA). Several of the other most promising vaccines are also using
methods that are at the technological innovation frontier (e.g., viral vector vaccines).
11
   For instance, more than 140 world leaders and experts called for a "people's vaccine" on May 14, 2020,
demanding that COVID-19 vaccines, diagnostics, tests, and treatments be provided free of charge to everyone and
everywhere in the world:
https://www.unaids.org/en/resources/presscentre/featurestories/2020/may/20200514_covid19-vaccine-open-letter
12
   Debates about the allocation of other scarce medical resources within countries have occurred as well, especially at
the beginning of the pandemic, when the explosive pace of infections overwhelmed hospitals in some locales, forcing
hard choices of whom to treat and how to allocate resources such as ICU beds and ventilators (e.g., Emanuel et al.
2020b; Bloom et al. 2020).



                                                         14
characteristics of COVID-19 (e.g., age differences in severity and risk). Most guidelines seek also
to be sensitive to equity concerns, in particular to pre-existing health and economic inequities and
to the apparent correlation between burdens of COVID-19 and structural inequalities (Schmidt et
al. 2020).

One hotly debated issue is whether essential workers within the healthcare sector and service
industries should be prioritized over older adults and individuals with serious medical conditions,
despite the fact that the latter face a considerably higher risk of severe health consequences
(Goodnough and Hoffman 2020). Epidemiological, economic, and ethical reasons have been
suggested to support this argument (Ferranna et al. 2021). Essential workers are at highest risk of
exposure and transmission of the virus because their work often involves unavoidable high-
frequency indoor proximity or interaction with others. If the vaccine can block transmission from
vaccinated individuals (an uncertain feature of the approved vaccines as we write this chapter, see,
e.g., Peiris and Leung 2020), then vaccinating essential workers first may be more beneficial.
Economic reasons for prioritizing essential workers refer to their instrumental value in keeping
essential services in the economy open (in addition to the instrumental value in saving other
people's lives). Ethical reasons appeal to reciprocity and compensation for the work done by these
workers in keeping the economy open while overexposing themselves to the risk of infection.
Social justice arguments have also been raised highlighting the fact that many essential workers
belong to disadvantaged racial and ethnic minorities and socioeconomically vulnerable groups.



3. Value frameworks to evaluate control and vaccine allocation strategies

An emergent and rapidly growing economic literature assesses the value of various measures to
control the spread of COVID-19 and to determine the best course of action. Some of the questions
this literature addresses are the optimal extent and length of economic shutdowns (how many
sectors of the economy to close and for how long), the timing and process of reopening the
economy, and the opportunity for age-targeted interventions. 13 In terms of evaluation methods,
two main approaches have emerged: BCA, using value-of-statistical-life measures (see, e.g.,
Acemoglu et al. 2020, Alvarez et al. 2020, Favero et al. 2020, Gollier 2020), and utilitarian SWFs


13
  See, for instance, Bloom, Kuhn and Prettner (forthcoming) for a review of the literature on the macroeconomic
costs of COVID-19 and policies to control its spread.


                                                       15
(see, e.g., Eichenbaum et al. 2020, Glover et al. 2020, Jones et al. 2020, Quaas et al. 2020). Only
a couple of papers adopt a prioritarian perspective in evaluating COVID-19 control policies (Adler
et al. 2020 and Adler 2020). 14

The literature on vaccine allocation, instead, is based mainly on health metrics. While ethical
guidelines for vaccine prioritization recommend also considering non-health outcomes and being
sensitive to the burden of COVID-19 impacts among socioeconomically vulnerable groups, most
modeling exercises focus on strategies that maximize some health benefits, e.g., deaths averted or
years of life lost averted (e.g., Bubar et al. 2021; Buckner et al. 2020; Rodríguez et al. 2020). Note
that maximizing (quality-adjusted) years of life is tantamount to a utilitarian approach where well-
being is assumed to depend only on (quality-adjusted) longevity (see also Cookson, Norheim, and
Skarda forthcoming).

In broad terms, the main difference among BCA, utilitarianism, and prioritarianism concerns the
relative weight attached to the policy impacts experienced by different individuals. 15 BCA relies
on the principle that "a dollar is a dollar is a dollar." BCA evaluates a given policy by converting
all its health and economic impacts into monetary equivalents based on individuals' willingness to
pay (WTP) to avoid these impacts and then summing up these equivalents. Consequently, the
method is unconcerned with the distribution of willingness to pay in the population: health and
economic impacts experienced by low-income individuals have the same moral importance as
impacts experienced by wealthy individuals, where impacts are measured by individuals'
willingness to pay.

The "dollar is a dollar is a dollar" principle has two main consequences. First, because willingness-
to-pay measures are inextricably linked to individuals' ability to pay, the interests of the better-off
count more than the interests of the less well-off. Wealthy individuals are likely to offer more to
reduce the risk of COVID-19 infection and death than their less-wealthy counterparts not because
they value life more, but because they have more resources and are thereby more inclined to trade
wealth for a given change in health. BCA might value saving 100 rich lives more than saving 100
poor lives because the total willingness to pay of the former is considerably larger than the total


14
   Adler et al. (2020) is based on the COVID-19 simulator created by Marc Fleurbaey and co-authors
(https://sites.google.com/site/marcfleurbaey/Home/covid).
15
   See also Adler (2019), chapter 5, and Hammitt and Treich (forthcoming) for a comparison of BCA, utilitarianism,
and prioritarianism.


                                                       16
willingness to pay of the latter. As an extreme case, BCA might condone a control policy that
saves 100 rich lives from COVID-19 while condemning 100 poor lives to starvation and death.
Additionally, BCA would allocate scarce medical resources (including vaccines) to wealthy
individuals first, on the grounds that they have a larger willingness to pay than poorer individuals
for the same expected improvement in health through immunization.

Note that, to avoid these ethically objectionable results, benefit-cost analysts in practice often use
a constant willingness to pay throughout the population, independent of individuals' characteristics
such as income or age (Robinson 2007). The analysis in the chapter focuses on "textbook" BCA,
which allows for heterogeneous willingness to pay across the population.

Second, because BCA attaches the same value to dollars paid by the rich and dollars paid by the
poor (according to the "a dollar is a dollar is a dollar" rule), the distribution of the (net) policy
costs plays no role in the evaluation process. Willingness-to-pay measures express how much
individuals are ready to pay to reduce their own risk of contracting the virus and suffering the
pandemic costs. But, if the policy is implemented, some individuals might end up paying more
than their willingness-to-pay threshold, while supporting the risk reduction of other individuals. In
particular, absent adequate support policies (e.g., unemployment benefits, paid sick leave, and
support for virtual learning), disadvantaged populations, like ethnic minorities and low
socioeconomic groups, will mainly feel the costs both of COVID-19 and of the nonpharmaceutical
interventions to control it. It is reasonable to assume that a control policy that saves lives while
condemning thousands to poverty should rank lower than another control policy that saves the
same number of lives, costs the same amount of money in aggregate, but whose burden is felt
mainly by the wealthy. However, BCA would be indifferent between the two policies. The same
principle holds for the financing of alternative vaccine allocation strategies. BCA is indifferent
about who pays for the vaccine doses, whether they are privately paid by single individuals or paid
through tax revenues (i.e., sharing the costs collectively).

In contrast, utilitarianism relies on the principle that "a util is a util is a util," where "util" is a
quantum of well-being. The utilitarian SWF evaluates policies based on their impacts on
individuals' total expected well-being. A known criticism of utilitarianism is its indifference to the
distribution of well-being across the population. Consequently, the utilitarian approach is




                                                  17
indifferent to whether policy benefits go mainly to the well-off or the worse-off, as long as it leads
to an increase in the sum of individuals' well-being.

Although the utilitarian approach is insensitive to inequalities in individual well-being levels, it is
sensitive to inequalities in individual income because of the diminishing marginal utility of money
assumption. Thus, policies that reduce the income of the poor are valued less than similar policies
that induce an identical reduction in the income of the rich. Applied to COVID-19, control policies
whose costs are paid mainly by the high-income quintiles are considered better than identical
policies (in terms of infection and fatality reductions) whose costs are paid mainly by the low-
income quintiles. In contrast, BCA is indifferent to the distribution of the policy costs. Concerns
about the incidence and distribution of policy costs have arisen, for instance, in some developing
countries, where lack of suitable redistribution mechanisms (e.g., unemployment benefits) make
policy costs fall harder on the economically worse-off. 16

Additionally, because utilitarianism values policy changes in terms of their impact on individual
well-being rather than in terms of the individuals' willingness to pay for those changes, ability to
pay is implicitly accounted for (in other words, utilitarianism can be thought of as a form of WTP-
driven assessment where willingness to pay is adjusted to reflect differential abilities to pay). As
a result, the approach does not inflate the policy benefits accruing to the well-off relative to the
worse-off merely because money has relatively lower marginal value for the well-off.

A further consequence is that the utilitarian optimal allocation of vaccines is only sensitive to
differences in well-being impacts of the vaccine; individual differences in the marginal utility of
money (which reflect differences in their ability to pay) do not, as such, change the optimal
allocation. In other words, the framework prioritizes individuals that benefit more in well-being
terms from being vaccinated. This will typically include those that face the higher burden of
COVID-19 (e.g., those with a high COVID-19 fatality risk). However, the framework is sensitive
also to life expectancy (the larger the number of years one is expected to live if vaccinated, the
larger the increase in well-being) and to the quality of life preserved.

Finally, prioritarianism relies on the principle that "a priority-weighted util is a priority-weighted
util is a priority-weighted util"; i.e., unlike utilitarianism, the method is concerned with the



16
     See, for instance, Cash and Patel (2020).


                                                  18
distribution of the individual well-being impacts of the pandemic, attaching higher value to well-
being increments that accrue to the worse-off than to identical well-being impacts that accrue to
the better-off. Applied to the evaluation of COVID-19 control and vaccine allocation strategies,
the prioritarian approach favors interventions with the overall effect of benefiting mainly the
worse-off in the population.

Two main forms of prioritarianism can be considered, which differ in the definition of the "worse-
off" (Adler forthcoming). Ex-ante prioritarianism is concerned with the distribution of expected
lifetime well-being across the population. From an ex-ante point of view, the worse-off individuals
are those who in expectation have poor lifetime prospects. For example, individuals with low
expected longevity, individuals who are expected to have low income, and individuals with high
chances of suffering from illness. In contrast, ex-post prioritarianism is concerned with the
expected distribution of realized lifetime well-being. From an ex-post point of view, the worse-off
individuals are those who have experienced some hardship during their life, expressed in a low
lifetime well-being. For example, individuals who die prematurely, individuals who have low
lifetime income, and disabled individuals who suffer from poor health and lack access to many
lifetime opportunities.

Compared with utilitarianism, the concern for the worse-off has two consequences. First,
prioritarianism is even less likely than utilitarianism to support situations where low-income
groups bear the brunt of COVID-19 (net) control policy costs. Equivalently, a prioritarian approach
to control policy evaluation is likely to support more redistributive transfers favoring unemployed
and essential workers because they bear the greatest economic and health burdens, respectively,
of the COVID-19 pandemic and thus are among the worse-off in the population. Second, while
utilitarianism is indifferent between saving the life of a well-off individual or the life of a worse-
off individual, provided they enjoy the same increase in well-being if saved, prioritarianism prefers
the latter. Because young individuals are among the worse-off in lifetime terms (because they have
not yet had the opportunity to live a full life), prioritarian SWFs attach higher value than
utilitarianism to interventions that benefit mostly the young. One consequence of this is that
prioritarianism is more likely than utilitarianism to prioritize the young in the allocation of vaccine
doses, despite the fact that they might have lower overall benefits from being vaccinated.




                                                  19
Note that all three methods eventually support the introduction of control policies over an
uncontrolled spread of the virus because of the death toll imposed by the pandemic and the positive
economic feedback from controlling the virus (e.g., the poor can only go back to work when the
pandemic is under control). However, the three methods will differ in the specific characteristics
of the recommended control policy (e.g., when to start the lockdown and when to start reopening,
whether to have age-specific policies, how to allocate tests and healthcare resources, and so on).
In particular, if the trade-off between saving lives and saving livelihoods exists, BCA,
utilitarianism, and prioritarianism are, in that order, increasingly sensitive to distribution and so
could differ in the choice between more or less aggressive control. If the net costs of control are
regressively distributed, for example, aggressive control may be more optimal under BCA than
under utilitarianism or prioritarianism. In contrast, if the trade-off between health and the economy
does not exist, aggressive control may be optimal under all three views, and distributional
sensitivity may largely manifest in the amount of income support to provide the worse-off during
the control period.



4. Example 1: The value of COVID-19 control policies in the United States

This section considers a simple example to illustrate the differences among BCA, utilitarianism,
and prioritarianism when it comes to evaluating COVID-19 control policies. The example applies
to the U.S. economy. Here, we discuss the main features of the example, while Appendix A
describes the model in full. The example is not intended to provide policy recommendations, but
to clarify the implications of different evaluation methods.

Suppose that, at the beginning of the pandemic, the policy maker must choose between a no
intervention strategy (i.e., letting the virus spread in an uncontrolled way) and a strict control
strategy that prevents all deaths and is maintained until a vaccine or an effective treatment is found.
Further suppose that the vaccine and/or treatment is expected to be available in one year. What is
the maximum socially acceptable GDP loss from the intervention to consider the control strategy
better than no intervention at all? If the actual cost of the policy is lower than the maximum socially
acceptable GDP loss, then the policy maker will implement the policy. In contrast, if the actual
cost of the policy is larger than the maximum acceptable GDP loss, then no intervention is better
than the control strategy. What is regarded as "socially acceptable" depends on the chosen


                                                  20
evaluation method. Obviously, no real-world policy maker faces a stark choice between strict
control and doing nothing. But the lessons from this simple example generalize to more realistic
settings in which the optimal degree of strictness of the control can be set in a manner more or less
sensitive to the distributional implications of such control.

In sum, this example shows that, all else equal: i) the more regressive are the burdens of COVID-
19 (i.e., the more concentrated these burdens are on the worse-off), the higher is the value of
control to distribution-sensitive value frameworks (i.e., as regressivity increases, the value of
control increases more for prioritarianism than it does for utilitarianism, and more for utilitarianism
than it does for BCA); ii) the more regressive are the economic costs of control (net of any
redistribution of such costs), the lower is the value of control to distribution-sensitive value
frameworks; iii) thus, whether the value of control rises with the distribution-sensitivity of the
value framework depends on the relative magnitude of these two regressive patterns.



4.1. Setup

We assume that the population is divided into five income quintiles and two age groups, the
"young" (<65 years old) and the "old" (65+). The young constitute 84% of the population.
Individuals remain in the same quintile all their life. We use the U.S. lifetable to construct the
survival function of the two age groups in a non-COVID-19 situation (see Appendix A for more
details). Ample evidence indicates that life expectancies are lower for individuals in low-income
groups. To account for the socioeconomic gradient of health, we assume that the survival curve
derived from the U.S. lifetable applies to individuals with median income, and we scale up and
down the survival chances of the other income quintiles.

We introduce heterogeneity across ages and income quintiles in COVID-19 mortality. To simplify,
we assume that, absent any intervention, all age and income groups have the same probability of
being infected and of spreading the infection. 17 However, conditional on being infected, older
people have a higher risk of being hospitalized and of dying. Based on the estimates of infection
fatality risk by age in Verity et al. (2020) and on the 2019 U.S. population structure (U.S. Census
Bureau 2020), the average infection fatality rate is 0.95%. However, the infection fatality rate of

17
  In reality, members of low-income groups tend to face higher probabilities of infection because they are often
essential workers or otherwise more likely to be exposed to the virus. To simplify, we abstract from this.


                                                        21
the young is 0.28%, while the infection fatality rate of the old is 4.36%. Assuming that, absent any
intervention, 70% of the population will be infected, 0.67% of the population will die of COVID-
19 on average. From this it follows that the COVID-19 mortality rate of the young is 0.2%, while
the mortality rate of the old is 3.05% (i.e., 0.2% of the young and 3.05% of the old die of COVID-
19).

Additionally, we assume that the fatality rate may be a decreasing function of income to capture
the socioeconomic gradient of health (Seligman et al. 2021). Low socioeconomic groups often
face constraints in accessing healthcare (e.g., because they have access to lower-quality healthcare,
or because they wait to see a doctor even if ill to avoid losing their job), thereby exposing them to
a higher fatality risk. The presence of comorbidities such as hypertension and diabetes has also
been found to be correlated with the risk of death from COVID-19, and low socioeconomic groups
disproportionately suffer from these conditions. In the benchmark scenario, we assume that low-
income quintiles bear a disproportionate number of deaths, and we compare it with the case in
which all income quintiles suffer the same number of deaths (i.e., independently of income, 0.2%
of the young die of COVID-19 vs. 3.05% of the old). Table 1 summarizes the COVID-19 mortality
rates by age and income group if low-income quintiles bear a disproportionate number of deaths.



Table 1. COVID-19 mortality rates by age and income group.

             1st quintile           2nd quintile            3rd quintile         4th quintile         5th quintile

 Young       0.32%                  0.23%                   0.18%                0.15%                0.10%

 Old         4.96%                  3.51%                   2.87%                2.31%                1.62%

Assumptions: 70% of the population is infected, the infection fatality rate for the young is 0.28%, the infection fatality
rate for the old is 4.36%. COVID-19 deaths occur disproportionately in low income groups, with an income elasticity
of the mortality rate equal to -0.5 (see Appendix A). The 1st income quintile is the poorest, and the 5th is the richest.
The numbers are rounded to the second significant digit.



We introduce heterogeneities across age and income quintile in the economic costs of control.
COVID-19 control policies reduce economic activity and, as a result, induce a GDP contraction.
The costs of this contraction are heterogeneously distributed across the population. Lower


                                                           22
socioeconomic groups are more likely to bear the brunt of the costs, but adopting relief programs
(such as extending unemployment benefits) can substantially redistribute the costs away from low-
income groups. As noted earlier, the pandemic itself can induce an economic contraction because
of spontaneous reductions in economic activity brought about by fear of infection (e.g., working
from home, avoiding crowded places, etc.), job and income loss, and asset depreciation, but in the
example we ignore that. In other words, we assume a trade-off between saving lives and saving
livelihoods, i.e., avoiding COVID-19 deaths induces a GDP contraction relative to the no
intervention scenario. Stated differently, we assume that GDP with an uncontrolled COVID-19
pandemic and no intervention is the same as pre-pandemic GDP. We consider two cases: one in
which the monetary costs of the policy are borne by individuals in proportion to their income, and
one in which they are disproportionately borne by lower income individuals. Additionally, young
individuals may be more exposed to the negative economic effects of control policies, and so we
account for the age distribution of policy costs as well.

We assume that individual well-being depends on two attributes: income and longevity. COVID-
19 reduces expected longevity (and possibly income). COVID-19 control policies shrink the
longevity reduction at the expense of a larger income contraction. To simplify, we assume that
other individual attributes (e.g., physical and mental health status, the ability to interact socially,
human capital, etc.) do not affect well-being. We also assume that the income contraction brought
about by the control policy has only short-term effects (i.e., once the pandemic is over, the
economy goes back to pre-COVID-19 levels), and we do not consider increased mortality due, for
instance, to overburdened healthcare systems. The short-term effects assumption implies that the
policy-induced GDP contraction lasts only one year, i.e., the time until the vaccine or treatment is
available.



4.2. WTP calculations

Before determining the maximum GDP loss triggered by the intervention that the policy maker
would find socially acceptable (based on the chosen evaluation method) such that the intervention
is better than no intervention, let us compute the maximum income loss that each individual would
find acceptable for the same intervention. This is defined as the maximum percentage of current
own income the individual is willing to sacrifice to eliminate the COVID-19 mortality risk she


                                                  23
faces. In other words, the individual is indifferent between, on the one hand, suffering the COVID-
19 mortality risk and, on the other hand, losing income equal to the willingness to pay while
suffering no COVID-19 mortality risk (the individual is indifferent in the sense that her well-being
is constant in the two situations). This willingness to pay is the backbone of BCA. Because the
intervention we are considering eliminates all COVID-19-related fatalities, such a willingness to
pay can also be interpreted as the individual burden of the pandemic, absent any intervention (and
no economic loss triggered by the pandemic itself).

Table 2 summarizes individuals' willingness to pay for the intervention assuming that low-income
quintiles bear a disproportionate number of deaths, i.e., adopting the mortality rates displayed in
Table 1. We derive this willingness to pay through a modeling exercise that posits a reasonable
functional form for individual expected well-being, and that relies on the distribution of income
and longevity across the population and on existing information about individuals' risk attitudes
and individuals' incentives to trade-off income and longevity. Appendix A more formally
describes our computations.

Because of the higher COVID-19 fatality risk, the old age group attaches a much higher value to
policies that eliminate the risk of COVID-19 than the young age group. Moreover, even though
the low-income quintiles face a larger fatality risk, they are willing to sacrifice much less than the
top quintiles to eliminate the risk of COVID-19. This is a direct result of the lower ability to pay
of individuals at the bottom of the income distribution. For example, although an old individual in
the 1st income quintile has three times the mortality risk of an old individual in the 5th income
quintile, the difference in income implies that the former is willing to pay only a third of her income
to avoid the risk of a COVID-19 death, while the latter is willing to pay more than two thirds of
her (much higher) income to avoid a relatively lower risk of death. 18 Table A.1 in Appendix A
shows individuals' willingness to pay when the distribution of fatalities is independent of income.
The same pattern of income-related differences applies, although high-income (low-income)
individuals have higher (lower) willingness to pay than the values in Table 2 due to the higher
(lower) risk they face.



18
  In absolute terms, and assuming that the 1st quintile income is $16,250, while the 5th quintile income is $152,750,
the old individual in the 1st quintile is willing to pay $6,200 and the old individual in the 5th income quintile
$118,978.


                                                         24
Table 2. Individuals' willingness to pay as a percentage of own income for a policy that
eliminates the risk of death from COVID-19, by age and income quintile.

                    1st quintile        2nd quintile        3rd quintile       4th quintile        5th quintile

 Young              9.1%                17.7%               23%                28.6%               38.3%

 Old                38.2%               56.4%               63.7%              69.9%               77.9%

Assumptions: COVID-19 fatalities occur disproportionately in low-income groups (COVID-19 mortality rates by age
and income quintile are taken from Table 1); there is no income loss associated to an uncontrolled pandemic.



4.3. Comparison of BCA, utilitarianism, and prioritarianism: increasing sensitivity to the
distribution of the costs of control

BCA evaluates an intervention by summing the amounts individuals are willing to sacrifice to
implement the intervention. Using the values of Table 2 and the share of each age-income group
in the population, BCA implies that the maximum socially acceptable cost of an intervention that
avoids all COVID-19 deaths equals 36.8% of annual aggregate GDP. Therefore, the policy maker
adopting a BCA approach is ready to sacrifice up to 36.8% of GDP to eliminate the pandemic,
independently of who bears the brunt of those policy costs. In this case, if the policy costs are
proportional to income, all individuals pay 36.8% of their own income to finance the intervention.
But if the policy costs are regressive (i.e., the low-income quintiles pay a disproportionate amount
of them), the individuals in the lowest income quintile would end up sacrificing much more than
36.8% of their income, while the top-income quintile would sacrifice much less than that.19
However, BCA would find the two situations equally valuable, and would recommend any control
policy to eliminate the pandemic as long as, on average, it costs less than 36.8% of GDP. Such a
result occurs because BCA is insensitive to the distribution of costs, thereby overemphasizing the
interests of the wealthy individuals.



19
   For example, if the income elasticity of policy costs is equal to 0.5 (distribution of policy costs is mildly
regressive), the 1st income quintile pays 11% of the total costs, the 2nd 15%, the 3rd 19%, the 4th 23%, and the 5th
33% (see Appendix A). As a percentage of their own income, individuals in the 1st income group have to sacrifice
79% of their own income, while the other income groups scarifice, respectively, 56%, 45%, 37%, and 26% of their
own income.


                                                         25
Table 3 shows the maximum percentage reduction in aggregate GDP that utilitarian and
prioritarian policy makers find acceptable to finance an intervention that eliminates the COVID-
19 mortality risk. In other words, the maximum acceptable GDP loss is defined such that the policy
maker finds a situation where no COVID-19 deaths occur but individuals bear that GDP loss
socially equivalent to a situation where individuals die of COVID-19 but bear no policy-related
income loss (i.e., the two situations yield the same social welfare). Because the intervention under
consideration eliminates all COVID-19 deaths, the maximum acceptable GDP loss can be
interpreted as the societal burden of the pandemic, absent any intervention. We compute the
societal burden of the pandemic for the three SWFs discussed: utilitarianism, ex-ante
prioritarianism, and ex-post prioritarianism. We assume an Atkinson prioritarian SWF of the form
              1-
( ) =                , where the parameter  represents the degree of priority to the worse-off in (expected
             1-

or realized) lifetime well-being  . 20 We consider two different degrees of priority  = {1,2}. 21

To determine the sensitivity of the utilitarian and prioritarian societal burden of the pandemic to
the distribution of policy costs and COVID-19 fatalities, we consider five scenarios: (1) The
distribution of COVID-19 deaths is regressive (i.e., a disproportionate number of COVID-19
fatalities occur among low-income groups), the distribution of policy costs is also regressive (i.e.,
low-income groups bear the brunt of the policy costs), and only the young population suffers an
income loss due to the intervention. (2) The distribution of COVID-19 deaths is regressive, the
distribution of policy costs is proportional to income, and only the young population suffers an
income loss due to the intervention. (3) The distribution of COVID-19 deaths is regressive, the
distribution of policy costs is progressive (i.e., high-income groups bear the brunt of the policy


20
  See Adler (forthcoming) for a description of Atkinson SWFs. Note that if the priority parameter  = 1, then the
Atkinson SWF is of the form: ( ) = ln  .
                                                               1-
21
   Suppose that individual utility has the form ( ) =           - , with  = 2 the coefficient of relative risk aversion,
                                                            1-
and  = -0.000125288 the utility at subsistence consumption level (see Appendix A for the calibration details).
Take two individuals, one in the 1st income quintile (income=$16,250) and one in the 5th income quintile
(income=$152,750). The former has about 10% the income of the latter. Based on the example (in particular,
coefficient of relative risk aversion equal to 2), a utilitarian decision maker (for which the priority parameter  = 0)
would be indifferent between donating $100 to the low-income person and $1.13 to the high-income person, with
                       2
 (5 )       16,250
        =              = $1,13, and  ( ) =  -2 the marginal utility of consumption. A prioritarian decision maker
 (1   )     152,750
with priority parameter equal to 1 is indifferent between donating $100 to the low-income person and $0.6 to the
                                (5 )           16,250     2
high-income person, with               =  1               = $0.6. A prioritarian decision maker with priority parameter
                                (1 )    5      152,750
equal to 2 in indifferent between donating $100 to the low-income person and $0.3 to the high-income person.


                                                                 26
costs), and only the young population suffers an income loss due to the intervention. (4) The
distribution of COVID-19 deaths is regressive, the distribution of policy costs is also regressive,
and all age groups suffer an income loss due to the intervention. (5) The distribution of COVID-
19 deaths is independent of income (i.e., COVID-19 mortality risk depends only on age), the
distribution of policy costs is regressive, and only the young population suffers an income loss due
to the intervention.

We have already commented on the fact that the value determined through BCA is independent of
the distribution of policy costs, based on the principle that "a dollar is a dollar is a dollar." Note
that if the COVID-19 mortality risk is independent of income (Scenario 5), the maximum socially
acceptable cost is larger, at 44.7% of GDP, due to the relatively higher burden of deaths suffered
by high-income quintiles in this scenario (see Table A.1 in Appendix A). Because BCA values the
mortality risk reductions of wealthy individuals more than those of low-income ones, the value of
an intervention that saves wealthy lives is larger than the value of an intervention that saves the
same number of lives, but mainly poor lives. This is because willingness to pay depends on ability
to pay (thus wealthy people value a 1 percentage point reduction in mortality risk considerably
more than low-income ones), and BCA takes the unweighted sum of individuals' willingness to
pay, i.e., without adjusting for differences in abilities to pay.

A striking result from Table 3 is that, for most scenarios, BCA condones more expensive policies
to eliminate the risk of COVID-19 than does utilitarianism or prioritarianism. Only when the
distribution of policy costs is progressive (Scenario 3), i.e., when high-income groups pay
proportionately more of the policy costs than low-income groups, do both utilitarianism and
prioritarianism attach higher values to COVID-19 risk suppression policies than BCA. For
example, if the intervention to suppress COVID-19 triggers a 30% reduction in yearly GDP, BCA
would find such an intervention better than no intervention at all; utilitarianism and prioritarianism,
in contrast, would recommend against implementing such a control strategy, unless the distribution
of policy costs is highly progressive.




                                                   27
Table 3. Maximum percentage GDP loss that is considered socially acceptable to pay for an
intervention that eliminates the COVID-19 mortality risk.

               Scenario                 BCA       Utilitarianism          Ex-ante                Ex-post
                                                                      prioritarianism        prioritarianism
                                         (%)           (%)
                                                                            (%)                     (%)

                                                                      = 1          = 2       = 1           = 2

 Scenario 1:                            36.8           15.3          12.7         10.6       13.1         11.1
 Regressive distribution of deaths
 Regressive distribution of costs
 Only the young pay the costs

 Scenario 2:                            36.8           26.4          23.2         20.3        24          21.3
 Regressive distribution of deaths
 Distribution of costs proportional
 to income
 Only the young pay the costs

 Scenario 3:                            36.8           40.9          39.7         38.2        41           40
 Regressive distribution of deaths
 Progressive distribution of costs
 Only the young pay the costs

 Scenario 4:                            36.8           16.2          13.5         11.2        14          11.9
 Regressive distribution of deaths
 Regressive distribution of costs
 All age groups pay the costs

 Scenario 5:                            44.7           16.1          12.7         9.9        13.2         10.5
 Distribution of deaths
 independent of income
 Regressive distribution of costs
 Only the young pay the costs

Assumptions: there is no income loss associated with an uncontrolled pandemic; scenarios 1 through 4 adopt the age
and income specific mortality rates due to COVID-19 from Table 1, while scenario 5 adopts the mortality rates from
Table A.1.




                                                       28
Unlike BCA, utilitarianism and prioritarianism are sensitive to the distribution of policy costs.
Moving from Scenario 1 to Scenario 3, as the distribution of costs becomes more progressive (i.e.,
as the economic burden of the control policy shifts from low- to high-income groups), the
maximum socially acceptable GDP loss associated with the intervention increases. In other words,
the more likely the utilitarian or prioritarian policy maker will rank the control policy over no
intervention. Consequently, if income-support policies are in place (e.g., unemployment benefits)
to redistribute policy costs from low- to high-income quintiles, the societal value of eliminating
COVID-19 risk increases.

The sensitivity of utilitarianism and prioritarianism to the distribution of policy costs reflects a
shared assumption about the decreasing value of money, and in the prioritarian case an extra
concern for the worse off. The decreasing value of money assumption implies that dollars paid by
low-income quintiles decrease their well-being and total utilitarian welfare more than an equal
number of dollars paid mainly by high-income quintiles. Therefore, for a given total reduction in
COVID-19 deaths, progressive distributions of costs lead to a lower decrease in welfare. In the
prioritarian case, the sensitivity to policy costs reflects the additional prioritarian concern for
preserving the (expected or realized) well-being of the worse-off. Because low-income individuals
are among the worse-off, less regressive distributions of costs are even more valuable under
prioritarianism than under utilitarianism. For instance, the maximum utilitarian socially acceptable
GDP loss is 2.7 times larger with a progressive rather than regressive distribution of policy costs
(40.9% in Scenario 3 vs. 15.3% in Scenario 1). In the ex-ante and ex-post prioritarian cases the
ratio between the two scenarios is even higher: The maximum socially acceptable prioritarian GDP
loss is more than three times larger with a progressive rather than regressive loss, and the higher
the priority parameter, the larger the ratio.

As a consequence, the more regressive the costs of controlling COVID-19, the more the
distribution sensitivity of the value framework lowers the value attached to suppressing the
pandemic. Increasing the regressivity of the distribution of policy costs reduces the maximum
socially acceptable GDP loss, and such a reduction is larger under prioritarianism than under
utilitarianism, and is in turn larger under utilitarianism than under BCA (where there is effectively
no reduction at all). Analogous results would hold if the pandemic itself caused financial losses.
The more regressive the financial burdens of COVID-19, the larger is the increment in the socially
acceptable GDP loss from suppression for both utilitarianism and prioritarianism. And this


                                                 29
increment is larger under prioritarianism than it is under utilitarianism, which in turn is larger than
the increment under BCA, this latter equaling zero given BCA's distribution insensitivity. What
ultimately matters is the distribution of policy costs net of the COVID-19 costs: the more
regressive the net burden, the more the distribution sensitivity of the value framework lowers the
value attached to suppression.

Consider again Scenario 1, where the distribution of costs is regressive. Compared with
utilitarianism, ex-ante prioritarianism places a lower value on policies aimed at eliminating the
risk of COVID-19 (i.e., the ex-ante prioritarian maximum acceptable GDP loss is lower than the
utilitarian one). Additionally, the higher the priority conferred to the worse-off in expected well-
being (i.e., the higher the parameter ), the lower the maximum reduction in GDP that an ex-ante
prioritarian policy maker would find acceptable to fund an intervention that completely suppresses
the pandemic and its death toll. In Scenario 1, older individuals are most at risk of COVID-19
death, while only young and mainly less wealthy individuals bear the costs of the policy. From an
ex-ante point of view, the poor and the young are among the worse-off in the population: the poor
because they have less access to resources and opportunities and have lower living standards
overall, and the young because they have lived for fewer years and have not yet had a chance to
live a full life. Thus, ex-ante prioritarianism is less likely to support eliminating COVID-19 risk
because doing so hurts the prospects of those who will certainly pay the costs of the policy but
who are unlikely to die from COVID-19. Note that the difference between ex-ante prioritarianism
and utilitarianism declines once the distribution of costs becomes more progressive (moving from
Scenario 1 to Scenario 2 to Scenario 3) because of the reduced burden on low-income quintiles
and the associated reduced need to protect the worse-off.

The ex-post prioritarian maximum acceptable GDP loss for eliminating COVID-19 also tends to
be smaller than the utilitarian one, and decreases as the degree of priority to the worse-off
increases. Moreover, in the example the ex-post prioritarian acceptable loss is larger than the ex-
ante prioritarian one. Undoubtedly, from an ex-post point of view, those who die poor and
prematurely are the worst-off in the population, especially if they die young. Young, low-income
individuals are also the worst-off ex-ante because they face a larger lifetime mortality risk and
have lower expected well-being. But they are the worst-off only in expectation, i.e., the situation
might get rosier. That is likely one reason why ex-post prioritarianism values COVID-19
elimination more than ex-ante prioritiarianism does. Everyone bears the costs of the policy (both


                                                  30
those who survive and those who die), and many individuals face a risk of dying of COVID-19
ex-ante, but only a few will be dead because of COVID-19 ex-post. Protecting their interests is
thus a priority.

Note that as the degree of priority increases, the maximum acceptable GDP loss associated with
the policy reduces. The reason is that, from an ex-post point of view, the worse-off includes not
only those who die prematurely of COVID-19, but also those who die prematurely of other causes
(not necessarily related to COVID-19 or indirectly triggered by COVID-19). In other words, the
ex-post prioritarian policy maker must trade off the interests of those who die of COVID-19 (who
are better off with the policy), those who die prematurely from other causes but still bear the costs
of a COVID-19 policy (who are worse off with the policy), and those who do not die but pay the
costs (who are worse off with the policy). Because the second group represents the majority among
those who die prematurely (after all, they are more likely to die of other causes than of COVID-
19), protecting their interests means not investing in the control policy. The larger the priority
parameter, the larger the concern for protecting their livelihood, because preventing their death is
not possible. However, the ex-post prioritarian concern for protecting the interests of those who
die of COVID-19 is sufficient for accepting larger policy-induced income losses than utilitarianism
does.

BCA highly values policies that reduce the fatality risk of high-income groups, as shown by a
comparison of Scenario 5 with Scenario 1. In contrast, the distribution of fatalities by income
group has only a marginal effect on the evaluation under the utilitarian and prioritarian approaches.
Utilitarianism attaches a slightly higher value to preventing COVID-19 if fatalities were
independent of income rather than disproportionally falling on low-income quintiles. This is
because well-being increases with income in the model, that is, high-income groups have larger
expected well-being than low-income groups. Consequently, for a utilitarian policy maker saving
a wealthy life is more valuable than saving a less well-off life because differences in income are
associated with differences in quality of life.

Ex-ante prioritarianism finds COVID-19 more burdensome if fatalities disproportionately affect
low-income quintiles because that increases well-being inequality among individuals. 22


22
  With  = 1, the two values are pretty close: 12.697% when the distribution of deaths is regressive, 12.685% when
the distribution of deaths is independent of income.


                                                       31
Individuals in low-income quintiles are the worst-off in expectation because they have lower
income and lower life expectancy; the risk of COVID-19 further erodes their lifetime well-being,
particularly if they face a higher fatality rate than the top income quintiles. Ex-post prioritarianism
also values interventions against COVID-19 more if the fatalities occur disproportionately in the
low-income quintiles as long as the priority parameter is sufficiently high. 23 Dying young and poor
is the worst-off situation from an ex-post point of view, thereby increasing the value of policies
aimed at preventing that.

Note that distributing the policy costs among all age groups rather than only the young (Scenario
4) does not seem to have a sizable impact on the value of the control policy relative to Scenario 1.
If the costs are divided among all age groups, the societal burden of COVID-19 increases slightly
under both utilitarianism and prioritarianism as compared with Scenario 1. A more equal
distribution of costs across the age groups explains the increase in the maximum socially
acceptable GDP loss.

This example shows that: i) the more regressive are the burdens of COVID-19, the more the
distribution sensitivity of the value framework raises the value of control 24; ii) regardless of the
SWF approach, the value of controlling COVID-19 decreases if doing so hurts the poor;
prioritarianism reinforces this result with respect to utilitarianism; iii) the net impact of distribution
sensitivity on the value of control depends on the relative strength of the two patterns of
regressivity.

Note that, no matter the evaluation method, the simplified model analyzed here suggests that the
societal burden of uncontrolled COVID-19 is likely to be substantial; "do nothing" is unlikely to
be the best policy option compared with a control policy, i.e., the actual costs of the control policy
are likely to be lower than the maximum acceptable economic losses computed in Table 3.

The example also illustrated that ex-ante prioritarianism and ex-post prioritarianism evaluate
policies to eliminate the risk of COVID-19 quite differently, with the latter attaching more value


23
   When the priority parameter is close to zero, the ex-post prioritarian socially acceptable GDP loss is smaller with
a regressive distribution of deaths than with a distribution independent of income. This resembles the utilitarian
case.
24
   The more regressive are the health burdens of COVID-19, the more prioritarianism values control policies, while
that does not necessarily hold for utilitarianism and BCA. However, if we add also non-health burdens of COVID-
19, then, by parallel with the effects of regressive policy costs, we get that the more regressive are the total burdens
of COVID-19, the more the value of control increases going from BCA, to utilitarianism, to prioritarianism.


                                                           32
to such policies than the former. The difference in perspective explains the last result. Even if some
individuals face a substantial risk of infection and death from COVID-19, that is just one of many
possible outcomes--after all, they might survive COVID-19. Ex-post, some individuals have died
of COVID-19 and were definitely victims of the pandemic. Their fate is worse than the fate of
someone who might die because of the pandemic, but who has not yet died. Thus, the ex-post
prioritarianism societal burden of COVID-19 is higher than the ex-ante prioritarian one. Adler
(forthcoming) discusses the pros and cons of the two approaches. One reason why the ex-post
perspective may be more appropriate for evaluating COVID-19 policies is that, at the population
level, there is no risk. Some people will definitely die of COVID-19, we just do not know their
identity. In contrast, at the individual level death from COVID-19 occurs only with some (small)
probability. Focusing on the relatively small individual risk discounts the negative fate of those
who die due to COVID-19.

The model we have considered so far has several limitations. Addressing them changes the societal
burden of COVID-19 and possibly the comparison between BCA, utilitarianism and the various
forms of prioritarianism. For instance, we have neglected the morbidity effects of COVID-19, for
example, pain and suffering when ill, or the long-term health effects of the disease; adding them
would make COVID-19 even more costly. Even absent governmental interventions, people might
change their behavior for fear of infection, for example, deciding to work from home if possible
or avoiding crowded places like restaurants and bars. Accounting for this endogenous social
distancing reduces the value of policies to control the spread of COVID-19 (see, e.g., Farboodi et
al. 2020, Toxvaerd 2020).

Moreover, the example assumes that all financial impacts caused by the control policy are borne
in the current period (i.e., while the pandemic ravages and we wait for a vaccine or better
treatment). This is a strong assumption, because governments often increase their debt in the face
of a crisis, thereby shifting some of the burden to future periods or future generations. The impact
of such smoothing on the societal burden of COVID-19 and on the differences across evaluation
methods is likely to depend on the regressivity of the resulting distribution of costs across
individuals and across time.

Additionally, because we do not account for behavioral changes in the absence of intervention, we
underestimate the economic losses of the pandemic. But the "do nothing" strategy might end up



                                                 33
being far more costly than eliminating the COVID-19 risk, thereby leading to no effective trade-
off between saving the economy and saving lives. In other words, the actual costs of the control
policy may be lower than the economic loss triggered by the pandemic itself. If the pandemic
causes deaths and threatens individuals' livelihoods, the maximum reduction in pre-pandemic
GDP triggered by the control intervention that the policy maker would find socially acceptable
will be even larger than the values computed so far. This result holds independently of the
evaluation method and is because the pandemic is bad both for the economy and for population
health. Because the threshold for acceptability has increased, the control policy is more likely to
be the optimal strategy.

Policy evaluations based on BCA require a methodology to determine individuals' willingness to
pay. The standard methodology is to employ value-of-statistical-life (VSL) measures to monetize
the value of avoiding a death (Hammitt 2000; Kniesner and Viscusi 2019). VSL represents the
monetary equivalent of saving one (unidentified) life among a group of identical people and
derives from the rate at which individuals are willing to substitute a small change in their income
(or wealth) for a small change in their survival probability. This rate is estimated either through
revealed preference data from observing individuals' choices that affect both income and mortality
risk (e.g., purchases of protective equipment or decisions to select a safer job) or through stated
preference methods such as surveying people about their hypothetical choices regarding income
and mortality risk. For example, if individuals are willing to pay $10 to reduce their risk of
premature death by 1 in a million, then the monetary value of saving one statistical life is
$10,000,000. In a group of 10 million identical people, one death is avoided for sure, and if
everyone is willing to pay $10, the total value of saving one life is exactly $10 million.

There is an extensive literature providing VSL estimates for the population of interest (Viscusi
2018). In the example, we used those estimates to infer individuals' preferences between income
and longevity, and to calibrate the functional form of individual well-being. We then calculate
individuals' willingness to pay through a modeling exercise.

Although the calibration relies on VSL estimates from the literature, we did not directly adopt
those estimates to measure individuals' WTP for two reasons. First, although VSL is not constant
across the population, reflecting the preferences and circumstances of different individuals (e.g.,
their life expectancy or their wealth), in practice it is often assumed to be uniform across the



                                                 34
population. This avoids the ethically objectionable result that saving the life of a wealthy individual
is more valuable than saving the life of a less well-off individual because of differences in abilities
to pay. However, assuming a constant VSL also implies that life expectancy differences do not
matter, i.e., saving the life of a young or of an old person is equally valuable, even though the
young will live more years if saved. To account for differences in life expectancy, value of
statistical life years (VSLY) measures are often employed (Hammitt 2007). VSLY is computed by
dividing the constant VSL by the average life expectancy in the population. The value of extending
the life of an individual is then equal to the product of VSLY and the number of life years gained
if the person is saved, thereby accounting for age and life expectancy differences.

The second issue with VSL (and VSLY) is the marginality assumption. VSL is the marginal rate
of substitution between wealth and survival probability, but COVID-19 may represent a
nonmarginal risk of death. Standard theory implies that the individual's willingness to pay for a
nonmarginal increase in survival probability is an increasing, concave function of the change in
survival probability (Hammitt 2020). In other words, the higher the increment in survival
probability, the larger the individual's willingness to pay, but as the increment grows larger, the
rate at which the individual is willing to trade wealth for incremental increases in survival
probability decreases. 25 For example, Adler (2020) shows that, for fatality rates of 1% of the
population (a nonmarginal risk and close to the estimated mortality rate of COVID-19), the
individual's willingness to pay to eliminate such a risk is only half the amount associated with
VSL. 26 Therefore, for large probabilities of preventing death, the VSL is likely to overestimate the
value that individuals place on saving lives.




25
   For example, the individual might be willing to pay $1,000 for increasing her chances of survival by 0.1 percentage
points, but she might be ready to pay at most $1,800 for increasing her chances of survival by 0.2 percentage points.
The concavity of individual willingness to pay with respect to the size of the increment in survival probability is due
to the constraints on the individual's ability to spend and the fact that the opportunity cost of spending increases the
more the individual has already reduced her mortality risk.
26
   Adler (2020) assumes a VSL of more than $9 million, which, in a population of 100 people, corresponds to an
individual willingness to pay to marginally reduce the fatality risk of about $90,000. In contrast, the individual
willingness to pay to eliminate the 1% fatality risk (a nonmarginal reduction) is only $46,000, half the value implied
by VSL. Thus, VSL tend to overestimate the value individuals place on reducing the risk.
See also Cutler and Summers (2020), Greenstone and Nigam (2020), and Thunström et al. (2020) for analyses using
the VSL framework that suggest that policies to reduce fatalities from COVID-19 are worth trillions of dollars.


                                                          35
5. Example 2: Vaccine allocation

Manufacturing and delivery constraints make vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 a scarce and valuable
resource, at least initially. The questions in this initial phase include how to distribute the scarce
vaccine doses and who should get them first. Different approaches have been proposed to allocate
vaccines among the population. For instance, they could be allocated randomly through a lottery,
based on the principle that everyone should be treated equally--although not necessarily fairly,
because individuals may have different needs. Or a vaccine could be allocated based on a first-
come, first-served principle, thereby potentially favoring those with easier access to healthcare
resources or with better information. Or they could be allocated based on need by giving them first
to those who are at higher risk, e.g., the elderly in the case of COVID-19 or essential workers.
Alternatively, they could be allocated based on the size of expected health benefits, thereby
favoring not only high-risk individuals, but also those who will have a long and healthy life if
saved (thus, according to this view, a younger person may receive the vaccine before an older
person, even if the latter is at greater risk). 27 Or they could be allocated based on the size of both
health and non-health benefits, e.g., prioritizing those who cannot earn labor income unless they
prove they have been vaccinated. Or they could be allocated based on the instrumental value
created by the immunized, e.g., prioritizing essential workers within the healthcare sector and
service industries given that keeping them healthy is instrumental in saving other people's lives or
keeping essential services open. Another approach is to allocate resources based on ability to pay,
thus favoring the wealthy. Or, in contrast, priority could be given to the worse-off to compensate
for pre-existing injustices.

Adapting the example of section 4, we comment now on the best approach to allocate vaccines
through the lenses of utilitarian and prioritarian SWFs and BCA. Although the example is better
suited to illustrate vaccine allocation within a country, similar considerations can also guide
vaccine allocation among countries.

Individuals are divided into five income quintiles and two age groups, the "young" (<65) and the
"old" (65+). Individuals' well-being depends on income and longevity; the risk of COVID-19
threatens both. Suppose that a limited number of vaccine doses is administered. Who should

27
  We say "may" but not "will." If fatality risk is much higher for the older adults, and the vaccine is effective at
reducing their risk, expected health gains are maximized by prioritizing older adults even though they have lower
healthy life expectancy.


                                                          36
receive the first dose of vaccine? Should we allocate it to a young person or an old one, a person
in the bottom of the income distribution or someone in the high-income quintiles? Appendix B
presents the model more formally.

Vaccines can provide both direct protection to the vaccinated individual and indirect protection to
others who are at reduced risk of infection from the vaccinated individual. 28 The example focuses
on the direct social value of protecting the vaccinated person from COVID-19, leaving aside the
indirect social value created by reduced community transmission (e.g., reduced risk of death for
unvaccinated persons, increased social and economic activity by nonvaccinated members of
society, increased nonmarket productive activities such as childcare or volunteering). Our goal is
to determine who in the population has the largest direct social value of being vaccinated. This
individual will be the first to get the vaccine.

The general conclusions are that BCA allocates vaccines based on individuals' WTP for
vaccination, while the utilitarian and prioritarian allocations are based, respectively, on well-being
gains and priority-adjusted well-being gains. In our example, the groups that tend to have larger
WTP for vaccination are the old (because of higher fatality risk from COVID-19) and the wealthy
(because of higher ability to pay). Larger well-being gains from vaccination are, instead,
experienced by the old (because of higher fatality risk from COVID-19) and by the less wealthy
(because COVID-19 disproportionately affects low-income individuals), although not the poorest
(because in the model quality of life, and thus well-being, increases in income). Because the groups
that tend to be worse-off are the young and the poor, the prioritarian allocation will account for the
size of the well-being gains but skew the prioritization strategy toward the young and poor.
Depending on the relative strength of empirical facts and priority concerns, young poor
populations might be vaccinated before some of the older adults, especially older wealthy adults.

Interestingly, a prioritarian approach seems to substantiate the argument that essential workers
should be among the first to be vaccinated for social justice reasons. Many essential workers
belong to disadvantaged racial and ethnic minorities and socioeconomically vulnerable groups.
Therefore, a prioritarian approach to vaccine allocation suggests that essential workers should be


28
  Many vaccines block the symptoms of a disease, but do not prevent infection or onward transmission of the
pathogen (Warfel et al. 2014; Hodgson et al. 2020). As we write this chapter (December 2020), whether the
COVID-19 candidate vaccines will be effective at reducing the risk of transmission is unclear (Peiris and Leung
2020).


                                                        37
prioritized not only because they face a high risk of exposure to COVID-19 and of transmission
of the virus, but also because of their social and economic vulnerability.



5.1. Epidemiological considerations in vaccine allocation

Given our simplified model focused only on longevity and income impacts, the direct social value
of vaccinating an individual in a given group depends on (i) the clinical effectiveness and safety
of the vaccine for the individual; (ii) the individual's pre-vaccination probability of suffering from
COVID-19; (iii) the individual's infection fatality rate; (iv) the potential non-health benefits of
being vaccinated, e.g., the income gains if proof of vaccination is required to work; and (v) the
social value of a given reduction in mortality risk and a given increase in income for the individual.
This last value depends on the ethical framework adopted for the analysis, i.e., BCA, utilitarianism,
or prioritarianism (or any other approach not considered in this chapter). 29

Individuals' infection fatality rates (iii) for COVID-19 vary by age and socioeconomic status, with
older individuals and individuals in low socioeconomic groups more likely to suffer severe health
consequences, e.g., due to the higher incidence of comorbidities, more frequent use of public
transit, and reduced access to high-quality healthcare (O'Driscoll et al. 2021; McLaren 2020). This
heterogeneity in fatality risks may call for vaccinating older people first, especially older people
in low-SES groups. However, the safety and effectiveness of a vaccine (i) usually vary across
individuals. Vaccines (e.g., flu vaccines) are frequently less effective in older adults because the
immune system weakens with age (Bridle and Sharif 2020). 30 Additionally, early clinical trials
rarely include older populations to test the safety and efficacy of vaccines. Pressure to release a
vaccine as soon as possible implies that the first vaccines may not be proven effective and safe for
older people, thereby raising the question of how to balance effectiveness and mortality risk. If
effectiveness reduces with age, vaccinating the younger population first may be better, even if they
face lower risks of dying from COVID-19.



29
   An often debated issue is whether vaccine allocation strategies should depend only on number of deaths or also on
life years gained, and potentially on other metrics (Emanuel and Wertheimer 2006). These questions pertain to the
ethical framework that is adopted in the analysis, and the extent to which the ethical framework values those
outcomes.
30
   As of December 2020, there is some evidence suggesting that leading COVID-19 vaccines work well also among
the elderly (Mandavilli 2020).


                                                        38
Moreover, infection fatality rates may depend on the existence of an economically viable and
effective treatment and on the effectiveness of this treatment by age, comorbid status, etc.
Therefore, what matters for vaccine allocation is not just the individuals' infection fatality risk,
but rather the infection fatality risk net of the potential protection conferred by the treatment. For
example, if a treatment is forthcoming soon that is more effective for older people than the vaccine,
vaccinating the young generations and letting the older generation wait for the treatment may be
better (even if that wait will cause some deaths among the elderly).

The probability of being infected with COVID-19 (ii) depends on individuals' characteristics; for
example, older people may be more susceptible to infection (i.e., conditional on a contact with an
infected person, they are more likely to catch the virus), and individuals with many social contacts
are more likely to be infected (Ferguson et al. 2020; Viner et al. 2021). However, this probability
depends also on the social and economic context wherein the vaccine is introduced, e.g., the
number and characteristics of the people still susceptible (assuming that the once infected have
acquired permanent or temporary immunity), the presence of nonpharmaceutical interventions
(those interventions will likely remain in place in the initial phases if the number of vaccine doses
is limited), and individuals' behavior and compliance with social-distancing norms. For example,
if we are in a hypothetical society where populations at higher fatality risk can be safely and
perfectly isolated from the rest of the population, and where such an isolation is not burdensome
for them and their families, vaccinating first the individuals with high contacts, but low fatality
risk, rather the individuals with low contacts, but high fatality risk, may be better. Likewise, the
non-health benefits of being vaccinated (iv) depend on the economic burden of the counterfactual
scenario and how this burden is distributed across the population. For instance, if months of
economic lockdown have strained young generations economically and mentally, vaccinating
them first rather than the elderly may be more valuable if employability requires proof of
vaccination, even if the latter are more at risk.

Another factor to consider is the quantity of vaccine supplied and the timing of its availability. If
individuals are not vaccinated today, will they be vaccinated before a new surge of cases and
deaths? For example, if the next stock of vaccine doses will be distributed only in six months, the
argument for prioritizing the high-fatality-risk individuals gains strength, because those
individuals are likely to die while waiting for the next stock.



                                                    39
The discussion and the example focus on the direct value of vaccination. However, note that if the
vaccine could stop the transmission of the virus, vaccinating the super-spreaders first (i.e., those
individuals with many contacts), rather than the high-fatality-risk individuals, might be better
(Medlock and Galvani 2009).

To abstract from many of these considerations, while keeping the main trade-offs, we will make
the following assumptions. A limited stock of vaccine doses is distributed at the beginning of the
pandemic; no more doses will be distributed in the foreseeable future (or at least in the relevant
time horizon of the analysis). Vaccination reduces mortality risk, but has no impact on income;
except for the vaccine, no other intervention is implemented, in particular, there is no social or
physical distancing policy and no treatment is discovered. Vaccination reduces the mortality rate
of the vaccinated, but has no impact on the mortality rate of the unvaccinated (i.e., we neglect the
disease transmission channels). Therefore, we assume that the unvaccinated individuals face the
same mortality risk as in the benchmark uncontrolled outbreak scenario analyzed in Section 4.
Table 1 summarized the probability of dying from COVID-19 for each age and income group,
under the assumption that deaths over-proportionately occur in low-income groups.



5.2. Prioritization groups under BCA, utilitarianism and prioritarianism

Benefit-cost analysis. Consider first the allocation rule that a benefit-cost approach would support.
BCA evaluates policies (i.e., ways of allocating vaccine doses) by estimating individuals'
willingness to pay and summing up those monetary amounts. A safe and 100% effective vaccine
eliminates the risk of COVID-19-related death for the individual. Table 2, which measured
individuals' willingness to pay to eliminate the risk of COVID-19, is then informative of the
monetary value that individuals place on being vaccinated. The table shows that individuals'
willingness to pay is larger for the old than for the young because the former is expected to benefit
more from being vaccinated (as they face a much higher fatality risk). Additionally, the monetary
values are larger for top income quintiles than for bottom income quintiles because the former
have a greater ability to pay. Therefore, the allocation rule supported by a benefit-cost approach is
sensitive to the size of the expected benefits and to differences in abilities to pay, and thus, the
vaccine dose will be given to an old individual in the top income quintile. We have already




                                                 40
commented on the ethically objectionable discrimination of BCA toward the interests of the
wealthy.

Utilitarian SWF. Consider now the utilitarian framework. The utilitarian SWF evaluates policies
based on the change in the sum of individuals' expected well-being compared with the status quo.
The optimal allocation rule of vaccine doses is that which confers the greatest increase in the sum
of individuals' well-being. In other words, the first vaccine dose will be given to the individual
who is expected to gain most in terms of increase in well-being. The first consequence is that the
vaccine is likely to be given to individuals who will experience a larger reduction in their COVID-
19-related fatality risk thanks to vaccination, i.e., individuals with high baseline COVID-19 fatality
risk and/or individuals with high vaccine effectiveness. The second consequence is that the size of
the mortality risk reduction is insufficient to determine who gets the vaccine first, because changes
in well-being are more than just changes in health.

To determine which demographic group gains the most well-being from COVID-19 vaccination,
let us first introduce the concept of social value of mortality risk reduction (SVRR). 31 The 
is defined as the change in social welfare induced by a small reduction (e.g., a 1 in 100,000
probability reduction) in the mortality risk of an individual in age group  and income group  . If
   , then reducing the mortality risk of an individual in age group  and income
group  generates more social welfare than reducing the mortality risk of an individual in age group
 and income group  by the exact same amount. The SVRR is the moral weight associated with a
given reduction in fatality risk.

The utilitarian  is the change in utilitarian social welfare (i.e., the change in individual

lifetime expected well-being) induced by a small reduction in the mortality risk of an individual in
age group  and income group  . Suppose that vaccination reduces the COVID-19 fatality risk of
an individual in age group  and income group  by  , while reducing the fatality risk of an
individual in age group  and income group  by  . The utilitarian vaccine allocation rule
prioritizes the individual in age group  and income group  over the individual in age group  and
income group  if and only if    
                                  . Suppose that  >  , i.e., the fatality

risk reduction an individual in age group  and income group  experiences thanks to the COVID-

31
  See also Hammitt and Treich (forthcoming) and Adler et al. (2021) for a definition and some properties of social
value of mortality risk reduction.


                                                        41
19 vaccine is larger than the fatality risk reduction an individual in age group  and income group
 experiences. If reducing the fatality risk of the former is considered more valuable from a
utilitarian point of view than reducing the fatality risk of the latter (i.e.,   
                                                                                  ), the

individual experiencing the larger fatality risk reduction obtains the vaccine first. However, if
reducing the fatality risk of an individual in age group  and income group  is considered less
valuable from a utilitarian point of view than reducing the fatality risk of an individual in age group
                          
 and income group  (i.e.,  >  ), then the vaccine is allocated to the former first

                                                                                     
only if the associated COVID-19 fatality risk reduction is large enough,     .
                                                                                        


Table 1 indicates that older individuals in the lowest income quintile face the largest COVID-19
mortality risk. Additionally, for each income quintile, the COVID-19 mortality rate of the older
population is about 15 times larger than the corresponding mortality rate of the younger population.
Unless the age difference in vaccine effectiveness is very large (i.e., the vaccine is at least 15 times
more effective for the young than for the old), the older people in low-income groups are likely to
benefit the most from a vaccine with any average vaccine effectiveness in terms of mortality risk
reduction (i.e., they have the larger ). However, they will be allocated the vaccine first only if the
SVRR attached to a given reduction in their mortality risk is large enough.

Table 4 shows the ratio of the utilitarian SVRR for each age and income group to the corresponding
utilitarian SVRR of an old individual in the 1st income quintile. For each age group  and income
group  , we divided  by the corresponding SVRR attached to mortality risk reductions an
                                                  
old individual in the 1st income quintile enjoys (1 ). Values greater than 1 in age group 
and income group  mean that, from a utilitarian perspective, reducing the mortality risk of an
individual in age group  and income group  by a given amount is more valuable than reducing
the mortality risk of an old individual in the 1st income quintile by the same amount.




                                                  42
Table 4. Utilitarian SVRR compared with the corresponding utilitarian SVRR attached to
an older person in the 1st income quintile, by age and income group.

                   1st quintile     2nd quintile      3rd quintile      4th quintile      5th quintile

 Young             2.51             3.85              4.36              4.71              5.11

 Old               1                1.48              1.64              1.76              1.86



Although older people in the 1st income quintile are expected to experience the largest risk-
reduction benefit from the vaccine (Table 1), they have the lowest utilitarian SVRR, while young
wealthy individuals have the highest value. For example, a small reduction in mortality risk is
valued almost five times more for a young individual in the 4th income quintile than an old
individual in the 1st income quintile. More generally, the utilitarian SVRR decreases in age and
increases in income. This is because younger individuals have longer remaining life expectancies
if saved (i.e., a higher number of life years gained). Also, in the simplified model used in this
chapter, income buys happiness, i.e., utility increases in income. Thus, reducing the mortality risk
of an individual with better quality of life is more valuable from a utilitarian perspective.
      
Let             be the "utilitarian-adjusted" COVID-19 mortality risk reduction that an individual
      1 

in age group  and income group  experiences if vaccinated, and 1 the vaccine-induced COVID-
19 mortality risk reduction experienced by an older individual in the 1st income quintile. Even
though older individuals in the 1st income quintile have the lowest utilitarian SVRR, they should
still receive the vaccine first if their mortality risk reduction is larger than the "utilitarian-adjusted"
                                                                            
mortality risk reduction any other group would experience, i.e., 1 >    , for any   1.
                                                                                 1


For example, suppose the vaccine is 100% effective for all age groups. Then, Table 1 implies that
such a vaccine reduces the COVID-19 mortality risk of an old individual in the 1st income quintile
by 4.96 percentage points. The same vaccine reduces the mortality risk of a young individual in
the 4th income quintile by only 0.15 percentage points. However, any given reduction in mortality
risk is valued 4.71 times more if it occurs to a young individual in the 4th income quintile rather
than an old one in the 1st income quintile. Therefore, the 0.15 percentage point reduction accruing


                                                    43
to the young is as valuable as a 0.7 percentage point reduction (4.71×0.15) accruing to the old. In
other words, a vaccine that saves 0.15% of the young people in the 4th income quintile is as
valuable, from a utilitarian point of view, as a vaccine that saves 0.7% of the old people in the 1st
income quintile (if the two groups have the same number of members).

Table 5 shows the utilitarian-adjusted reductions in COVID-19 mortality risk induced by a vaccine
that is 100% effective for all age groups (where the numbers in Table 5 are derived by multiplying
the SVRRs in Table 4 by the COVID-19 mortality rates in Table 1). Elderly in the 2nd income
quintile have the largest utilitarian-adjusted mortality risk reduction if vaccinated, i.e., vaccinating
them creates the largest increase in utilitarian social welfare. Indeed, vaccinating an elderly
individual in the 2nd income quintile--which reduces their mortality risk by 3.51 percentage points-
-raises utilitarian social welfare as much as reducing the mortality risk of an older individual in the
1st income quintile by 5.2 percentage points. Vaccinating elderly in the 2nd income quintile
therefore yields more utilitarian welfare than vaccinating those in the 1st income quintile, which
would only reduce the latter's mortality risk by 4.96 percentage points.



Table 5. Utilitarian-adjusted reduction in COVID-19 mortality risk if the vaccine is 100%
effective for all age groups, by age and income group.

                     1st quintile         2nd quintile        3rd quintile        4th quintile         5th quintile

 Young               0.8%                 0.87 %              0.8%                0.7%                 0.53%

 Old                 4.96%                5.2%                4.71%               4.06%                3.01%

Assumption: COVID-19 deaths occur disproportionately in low income groups, with COVID-19 mortality rates
displayed in Table 1. If the vaccine is less than 100% effective, the values in the table should be multiplied by the
reduced effectiveness (e.g., if effectiveness is 60%, the utilitarian-adjusted reduction for a young individual in the 1st
income quintile is 0.6×0.8%).



Therefore, the utilitarian allocation rule will prioritize elderly in low-income quintiles, though not
necessarily the poorest ones. Differences in length and quality of life by income explain this result:
individuals in the 2nd quintile face a relatively high COVID-19 mortality rate and, if saved from
death can expect a longer life and higher income than those in the 1st quintile. More generally, our


                                                           44
assumptions imply that for any age-invariant vaccine effectiveness, the mortality risks faced by
poor elderly are large enough to ensure that the utilitarian allocation rule will prioritize them
(although not the poorest ones), despite the lower relative social value attached to extending their
life.

If vaccine effectiveness decreases with age, the likelihood of prioritizing the young individual
increases. Earlier, we pointed out that vaccinating the young in our example could produce larger
mortality risk reductions than vaccinating the elderly if vaccine effectiveness in the young were at
least 15 times that for the old. However, the lower utilitarian value of mortality risk reductions in
the elderly implies that smaller age differences in vaccine efficacy are required to prioritize the
young. Indeed, vaccine efficacy in the young that is six times higher than that in the old suffices
to prioritize the young (we divide the utilitarian-adjusted risk reduction of an old person in the 2nd
income quintile by the utilitarian-adjusted risk reduction of a young person in the 2nd income
quintile 32). For example, if the vaccine is 50% effective for the young and only 8% effective for
the old, the young get priority.

Ex-ante prioritarian SWF. Ex-ante prioritarianism evaluates policies based on changes in the sum
of strictly increasing and strictly concave transformations of individuals' expected lifetime well-
being compared with the status quo. The concave transformation guarantees that, for a given
increase in individuals' well-being, the worst-off in expected lifetime well-being are prioritized.
The ex-ante prioritarian allocation rule then depends on the change in an individual's expected
well-being if vaccinated (i.e., the rule should consider who gains more from the vaccine in terms
of well-being, as in the utilitarian rule) and on the identity of the vaccinated person, with a
preference for the most disadvantaged in expected well-being. Individuals with low expected well-
being are typically people in low socioeconomic groups, people with short life expectancies (i.e.,
the sick and disabled), and the young because they have lived for fewer years and face a higher
lifetime risk of dying prematurely than the individuals who have already reached an old age.

To determine the ex-ante prioritarian allocation strategy, define the ex-ante prioritarian social
value of mortality risk reduction  as the change in ex-ante prioritarian social welfare

induced by a small mortality risk reduction of an individual in age group  and income group  . If



32
     We chose the 2nd income quintile because it represents the largest value of vaccination, from Table 5.


                                                            45
  
   , then reducing the mortality risk of an individual in age group  and income

group  is more valuable from an ex-ante prioritarian point of view than reducing the mortality risk
of an individual in age group  and income group  by the same amount. Let  and  be the
COVID-19 mortality risk reductions induced by vaccination; individuals in age group  and
income group  get priority over individuals in age group  and income group  if and only if
                                                           
                                                           
                 
                   ,              or equivalently,     .
                                                               


Table 6 shows the ratio of the ex-ante prioritarian SVRR for each age and income group to the
corresponding ex-ante prioritarian SVRR of elderly in the 1st income quintile. It is the ex-ante
prioritarian counterpart of Table 4 for the utilitarian case. To compute the values in Table 6, we
                                                      1-
assume an Atkinson SWF of the form ( ) =              1-
                                                           , with priority parameter  equal to 2. Table 6

shows that given our assumptions, from an ex-ante prioritarian perspective, a 1 percentage point
reduction in the mortality risk of a young individual in the 1st income quintile is valued 2.87 times
more than a 1 percentage point reduction in the mortality risk of an old individual in the 1st income
quintile.



Table 6. Ex-ante prioritarian SVRR compared with the corresponding ex-ante prioritarian
SVRR attached to an older person belonging to the 1st income quintile, by age and income
group.

                   1st quintile       2nd quintile      3rd quintile     4th quintile    5th quintile

 Young             2.87               1.91              1.69             1.58            1.47

 Old               1                  0.66              0.58             0.54            0.5

Assumption: Atkinson SWF with priority parameter equal to 2.




As in the utilitarian case, reducing the mortality risk of young people is valued more than reducing
the mortality risk of older people by the same amount. This priority to the young is even stronger
than in the utilitarian case: the young are prioritized because they are expected to live longer if


                                                      46
saved (as in the utilitarian case) and because they are among the worse-off in lifetime terms (they
have not yet lived a full life). For instance, if we take the first income quintile, the ex-ante
prioritarian SVRR of a young individual is 2.87 times the value of an older one, while the utilitarian
value is 2.51 times the value of an older one: reducing the mortality risk of the young rather than
the old is more valuable under ex-ante prioritarianism than utilitarianism. A similar comparison
holds for the other income quintiles. 33

Unlike in the utilitarian case, our assumptions imply that the ex-ante prioritarian SVRR decreases
in income. For a given age, a 1 percentage point reduction in the mortality risk of a low-income
individual is more valuable than the equivalent reduction in that of a wealthier one. For example,
the ex-ante prioritarian SVRR of an old individual in the 5th quintile is only half that of an old
individual in the 1st quintile. This is because low-income individuals are among the worse-off,
both because of their poorer economic conditions and because of their shorter life expectancy due
to the income gradient in health and the larger COVID-19 mortality risk if not vaccinated. Note
that this result of SVRR declining in income is specific to our model assumptions and not
generalizable. Table B.1 in Appendix B reports the ex-ante prioritarian SVRR when the priority
parameter is equal to 1 (i.e., giving less priority to the worse-off than when the parameter equals
2). While reducing the mortality risk of the young remains more valuable than reducing that of the
old, reducing the risk of a rich young person is now more valuable than reducing that of a poor
one. Although low-income individuals are among the worse-off, they also expect to gain less from
having their life saved because of their shorter life expectancies and lower incomes.

Consider again Table 6. Poor young individuals have the largest ex-ante prioritarian social value
of mortality risk reduction. Will they receive the vaccine first? As before, we can compute the "ex-
ante-prioritarian-adjusted" mortality risk reductions to determine which age and income group has
the largest ex-ante prioritarian value of vaccination. The ex-ante prioritarian-adjusted mortality
                                                                                                         
risk reduction of an individual in age group  and income group  is defined as 
                                                                                . Table
                                                                                                              1

7 displays the results for a vaccine that is 100% effective for all age groups.



33
  For each income quintile, we can divide the value for the young by the value for the old to determine how much
more valuable it is to prioritize the young. In the utilitarian case, we find 2.51 (1st), 2.59 (2nd), 2.65 (3rd), 2.68 (4th),
and 2.74 (5th). In the ex-ante prioritarian case, we find 2.87 (1st), 2.91 (2nd), 2.92 (3rd), 2.93 (4th), and 2.96 (5th). For
each income quintile, the value is higher in the ex-ante prioritarian case than in the utilitarian one.


                                                              47
Table 7. Ex-ante-prioritarian-adjusted reduction in COVID-19 mortality risk if the vaccine
is 100% effective for all age groups, by age and income group.

                     1st quintile        2nd quintile        3rd quintile        4th quintile        5th quintile

 young               0.92%               0.43%               0.31%               0.23%               0.15%

 old                 4.96%               2.3%                1.66%               1.24%               0.8%

Assumption: Atkinson SWF with priority parameter equal to 2. If the vaccine is less than 100% effective, the values
in the table should be multiplied by the reduced effectiveness (e.g., if effectiveness is 60%, the ex-ante-prioritarian-
adjusted reduction for a young individual in the 1st income quintile is 0.6×0.92%).




Table 7 indicates that if the vaccine is 100% effective for everyone, it will be allocated first to
elderly in the 1st quintile because of the high expected reduction in mortality risk despite the low
ex-ante prioritarian SVRR of a given reduction in such risk (see Table 6). For example, the vaccine
reduces the mortality risk of the old in the 1st quintile by 4.96 percentage points, while the ex-ante-
prioritarian-adjusted reduction in the mortality risk of the young in the 1st quintile is only 0.92
percentage points. In other words, vaccinating a young individual in the 1st quintile is equivalent,
from an ex-ante prioritarian perspective, to reducing the mortality risk of an old individual in the
1st quintile by 0.92 percentage points, a lesser reduction than that from vaccinating an old person
in the 1st quintile (who would experience a 4.96 percentage point reduction in mortality risk). These
numbers account for the lower ex-ante prioritarian social value associated with reductions in
mortality risk experienced by the young compared with those experienced by old.

These results differ from those of the utilitarian case in two respects. First, the ex-ante prioritarian
rule prioritizes individuals in the 1st income quintile over people in higher income quintiles, which
was not always the case with a utilitarian SWF. Second, the rule prioritizes poor young individuals
over rich older ones. A strong priority for the worse-off implies that young low-income individuals
get priority over older wealthy people because of their young age and despite the lower expected
death rate from COVID-19. For example, vaccinating a young person in the 1st income quintile is
more valuable than vaccinating an old one in the 5th income quintile: vaccinating the former is
equivalent to achieving a 0.92 percentage point reduction in mortality risk of an old individual in



                                                          48
the 1st income quintile, while vaccinating the latter is equivalent to achieving only a 0.8 percentage
point reduction. Note that a policy maker with less concerns for the worse-off (priority parameter
equal to 1 instead of 2) will also prioritize the old poor individuals in allocating the vaccine, but
not the poor young over the wealthy old (Table B.2 in Appendix B).

If the vaccine effectiveness reduces with age, will a young low-income individual get the vaccine
before an old low-income one? The answer is positive if the effectiveness for the young is at least
5.4 times the effectiveness for the old (where the figure has been computed by dividing the ex-
ante-prioritarian-adjusted mortality risk reduction of the old in the 1st income quintile from Table
7 by the corresponding value of a young person). Therefore, young individuals get priority despite
the lower gain in mortality if the vaccine is sufficiently more effective for them than it is for old
people. Note that the "excess" effectiveness for prioritizing the young is lower than in the
utilitarian case. Once again, that is because, compared with utilitarianism, ex-ante prioritarianism
attaches higher moral importance to preserving the life of a young person than the life of an older
one.

Ex-post prioritarian SWF. Ex-post prioritarianism evaluates policies based on the expected sum
of concave transformations of individuals' realized well-being. The concave transformation
implies that, for a given increase in realized well-being, priority is given to those with lower
realized lifetime well-being. From an ex-post point of view, the worse-off are those who die
prematurely, the individuals in low-income groups, and the young (because dying prematurely
while young is considered worse than dying prematurely while old).

Let  represent the ex-post prioritarian social value of reducing the mortality risk of an

individual in age group  and income group  . Such a value is defined as the change in ex-post
prioritarian social welfare induced by a small mortality risk reduction of an individual in age group
 and income group  . If   
                           , then reducing the mortality risk of an individual in

age group  and income group  is considered more valuable from an ex-post prioritarian point of
view than reducing the mortality risk of an individual in age group  and income group  by the
exact same amount. Moreover, let  and  be the COVID-19 mortality risk reductions induced
by vaccination in these two individuals. The ex-post prioritarian policy maker allocates the vaccine




                                                 49
to the individual in age group  and income group  before the individual in age group  and
                                                                                       
income group  if and only if                           
                                  , or equivalently,      .
                                                                                        


Table 8 shows the ratio of the ex-post prioritarian SVRR for each age and income group to the
corresponding ex-post prioritarian SVRR for an old individual in the 1st quintile, assuming an
Atkinson SWF with priority parameter equal to 2. For example, from an ex-post prioritarian
perspective, a 1 percentage point reduction in the mortality risk of a young individual in the 1st
income quintile is valued 5.58 times more than a 1 percentage point reduction in the mortality risk
of an old individual in the 1st income quintile.



Table 8. Ex-post prioritarian SVRR compared with the corresponding ex-post prioritarian
SVRR attached to an older person belonging to the 1st income quintile, by age and income
group.

                    1st quintile      2nd quintile      3rd quintile   4th quintile   5th quintile

 young              5.58              3.89              3.59           3.39           3.27

 old                1                 0.67              0.61           0.57           0.54

Assumption: Atkinson SWF with priority parameter equal to 2.




As in the ex-ante prioritarian case, the value of reducing mortality risk by a fixed amount decreases
in income. Additionally, as in the utilitarian and ex-ante prioritarian cases, reducing the mortality
risk of a young individual is more valuable than reducing the mortality risk of an older individual
by the same amount. Note that the priority conferred to the young is considerably higher than in
both the utilitarian and ex-ante prioritarian cases. Consider, for example, the 1st income quintile.
The ex-post prioritarian SWF values risk reductions accruing to the young 5.58 times more than
comparable risk reductions accruing to the old; the corresponding values in the utilitarian and ex-
ante prioritarian cases are, respectively, 2.51 and 2.87. Comparable differences hold for the other
income quintiles.




                                                      50
All three SWFs prioritize the young because they are expected to experience a bigger gain in
lifetime well-being if saved from COVID-19 (i.e., a larger number of life years gained). On top of
that, ex-ante and ex-post prioritarianism prioritize the young because they rank among the worse-
off in well-being terms since they have lived for fewer years. However, this "fair innings"
argument 34 is stronger under ex-post prioritarianism than under ex-ante prioritarianism. This
difference depends on the fact that the ex-post prioritarian favors the young because they are
definitely the worst-off if they die prematurely; the ex-ante prioritarian favors them because they
face a higher risk, that is, they are the worst-off in expectation. Table 8 assumes a relatively high
degree of priority to the worse-off. Table B.3 in Appendix B shows that, with a lower degree of
priority, differences in income do not matter any longer, i.e., for a given age, a 1 percentage point
reduction in mortality risk has approximately a constant value independently of whether it occurs
to a poor or a rich individual. In contrast, differences in age still matter considerably, with higher
values attached to interventions that benefit primarily the young.

Multiplying the COVID-19 mortality risk each demographic group faces (Table 1) and the ex-post
prioritarian SVRRs of Table 8, we can determine to whom the ex-post prioritarian policy maker
will allocate a 100% uniformly effective vaccine first. Table 9 presents the "ex-post-prioritarian-
adjusted" mortality risk reductions achieved by such a vaccine, where the ex-post prioritarian-
adjusted mortality risk reduction of an individual in age group  and income group  is defined as



 
         . The age and income group with the largest ex-post-prioritarian-adjusted mortality risk
1

reduction receives the vaccine first.




34
  The "fair innings" argument refers to the idea that mortality risk reduction policies benefiting younger people
should be counted more because the young have not yet had a fair innings in their life, i.e., they have not had a
chance to live for a normal lifespan (Hammitt and Treich forthcoming; Adler et al. 2021).


                                                         51
Table 9. Ex-post-prioritarian-adjusted reduction in COVID-19 mortality risk if the vaccine
is 100% effective for all age groups, by age and income group.

                     1st quintile        2nd quintile        3rd quintile        4th quintile        5th quintile

 young               1.78%               0.88%               0.66%               0.5%                0.34%

 old                 4.96%               2.37%               1.74%               1.32%               0.87%

Assumption: Atkinson SWF with priority parameter equal to 2. If the vaccine is less than 100% effective, the values
in the table should be multiplied by the reduced effectiveness (e.g., if effectiveness is 60%, the ex-post-prioritarian-
adjusted reduction for a young individual in the 1st income quintile is 0.6×1.78%).



Once again, an old individual in the 1st income quintile will receive the vaccine first because the
achievable reduction in COVID-19 mortality risk outweighs the lower ex-post prioritarian value
attached to interventions that benefit the old. For example, vaccinating an old person in the 1st
income quintile reduces her probability of death by 4.96 percentage points. Vaccinating a young
person in the 1st income quintile is equivalent, from an ex-post prioritarian perspective, to reducing
the probability of death of an old person in the 1st income quintile by only 1.78 percentage points.
Clearly, vaccinating the old produces more value.

Additionally, as with the ex-ante prioritarian SWF, the priority conferred to the young is so high
that a young, low-income individual will get the vaccine before an old, high-income one.
Specifically, vaccinating a young individual in the 1st income quintile produces more value than
vaccinating an old individual is the 3rd (or higher) income quintile. This result hinges on the
relatively high priority parameter, and it disappears if the policy maker has a low concern for the
worse-off (Table B.4 in Appendix B).

If vaccine effectiveness decreases with age, under which conditions will it be given first to a young
individual? Fix, for instance, the 1st income quintile. If the vaccine is at least 2.8 times more
effective for a young than for an old person, the ex-post prioritarian rule will allocate it to a young
person first, regardless of the lower risk faced by the young (where the 2.8 figure has been
computed by dividing the ex-post-prioritarian-adjusted mortality risk reduction of the old in the 1st
income quintile from Table 9 by the corresponding value of a young person). For example, if the
vaccine is 50% effective for the young, and only 20% effective for the old, the higher ex-post


                                                          52
prioritarian value conferred to saving a young life implies that a young person in the 1st income
quintile will get the vaccine first.

One clear conclusion from this discussion is that age matters in allocating vaccine doses and that
both ex-ante and ex-post prioritarian SWFs are more likely than utilitarianism to allocate the
vaccine to young people first (or at least to some poor young people over wealthier older people),
despite their lower COVID-19 mortality risk. Note that this "ageist" feature of prioritarian SWFs
is likely to be softened if we recognize that current young generations have higher standards of
living than previous young generations (i.e., those who are currently old). Even if the young have
not yet had a chance to live a full life, the quality of their life (both the one already lived and the
expected one) might be, all things considered, higher than that of the current older generations.
Accounting for that is likely to reduce the higher priority attached to interventions that benefit
primarily the young.

The discussion so far has completely neglected the costs of different allocation rules. Logistical
and political constraints may make it infeasible or expensive to distribute the vaccine in some
areas, even if the populations in those areas would benefit most from it. Feasibility constraints are
also linked to the properties of the vaccine. For example, widely distributing vaccines that need to
be stored at very cold temperatures is more difficult. Vaccine hesitancy also interferes with the
optimal vaccine allocation mechanism. If complementary interventions are required to persuade
people to get the vaccine, the optimal vaccine allocation may be tilted toward nonhesitant
individuals independent of the expected benefits. Additionally, we have so far assumed that only
one vaccine will be allocated. Competition among multiple vaccines with different properties may
result in a vaccine being allocated first to individuals who will benefit less from it.



6. Discussion and Conclusions

This chapter discusses the use of utilitarian and prioritarian SWFs in assessing COVID-19 control
and prevention policies, as compared with more standard BCA. We show that SWF analysis is a
rich and flexible evaluation framework; unlike BCA, it is sensitive to the distribution of policy
costs and benefits among the population, and it does not have the ethically objectionable result that
the interests of the rich count more than the interests of the poor in the evaluation process. One
key implication is that all else equal, if the net costs of control are regressively distributed,


                                                  53
aggressive control may be more optimal under BCA than under utilitarianism or prioritarianism.
(Though if the burdens of COVID-19 are regressive, then all else equal, both utilitarianism and
prioritarianism will recommend more stringent control policies than BCA). BCA prioritizes
vaccinating the wealthy based on their higher ability to pay. In contrast, SWF analysis (whether
prioritarian or utilitarian), value policies not in terms of people's willingness to pay for their effects
but rather in terms of those policies' effects on well-being, thus doing away with any priority the
rich may get from their greater ability to pay.

The main difference between utilitarianism and prioritarianism is that the former is only concerned
with maximizing the aggregate well-being gains from policy while the latter will accept lower
aggregate gains for a better distribution of such gains toward the worse off. One example where
such a difference plays out is in the allocation of vaccine doses. Young individuals are among the
worse-off in the population because they have not yet had the opportunity to live a full life. So
both forms of prioritarianism prioritize vaccinating low-income young individuals before wealthy
older adults, even though the latter face a higher COVID-19 mortality risk and could enjoy larger
utility benefits from being saved. In the utilitarian case, all older adults should receive priority over
younger populations independently of their relative income. However, note that all three SWFs
agree in ranking low-income older individuals at the top of the vaccine prioritization strategy.

Both BCA and SWF analysis are likely to support policies that control the pandemic over an
uncontrolled spread, although the optimal degree of stringency may vary. Both context and policy
horizon matter. In a country where the trade-off between saving lives and saving livelihoods is
stark (e.g., if the control policy causes widespread unemployment, depletion of savings, fall into
poverty, and associated increase in mortality) and the distribution of policy costs is regressive,
BCA might support more aggressive control policies than utilitarianism or prioritarianism if the
burdens of COVID-19 are not too regressive. If instead there is no trade-off between health and
the economy (e.g., if the economic losses from an uncontrolled pandemic are staggering) and the
only way to save the economy is through suppression, then all three methods will support
suppression and mainly differ on the magnitude of the income support to the worse-off. The policy
horizon plays a role as well. Excessive attention to short-run economic costs of suppression leads
to less aggressive policies, independently of the chosen method.




                                                   54
One important topic concerning COVID-19 that we have not discussed is the role of uncertainty.
Great uncertainty surrounds the transmission mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2, the severity of its
effects, and the timing and effectiveness of treatments and vaccines. Countries must make
decisions about the best control strategy based on uncertain and evolving scientific evidence.
Prudential considerations suggest employing aggressive control strategies to avoid worst-case
scenarios with unknown probability and/or magnitude, regardless of the high policy costs. 35

Another issue the COVID-19 pandemic raises is that of aversion to catastrophic outcomes. From
a population-level perspective, a catastrophic outcome refers to a situation in which many people
die or face a loss together. Thus, not only the eventual magnitude, but also the coincidence or
bunching together of deaths and losses might affect policy evaluation. Many COVID-19 deaths
occur among old people who would likely have died from other causes soon. Yet, instead of having
those deaths spread over a few months or years, they occurred all at the same time. Images of
rooms and trucks filled with coffins have been frequently broadcasted during the pandemic.
Aversion to such a dreadful situation calls for stringent control policies even if they impose high
costs on the economy. 36

The chapter focuses on COVID-19 policies. However, the evaluation tools described can be
applied to other epidemics, and more generally, to the evaluation of health technologies and health
interventions. One area in which SWF analysis can be useful is in determining the value of
vaccines. Traditional economic evaluations of vaccines adopt a narrowly defined health-centric
perspective, focusing on two types of benefits: (i) the direct health benefits for the immunized
(e.g., the reduction in the number of fatalities or the number of quality-adjusted life years gained)
and (ii) the savings in the healthcare system due to a reduced need for alternative treatments. This
perspective implies that developing, manufacturing, and distributing a new vaccine is valuable




35
   However, an argument may exist that learning about the virus occurs only as the pandemic unfolds. The effects of
the virus have been found more severe among the elderly because we have observed more deaths in this age group.
The presence of endogenous learning implies that, from a purely informational perspective, it is better not to
completely suppress the virus. This suggests a trade-off between the value of information and the value of being
precautious, although, in practice, the former is likely to be small in the face of an unfolding pandemic.
36
  See Rheinberger and Treich (2017) for an exact definition of catastrophe aversion and whether catastrophe
aversion is a common sentiment. Hammitt and Treich (forthcoming) also discusses the notion of catastrophe
aversion.



                                                        55
only insofar as it avoids deaths and disabilities and saves health sector costs. 37 A rapidly growing
body of evidence suggests that vaccination yields sizable health, economic, and social benefits far
beyond the narrow health-centric benefits traditionally captured in economic evaluations (see, e.g.,
Bloom et al. 2018; Jit et al. 2015; Nandi et al. 2019). These benefits include, e.g., protection against
nosocomial infections (i.e., infections acquired in hospitals or in healthcare-associated locales),
and herd protection; increasing labor force participation and labor productivity among the
working-age population; protection against catastrophic health spending and the risk of falling into
poverty traps; better cognitive functioning, higher school attendance, and higher educational
attainment among vaccinated children; increases in tax revenues; and promotion of social equity
insofar as the vaccine-preventable disease disproportionately affects low-income groups,
minorities, and disadvantaged populations in general.

SWF analysis, with its focus on the overall well-being impact of health technologies and its
concern for distributions, can easily accommodate all the relevant dimensions of vaccine
evaluation. 38 Drawing from the analysis in the chapter, when assessing the value of vaccines
through a SWF approach, what counts are not just the distributional aspects of the disease burden
and the distributional aspects of disease-control interventions, but also the distributional aspects
of financing vaccines. A vaccine paid for by rich countries and distributed free of charge
throughout the world contributes more to social welfare than an equally effective vaccine whose
costs are shared by all countries, also developing ones.




37
   Note, in particular, that traditional economic evaluation of vaccines often does not incorporate the vaccine-
induced decrease in transmission of the pathogen and the resulting herd protection.
38
   Note that the framework can also encompass the potential adverse effects of vaccination.


                                                          56
References

Acemoglu, D., Chernozhukov, V., Werning, I., Whinston, M.D. (2020). "Optimal Targeted
Lockdowns in a Multi-Group SIR Model." NBER Working Paper n. 27102. Available at
https://www.nber.org/papers/w27102.pdf

Adam, D. (2020). "The Limits of R." Nature, 583: 346­348.
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-02009-w

Adler, M.D. (2019). Measuring Social Welfare. An Introduction. Oxford University Press.

Adler, M.D. (forthcoming). "Chapter 2: Theory of Prioritarianism." In M.D. Adler and O.F.
Norheim, eds., Prioritarianism in Practice. Cambridge University Press.

Adler, M.D. (2020). "What Should We Spend to Save Lives in a Pandemic? A Critique of the
Value of Statistical Life." Duke Law School Public Law and Legal Theory Series No. 2020-40.
Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3636550

Adler, M.D., Bradley, R., Ferranna, M., Fleurbaey, M., Hammitt, J.K., Voorhoeve, A. (2020).
Assessing the Well-Being Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic and Three Policy Types:
Suppression, Control, and Uncontrolled Spread." T20 Policy Brief. Available at https://www.g20-
insights.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/assessing-the-wellbeing-impacts-of-the-covid-19-
pandemic-and-three-policy-types-suppression-control-and-uncontrolled-spread-1606214930.pdf

Adler, M.D., Decancq K. (forthcoming). "Chapter 3: Measuring Well-Being and Respect for
Preferences." In M.D. Adler and O.F. Norheim, eds., Prioritarianism in Practice. Cambridge
University Press.

Adler, M.D., Ferranna, M., Hammitt, J.K., Treich, N. (2021). "Fair Innings? The Utilitarian and
Prioritarian Value of Risk Reduction Over a Whole Lifetime." Journal of Health Economics, 75,
102412. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2020.102412.

Alvarez, F., Argente, D., Lippi, F. (2020). "A Simple Planning Problem for COVID-19
Lockdown."          NBER      Working        Paper        n.     26981.       Available       at
https://www.nber.org/papers/w26981.pdf

Andrew, A., Cattan, A., Costa Dias, M., Farquharson, C., Kraftman, L., Krutikova, S., Phimister,
A., Sevilla, A. (2020). "Inequalities in Children's Experiences of Home Learning during the



                                              57
COVID-19 Lockdown in England." Fiscal Studies, 41(3): 653-683. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-
5890.12240

Armitage, R., Nellums, L.B. (2020). "COVID-19 and the Consequences of Isolating the Elderly."
The Lancet, Public Health, 5(5): E256. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-2667(20)30061-X

Avent, R. (2020). "COVID-19 Leaves a Legacy of Increased Inequality." The Economist, Nov 17,
2020.

Bloom, D.E., Cadarette, D., Ferranna, M. (forthcoming). "The Value of Vaccination in the Age of
COVID-19." American Journal of Public Health

Bloom, D.E., Cadarette, D., Ferranna, M., Hyer, R.N., Tortorice, D.L. (2021). "How New
Models of Vaccine Development for COVID-19 Have Helped Address an Epic Public Health
Crisis." Health Affairs, 40(3): 1­8. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.02012

Bloom, D.E., Cadarette, D., Ferranna, M., Seligman, B. (2020). "A Matter of Life and Death."
Finance and Development. Available at
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2020/04/allocating-scarce-medical-resources-during-
the-COVID19-pandemic-bloom.htm

Bloom, D.E., Fan, V.Y., Sevilla, JP. (2018). "The Broad Socioeconomic Benefits of Vaccination."
Science Translational Medicine, 10(441): eaaj2345. https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aaj2345

Bloom, D.E., Kuhn, M., Prettner, K. (forthcoming). "Modern Infectious Diseases: Macroeconomic
Impacts and Policy Responses." Journal of Economic Literature.

Blundell, R., Costa Dias, M., Joyce, R., Xu, X. (2020). "COVID-19 and Inequalities." Fiscal
Studies, 41: 291­319. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-5890/12232.

Bridle, B.W., Sharif, S. (2020). "Why Vaccines Are Less Effective in the Elderly, and What It
Means for COVID-19." The Conversation. Available at https://theconversation.com/why-
vaccines-are-less-effective-in-the-elderly-and-what-it-means-for-covid-19-141971

Brown, C.S., Ravallion, M. (2020). "Inequality and the Coronavirus: Socioeconomic Covariates
of Behavioral Responses and Viral Outcomes Across US Counties." NBER Working Paper n.
27549. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27549




                                                58
Brown, C.S., Ravallion, M., van de Walle, D. (2020). "Can the World's Poor Protect Themselves
from   the    New    Coronavirus?"      NBER    Working    Paper      n.    27200.    Available   at
https://www.nber.org/papers/w27200.pdf

Bubar, K.M., Kissler, S.M., Lipsitch, M., Cobey, S., Grad, Y.H., Larremore, D.B. (2021). "Model-
Informed COVID-19 Vaccine Prioritization Strategies by Age and Serostatus." Science, eabe6959.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abe6959

Buckner, J.H., Chowell, G., Springborn, M.R. (2020). "Dynamic Prioritization of COVID-19
Vaccines     When   Social    Distancing   Is   Limited   for   Essential    Workers."    medRxiv.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.22.20199174

Cash, R., Patel, V. (2020). "Has COVID-19 Subverted Global Health?" The Lancet, 395(10238):
1687­1688. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31089-8

Chetty, R., Stepner, M., Abraham, S., et al. (2016). "The Association between Income and Life
Expectancy in the United States, 2001­2014." Journal of the American Medical Association,
315(16): 1750­1766. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.4226

Chow, N., Fleming-Dutra, K., Gierke, R., Hall, A., Hughes, M., Pilishvili, T., et al. (2020).
"Preliminary Estimates of the Prevalence of Selected Underlying Health Conditions among
Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019--United States, February 12­March 28, 2020." Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 69(13): 382­386.
https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6913e2

Cookson, R., Norheim, O.F., Skarda, I. (forthcoming). "Chapter 6: Health Care." In M.D. Adler
and O.F. Norheim, eds., Prioritarianism in Practice. Cambridge University Press.

Cutler, D.M., Summers, L.H. (2020). "The COVID-19 Pandemic and the $16 Trillion Virus."
Journal      of     the      American      Medical     Association,        324(15):      1495-1496.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.19759

Dingel, J.I., Neiman, B. (2020). "How Many Jobs Can Be Done at Home?" NBER Working Paper
n. 26948. Available at https://www.nber.org/papers/w26948.pdf

Eichenbaum, M.S., Rebelo, S., Trabandt, M. (2020). "The Macroeconomics of Epidemics." NBER
Working Paper n. 26882. Available at https://www.nber.org/papers/w26882.pdf



                                                59
Emanuel, E.J., Persad, G., Kern, A., Buchanan, A., Fabre, C., Halliday, D., Heath, J., Herzog, L.,
Leland, R.J., Lemango, E.T., Luna, F., McCoy, M.S., Norheim, O.F., Ottersen, T., Schaefer, G.O.,
Tan, K.-C., Wellman, C.H., Wolff, J., Richardson, H.S. (2020a). "An Ethical Framework for
Global        Vaccine         Allocation."          Science,          369(6509):        1309­1312.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abe2803

Emanuel, E.J., Persad, G., Upshur, R., Thome, B., Parker, M., Glickman, A., Zhang, C., Boyle,
C., Smith, M., Phillips, J.P. (2020b). "Fair Allocation of Scarce Medical Resources in the Time of
COVID-19."        New      England        Journal      of      Medicine,      382:      2049­2055.
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsb2005114

Emanuel, E.J., Wertheimer, A. (2006). "Who Should Get Influenza Vaccine When Not All Can?"
Science, 312(5775): 854-855. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1125347

Farboodi, M., Jarosch, G., Shimer, R. (2020). "Internal and External Effects of Social Distancing
in    a     Pandemic."      NBER       Working       Paper       n.     27059.       Available   at
https://www.nber.org/papers/w27059.pdf

Favero, C.A., Ichino, A., Rustichini, A. (2020). "Restarting the Economy while Saving Lives under
COVID-19." Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3580626

Ferguson, N.M., Laydon, D., Nedjati-Gilani, G., et al. (2020). "Impact of Non-Pharmaceutical
Interventions (NPIs) to Reduce COVID-19 Mortality and Healthcare Demand." Imperial College,
London, Working Paper. https://doi.org/10.25561/77482

Ferranna, M., Cadarette, D., Bloom, D.E. (2021). "COVID-19 Vaccine Allocation: Modeling
Health Outcomes and Equity Implications of Alternative Strategies." Unpublished manuscript.

Fontanet, A., Cauchemez, S. (2020). "COVID-19 Herd Immunity: Where Are We?" Nature
Reviews Immunology, 20: 583­584. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41577-020-00451-5

Giordano, G., Blanchini, F., Bruno, R., et al. (2020). "Modelling the COVID-19 Epidemic and
Implementation of Population-Wide Interventions in Italy." Nature Medicine, 26: 855­860.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0883-7

Glover, A., Heathcote, J., Krueger, D., Ríos-Rull, J.-V. (2020). "Health versus Wealth: On the
Distributional Effects of Controlling a Pandemic." NBER Working Paper n. 27046. Available at
https://www.nber.org/papers/w27046.pdf


                                               60
Gollier, C. (2020). "Cost-Benefit Analysis of Age-Specific Deconfinement Strategies." COVID
Economics, 24: 1­31.

Goodnough, A., Hoffman, J. (2020). "The Elderly vs. Essential Workers: Who Should Get the
Coronavirus Vaccine First?" The New York Times, Dec. 05, 2020. Available at
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/05/health/covid-vaccine-first.html

Gopinath, G. (2020). "The Great Lockdown: Worst Economic Downturn Since the Great
Depression." Available at https://blogs.imf.org/2020/04/14/the-great-lockdown-worst-economic-
downturn-since-the-great-depression/

Greenstone, M., Nigam, V. (2020). "Does Social Distancing Matter?" COVID Economics, 7: 1­
23. Available at https://bfi.uchicago.edu/wp-content/uploads/BFI_WP_202026.pdf

Guan, W., Liang, W., Zhao, Y., Liang, H., Chen, Z., Li, Y., et al. (2020). "Comorbidity and Its
Impact on 1590 Patients with COVID-19 in China: A Nationwide Analysis." European
Respiratory Journal, 55(5): 20000547. https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00547-2020

Hafner, M., Yerushalmi, E., Fays, C., Dufresne, E., Van Stolk, C. (2020). "COVID-19 and the
Cost of Vaccine Nationalism." RAND Europe Report. https://doi.org/10.7249/RRA769-1

Hammitt, J.K. (2000). "Valuing Mortality Risk: Theory and Practice." Environmental Science
and Technology, 34(8): 1396-1400. https://doi.org/10.1021/es990733n

Hammitt, J.K. (2007). "Valuing Changes in Mortality Risk: Lives Saved versus Life Years
Saved." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 1(2): 228-240.
https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/rem015

Hammitt, J.K. (2020). "Valuing Mortality Risk in the Time of COVID-19." Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty, 11:1-26. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11166-020-09338-1

Hammitt, J.K., Treich, N. (forthcoming). "Chapter 7: Environmental, Health and Safety Policy."
In M.D. Adler and O.F. Norheim, eds., Prioritarianism in Practice. Cambridge University Press.

Hodgson, S.H., Mansatta, K., Mallett, G., Harris, V., Emary, K.R.W., Pollard, A.J. (2020).
"What Defines an Efficacious COVID-19 Vaccine? A Review of the Challenges Assessing the
Clinical Efficacy of Vaccines against SARS-CoV-2". The Lancet, Infectious Diseases. Published
online. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30773-8



                                               61
IMF (International Monetary Fund). (2020). World Economic Outlook, October 2020: A Long
and Difficult Ascent. Available at
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2020/09/30/world-economic-outlook-october-
2020

Ioannidis, J. (2020). "The Infection Fatality Rate of COVID-19 Inferred from Seroprevalence
Data." Bulletin of the World Health Organization (published online October 14, 2020). Available
at https://www.who.int/bulletin/online_first/BLT.20.265892.pdf

Jit, M., Hutubessy, R., Png, M.E., et al. (2015). "The Broader Economic Impact of Vaccination:
Reviewing and Appraising the Strength of Evidence." BMC Medicine, 13: 209.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-015-0446-9

JCVI (Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation). (2020). "Priority Groups for
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Vaccination: Advice from the JCVI. 2 December 2020." Available at
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/priority-groups-for-coronavirus-covid-19-
vaccination-advice-from-the-jcvi-2-december-2020/priority-groups-for-coronavirus-covid-19-
vaccination-advice-from-the-jcvi-2-december-2020

Jones, C.J., Philippon, T., Venkateswaran, V. (2020). "Optimal Mitigation Policies in a
Pandemic: Social Distancing and Working from Home." NBER Working Paper n. 26984.
Available at https://www.nber.org/papers/w26984.pdf

Kissler, S.M., Tedijanto, C., Goldstein, E., Grad, Y.H., Lipsitch, M. (2020). "Projecting the
Transmission Dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 through the Postpandemic Period." Science, 368(6493):
860­868. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb5793

Kniesner, T.J., Viscusi, W.K. (2019). "The Value of a Statistical Life." Oxford Research
Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance.
https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780190625979.013.138

Levin, A.T., Hanage, W.P., Owusu-Boaitey, N., Cochran, K.B., Walsh, A.P., Meyerowitz-Katz,
G. (2020). "Assessing the Age Specificity of Infection Fatality Rates for COVID-19: Systematic
Review, Meta-Analysis, and Public Policy Implications." European Journal of Epidemiology
(published online December 8, 2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10654-020-00698-1




                                               62
Mahoney, N. (2020). "Don't Fall for the False Trade-offs of COVID-19 Policy." Chicago Booth
Review,           (published       online       March         26,          2020).       Available         at
https://review.chicagobooth.edu/economics/2020/article/don-t-fall-false-trade-offs-covid-19-
policy

Mandavilli, A. (2020). "The Next Vaccine Challenge: Reassuring Older Americans." The New
York              Times,          December           14,            2020.             Available           at
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/14/health/coronavirus-vaccine-elderly.html

McLaren, J. (2020). "Racial Disparity in COVID-19 Deaths: Seeking Economic Roots with
Census data." NBER Working Paper n. 27407. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27407

Medlock, J., Galvani, A.P. (2009). "Optimizing Influenza Vaccine Distribution." Science,
325(5948): 1705-1708. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1175570

Nandi, A., Shet, A., Behrman, J.R., Black, M.M., Bloom, D.E., Laxminarayan, R. (2019).
"Anthropometric, Cognitive, and Schooling Benefits of Measles Vaccination: Longitudinal Cohort
Analysis      in     Ethiopia,     India,    and   Vietnam."        Vaccine,        37(31):     4336­4343.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.06.025

NASEM (National Academy of Sciences Engineering and Medicine) (2020). Framework for
Equitable Allocation of COVID-19 Vaccine. Washington, DC: The National Academy Press.

NCHS (National Center for Health Statistics) (2019). National Vital Statistics Reports. Volume
68, No.7. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr68/nvsr68_07-508.pdf

O'Driscoll, M., Ribeiro Dos Santos, G., Wang, L., et al. (2021). "Age-Specific Mortality and
Immunity Patterns of SARS-CoV-2." Nature, 590: 140-145. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-
2918-0

Peiris, M., Leung, G.M. (2020). "What Can We Expect from First-Generation COVID-19
Vaccines?" The Lancet, 396(10261): 1467­1469. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31976-
0

Perez-Saez, J., Lauer, S.A., Kaiser, L., Regard, S., Delaporte, E., Guessous, I. et al. (2020).
"Serology-Informed Estimates of SARS-CoV-2 Infection Fatality Risk in Geneva, Switzerland."
The      Lancet    Infectious    Diseases   (published     online   July    14,     2020).    Available   at
https://doi/org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30584-3


                                                   63
Quaas, M.F., Meya, J.N., Schenk, H., Bos, B., Drupp, M.A., Requate, T. (2020). "The Social Cost
of Contacts: Theory and Evidence for the COVID-19 Pandemic in Germany." CESifo Working
Paper n. 8347. Available at https://www.cesifo.org/DocDL/cesifo1_wp8347.pdf

Rheinberger, C.M., Treich, N. (2017). "Attitudes Toward Catastrophe." Environmental and
Resource Economics, 67: 609­636. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10640-016-0033-3

Roberts, S. (2020). "Flattening the Coronavirus Curve." The New York Times, March 27, 2020.
Available at https://www.nytimes.com/article/flatten-curve-coronavirus.html

Robinson, L. (2007). "How U.S. Government Agencies Value Mortality Risk Reductions." Review
of Environmental Economics and Policy, 1(2): 283-299. https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/rem018

Rodríguez, J., Patón, M., Acuña, J.M. (2020). "Prioritisation of Population Groups with the Most
Interactions for COVID-19 Vaccination Can Substantially Reduce Total Fatalities." medRxiv.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094

Schmidt, H., Gostin, L.O., Williams, M.A. (2020). "Is It Lawful and Ethical to Prioritize Racial
Minorities for COVID-19 Vaccines?" Journal of American Medical Association, 324(20): 2023-
2024. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.20571

Seligman, B., Ferranna, M., Bloom, D.E. (2021). "Social Determinants of Mortality from COVID-
19:       A    Simulation   Study   Using    NHANES."    PLOS     Medicine,   18(1):    e1003490.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1003490

Streek, H., Schulte, B., Kümmerer, B.M., et al. (2020). "Infection Fatality Rate of SARS-CoV-2
in    a       Super-Spreading   Event   in   Germany."   Nature   Communications,      11,   5829.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-19509-y

Subbaraman, N. (2020). "How to Address the Coronavirus's Outsized Toll of People of Colour."
Nature, 581: 366­367. https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-01470-x

Thunström, L., Newbold, S.C., Finnoff, D., Ashworth, M., Shogren, J.F. (2020). "The Benefits
and Costs of Using Social Distancing to Flatten the Curve for COVID-19." Journal of Benefit-
Cost Analysis, 11(2): 179­195. https://doi.org/10.1017/bca.2020.12

Toner, E., Barnill, A., Krubiner, C., Bernstein, J. (2020). "Interim Framework for COVID-19
Allocation and Distribution in the United States." The Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security,



                                                 64
Baltimore,          MD.        Available        at        https://www.centerforhealthsecurity.org/our-
work/pubs_archive/pubs-pdfs/2020/200819-vaccine-allocation.pdf.

Toxvaerd, F. (2020). "Equilibrium Social Distancing." Cambridge Working Papers in Economics:
2021. Available at http://www.econ.cam.ac.uk/research-files/repec/cam/pdf/cwpe2021.pdf

UNIDO (United Nations Industrial Development Organization). (2020). "Managing COVID-19:
How       the       Pandemic         Disrupts    Global       Value     Chains."     Available       at
https://iap.unido.org/articles/managing-covid-19-how-pandemic-disrupts-global-value-chains

U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division (2020). "Annual Estimates of the Resident Population
for Selected Age Groups by Sex for the United States: April 1, 2010 to July 1, 2019 (NC-EST2019-
AGESEX)."       Available      at:    https://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-kits/2020/population-
estimates-detailed.html

Verity, R., Okell, L.C., Dorigatti, I., Winskill, P., Whittaker, C., Imai, N. et al. (2020). "Estimates
of the Severity of Coronavirus Disease 2019: A Model-Based Analysis." The Lancet, Infectious
Diseases, 20(6): 669­677. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30243-7

Viner, R.M., Mytton, O.T., Bonell, C., et al. (2021). "Susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 Infection
Among Children and Adolescents Compared with Adults: A Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis." Journal of American Medical Association, Pediatrics, 175(2): 143-156.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2020.4573

Viscusi, W.K. (2018). Pricing Lives: Guideposts for a Safer Society. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Vogel, G. (2020). "Sweden's Gamble." Science 370(6513): 159-163.
https://doi.org//10.1126/science.370.6513.159

Warfel, J.M., Zimmerman, L.I., Merkel, T.J. (2014). "Acellular Pertussis Vaccines Protect
Against Disease but Fail to Prevent Infection and Transmission in a Nonhuman Primate Model."
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 111(2): 787­792.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.13146888110

WHO (World Health Organization). (2020). "Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Situation
Report, 46." Available at https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-
reports/20200306-sitrep-46-covid-19.pdf?sfvrsn%3d96b04adf_4


                                                     65
Wu, X., Nethery, R.C., Sabath, B.M., Braun, D., Dominici, F. (2020). "Exposure to Air Pollution
and COVID-19 Mortality in the United States: A Nationwide Cross-Sectional Study." Science
Advances, 6(45), eabd4049. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adb4049

Yang, W., Kandula, S., Huynh, M., Greene, S.K., Van Wye, G., Li. W., et al. (2020). "Estimating
the Infection-Fatality Risk of SARS-CoV-2 in New York City During the Spring 2020 Pandemic
Wave: A Model-Based Analysis." The Lancet, Infectious Diseases (published online October 19,
2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30769-6

Yglesias, M. (2020). "Flattening the Curve isn't Good Enough." Vox (published online May 6,
2020).     Available     at     https://www.vox.com/2020/5/6/21241058/coronavirus-mitigation-
suppression-flatten-the-curve

Zhou, F., Yu, T., Du, R., Fan, G., Liu, Y., Liu, Z., et al. (2020). "Clinical Course and Risk Factors
for Mortality of Adult Inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: A Retrospective Cohort
Study." Lancet, 395(10229), 1054­1062. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30566-3




                                                 66
APPENDIX A: The value of COVID-19 control policies in the United States

Distribution of costs and fatalities

The population is divided into two age groups, the "young" (age less than 65) and the "old" (65+),
and five income groups, corresponding to the quintiles of the income distribution; based on the
2019 U.S. population age structure (U.S. Census Bureau 2020), 84% of the population is young.
Let  be the proportion of aggregate GDP that individuals in income group  own, with 5
                                                                                    =1  =

1. The income distribution is given by  = {5%, 10%, 15%, 23%, 47%}. We follow the COVID-
19 simulator created by Fleurbaey and co-authors in representing the distribution of fatalities and
costs by income quintiles. 39

Let  be the proportion of the total income loss caused by the control policy or by the pandemic
that an individual belonging to income group  = {1,2,3,4,5} and age group  = {, } bears:

                                                      5  
                                               =                                                               (1)
                                                         

where  is the elasticity of costs to income,  the proportion of costs paid by age group ,  the
                                                                                     
proportion of individuals in age group , N the total population, and                 5
                                                                                         the size of each income

group. 40 If  = 1, individuals pay proportionally to their income; if  < 1, lower-income quintiles
                                                        
bear a disproportionate amount of the costs. If  = 1, all ages suffer an economic loss; if only the
                                                         
                                                                         1
young pay the costs of the pandemic, then  = 0 and  =  , where  is the share of young in
                                                                          

the population. If the pandemic reduces aggregate income by the amount , each individual
in age group  and income group  pays  .

Let  be the proportion of individuals in age group  and income group  that die of COVID-19:

                                                     5   
                                              =                                                                (2)
                                                         
                                                              




39
     https://sites.google.com/site/marcfleurbaey/Home/covid
40
     There are ten age-income combinations in the example. The proportion of costs paid by each age-income group is
 
 
        . Since the size of an age-income group is 0.2  , each individual in age group a and income group i pays
                               
                   1         5  
 =                       =          .
                 0.2             




                                                         67
where  is the total number of COVID-19 fatalities,  is the elasticity of fatalities to income and
 the share of deaths experienced by individuals in age group . If there are  total COVID-19
                       
                     
fatalities,  =                 denotes the number of deaths accruing to individuals in age group  and
                     

                                   
income group  , and  = 0.2  the mortality rate of individuals in age group  and income group
                                      

 (i.e., the share of individuals in age group  and income group  that die of COVID-19). If  = 0,
mortality risk is independent of socioeconomic status (i.e., every income group bears the same
number of COVID-19 fatalities). If  < 0, individuals in low socioeconomic groups bear a
                                                                      
disproportionate number of deaths due to COVID-19. If                     = 1, then the mortality rate would be
                                                                      

the same in all age groups. Based on the estimates of infection fatality rate by age in Verity et al.
(2020) and on the 2019 U.S. population structure (U.S. Census Bureau 2020), the infection fatality
rate (i.e., the percentage of fatalities among the infected) of the young is equal to 0.28% and the
infection fatality rate of the old is equal to 4.36%. If both age groups have the same probability of
getting infected, 25% of COVID-19 fatalities occur among the young. As a consequence,  =
0.25 and  = 0.75.

Per capita annual GDP in the pre-COVID-19 situation is set equal to $65,000. The per capita
income distribution across quintiles is given by $16,250; $32,500; $48,750; $74,750; and
$152,750. 41 We also assume that, absent any control policy, the pandemic will cause 70% of the
population to be infected, resulting in a mortality rate equal to 0.67% of the population. More
specifically, 0.2% of the young will die from COVID-19, while the mortality rate of the old is
3.05%. Regarding the distribution of fatalities across income quintiles, we consider two scenarios:

     i) Elasticity of fatalities to income  equals -0.5, i.e., low-income quintiles bear a
         disproportionate number of deaths. The corresponding percentages of fatalities accruing to
         the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th income quintiles are, respectively, 33%, 23%, 19%, 15%, and
         11%. Table 1 presents the resulting mortality rates  per income and age group. 42

                                                                     
41
   Per-capita income of individuals in income group i is given by:  $65,000, where N is total population size and
                                                                  0.2 
0.2 the size of the income group.
                                                                                     
42
   The mortality rates are computed by multiplying the age-specific mortality rates,  (0.2% for the young and
                                                                                           
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
3.05% for the old), by five times the quintile-specific proportion of deaths, 5         . For example, the mortality rate of
                                                                                   
young individuals in the 1st income quintile is equal to 0.2*5*0.33%.


                                                          68
   ii) Elasticity of fatalities to income  equals 0, i.e., the distribution of fatalities is independent
       of income. Consequently, all young individuals have a COVID-19 mortality risk of 0.2%,
       and all old individuals a mortality risk equal to 3.05%.

Likewise, we consider three different cases for the distribution of policy costs:

   i) Elasticity of policy costs to income  = 1, i.e., the distribution of costs is proportional to
       income. The percentages of policy costs paid by the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th income quintiles
       are equal to the income distribution  .
   ii) Elasticity of policy costs to income  = 0.5, i.e., the distribution of costs is regressive, or
       low-income groups bear a higher proportion of economic losses. The percentages of policy
       costs paid by the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th income quintiles are, respectively, 11%, 15%, 19%,
       23%, and 33% (while their income share is 5%, 10%, 15%, 23%, 47%).
   iii) Elasticity of policy costs to income  = 1.5, i.e., the distribution of costs is progressive,
       or high-income groups bear the brunt of economic losses. The percentages of policy costs
       paid by the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th income quintiles are, respectively, 2%, 6%, 11%, 21%,
       and 60% (while their income share is 5%, 10%, 15%, 23%, 47%).

Individual well-being

Individual well-being depends on consumption and longevity. Lifetime well-being is time
                                                1-
                                                
separable, and the period utility is ( ) =       
                                                       - , where  is the coefficient of relative risk
                                                1-

aversion,  the consumption of an individual in age group  and income group  , and  the utility
at the subsistence consumption level. We assume that in the pre-COVID-19 situation, consumption
                                                                                              5
was constant across ages and equal to the income of the associated quintile:  =  =    ,

where GDP denotes aggregate income. If the pandemic (or the nonpharmaceutical intervention to
control it) causes a GDP contraction of , consumption is equal to  =  -  , where  is
the proportion of total loss borne by an individual in age group  and income group  , and its
expression is given by (1). To simplify, we assume that all costs occur in one year.

Let  be the pre-COVID-19 fraction of young individuals who die prematurely, that is, before
reaching an old age, and  the fraction of old individuals who die prematurely in the pre-COVID-
19 setting, i.e., before reaching a reasonable length of life, set at 85. Both probabilities depend on
the income group, with low-income quintiles facing a higher risk of dying prematurely. Based on


                                                  69
the 2017 U.S. lifetable (NCHS 2019), and averaging across all ages in an age group, we find that
13% of the young die before reaching age 65 and 43% of the old die prematurely, i.e., before
reaching age 85. The average age of the young who do not live past 65 is 51, and of the old who
do not live past 85 is 76; the life expectancy of the old who do live past age 85 (the assumed
desirable longevity) is 88. We assume that the derived fractions of premature deaths apply to
individuals in the 3rd income quintile, and we scale them to compute the probabilities of the other
income quintiles. Based on Chetty et al. (2016) and following Adler et al. (2021), we assume that
the annual probabilities of dying for individuals in the 1st, 2nd, 4th, and 5th quintiles are, respectively,
1.5, 1.3, 0.9, and 0.75 times the annual probability of dying of individuals with median income.
As a result, the fractions of young and old that die prematurely for each income quintile are (19%,
57%), (16%, 49%), (13%, 43%), (12%, 40%), and (10%, 34%).
                                                                      
COVID-19 increases the number of individuals who die prematurely. Let   be the total fraction

of individuals in age group  and income group  who die prematurely, with
                                           
                                             =  +                                                       (3)

and  the fraction of individuals in age group  and income group  who die of COVID-19,
whose expression is given in (2).

Let  be the expected lifetime utility of individuals in age group  and income group  . For the
"old" we have
                                                  
                          = 75( ) + ( -  ) + (1 -   )12 ( ).

The "old" has already lived for 75 years, sustains a consumption loss in the 76th year of age (the
average age of the "old"), and is expected to live for an additional 12 years (until age 88) if she
                                                                   
does not die prematurely of COVID-19 or of other causes (i.e., 1 -   of the "old" reach at least

the desirable longevity of 85 years).

For the "young" we have
                                 
           = 50 ( ) +  -   + 1 -   [ 25 ( ) + (1 -  )37 ( )].


The "young" has lived for 50 years and sustains a consumption loss in the 51st year of age (the
                                        
average age of the young). A proportion   dies before the old age (i.e., at age 51) for either

COVID-19 or other causes. Among those that survive the old age, a proportion 1 -  reaches


                                                    70
the desirable length of life and dies at age 88, thereby living for an additional 37 years; the
remaining individuals die at age 76 before reaching the desirable length of life, thereby living for
an additional 25 years.

Moreover, let  () be the realized lifetime utility of an individual in age group  and income
group  who dies exactly at  = {51,76,88}:

                                  () = ( - 1)( ) + ( -  ).

For example, a young individual who survives the young age, but dies prematurely when old, will
have a lifetime realized well-being equal to  (76) = 75 ( ) +  -  . The second term
denotes the fact that, when young, he had to pay the costs of the pandemic for one year.

To calibrate the utility function, we set  = 2 (a standard assumption in the literature), and the
parameter  is set such that the value of a statistical life of an individual with median income at
age 40 is equal to 10 million. 43

Individual willingness to pay to eliminate pandemic risks

Given the definition of expected individual lifetime utility, we can compute the amount of own
income each individual is willing to sacrifice to get rid of COVID-19, that is, to eliminate the
COVID-19-related mortality risk and income losses absent any intervention.

Consider an old individual and let  be the aggregate income loss associated with no control
over COVID-19. The individual willingness to pay  of an old individual in income group 
is defined as

      ( ,  )  75( ) + ( -  ) + (1 -  )12( )
                                                         
                    = 75( ) + ( -  ) + (1 -   )12 ( )   ( , )                                             (4)

Similarly, the willingness to pay of a young individual in income group  is defined as




43
  Consider a marginal change in the baseline probability of dying young. Assuming consumption is constant
                                                ()
through life, the formula for the VSL is  =        40 , where 40 is the remaining life expectancy of a 40-year-
                                              ()
old individual (set at 40.16) and ( ) the marginal utility of consumption. We set consumption at $48,750 (the
consumption value of an individual with median income) and solve the expression to derive . We find that  =
-0.000125288.


                                                       71
  ,    50 ( ) +  -   + 1 -  [ 25( ) + (1 -  )37( )]
                                      
                = 50 ( ) +  -   + 1 -   [ 25 ( ) + (1 -  )37 ( )]
                  
                    ,                                                                           (5)

Table 2 summarizes the individuals' willingness to pay to eliminate the pandemic risk by income
and age group, under the assumption that an uncontrolled pandemic does not cause any income
loss (i.e.,  = 0). 44

Evaluation methods

Under BCA, the value of a policy to eliminate the risk of COVID-19 is equal to the unweighted
sum of individuals' willingness to pay to eliminate COVID-19. Let  be the willingness to
pay of an individual in age group  and income group  . Under BCA, the total value   of the
intervention is given by:
                                             5
                                 
                                       1
                                     =    +   ,
                                       5
                                            =1

where  is the proportion of young people in the population,  = 1 -  the proportion of old
people, and  the total (prepandemic) population.

We consider three alternative SWFs:

     1. Utilitarianism. The utilitarian SWF is the sum of expected individual lifetime well-being:
                                       1
                                 =  5 5
                                      =1  + 1 -   .


     2. Ex-ante prioritarianism. The ex-ante prioritarian SWF is the sum of a concave
        transformation of expected individual lifetime well-being:
                                        1
                                =  5 5
                                     =1    + 1 -  ( ),




                                                                                  1-
44
  Applying the definitions of willingness to pay in (4) and (5), and given that ( ) =  +  and  = 2, the
                                                                                          1-
willingness to pay of an individual in age group  and income group  solves the following equation:
                                                                        -1
                                                                1
                                          =  -  -  -   
                                                               
with  = 1 -  (37 - 12 ) and  = 1 -  12.


                                                  72
       where  is a strictly increasing and strictly concave function, denoting the degree of priority
       to the worse-off in (expected) lifetime well-being.
   3. Ex-post prioritarianism. The ex-post prioritarian SWF is the expected sum of a strictly
       increasing and strictly concave transformation of realized individual lifetime well-being:
                        5
          
               1                 
             =        (51) + 1 -     (76)
               5
                        =1

                              
                        + 1 -   (1 -  )  (88)

                                        5
                          1                     
                        +  1 -      (76) + (1 -  ) (88).
                          5
                                       =1

We assume that the function  belongs to the Atkinson family, with  the priority parameter:
           1-
( ) =           .
          1-


The maximum GDP loss  associated with the policy that the policy maker finds acceptable is
defined as the reduction in current aggregate GDP that society is willing to suffer to eliminate the
                                              
pandemic. Let   (                         
                   ,  , ),  ( ,  , ), and   ,  ,  be the

utilitarian, ex-ante prioritarian, and ex-post prioritarian social welfare levels with COVID-19 and
no control policy, where  is the potential income loss associated to an uncontrolled policy
(note that in the examples considered in the text  is set to zero). The utilitarian societal
burden   is defined as
                              5
             1                                     
    ,  , X        , X U  + 1 -   ( , X U ) =   
                    U
                                                 ,  , ,
             5
                             =1

with   , X U  = 50 ( ) +  -     + 1 -  [25( ) + (1 -  )12( )] and
 ( , X U ) = 75( ) + ( -    ) + (1 -  )12( ).

The ex-ante prioritarian societal burden   is defined as
                                   5
                        EA
                               1
              ,  , X                 , X EA  + 1 -    ( , X EA )
                               5
                                  =1
                                
                        =     ,  , .




                                                73
Finally, the ex-post prioritarian societal burden   is defined as

          ,  , X EP 
                                   5
                        1
                              (51;   ) + 1 -     (76;   )
                        5
                                  =1

                       + 1 -  (1 -  )  (88;   )
                                           5
                         1
                       +  1 -     (76;   ) + (1 -  ) (88;   )
                         5
                                          =1
                               
                       =     ,  , ,


with  (;   ) = ( - 1)( ) + ( -    ).

The results in Table 3 correspond to the value   ,   ,   computed by solving the previous
expressions.



Additional tables

Table A.1. Individuals' willingness to pay as a percentage of own income for a policy that
eliminates the risk of death from COVID-19, by age group and income quintile

                   1st quintile        2nd quintile     3rd quintile      4th quintile      5th quintile

 Young             5.8%                15.8%            24.2%             34.6%             54%

 Old               27.5%               53%              65.2%             75.4%             86.9%

Assumptions: COVID-19 fatality risk is independent of income; the young die of COVID-19 with probability 0.2%,
the old with probability 3.05%; there is no income loss associated to an uncontrolled pandemic.




                                                      74
APPENDIX B: The allocation of vaccine doses

Consider again the example in Section 4. Individuals are divided into five income and two age
groups, and life expectancies depend on the income quintile. We denoted  the probability that
an individual in income quintile i and age group a dies because of COVID-19. If the individual is
vaccinated, her COVID-19 mortality rate decreases to  (1 -  ), where  is the effectiveness
of the vaccine for individuals of age a. We consider the case where low-income quintiles are over-
burdened with deaths. The COVID-19 mortality rates by income and age group are given in Table
1.

Consider an old person in income group i and suppose for simplicity that COVID-19 does not
entail any income loss, only the risk of premature mortality. If the individual is not vaccinated, her
expected well-being is 
                        
                         = 76 ( ) + (1 -  -  )12( ). If the individual is
vaccinated, her well-being becomes  = 76 ( ) + (1 -  -  (1 -  ))12( ). The
well-being gain from being vaccinated then equals

                                        = 12( )  .

Consider now a young person in income group i. If the individual is not vaccinated, her expected
well-being    is    
                     = 51( ) + 1 -  -  [25( ) + (1 -  )12( )].                                If   the

individual is vaccinated, her well-being becomes  = 51 ( ) + 1 -  -  (1 -
 )[25( ) + (1 -  )12( )]. The well-being gain from being vaccinated then equals

                                  = [37 -  12]( )  .

In the utilitarian case, social welfare is the sum of individuals' expected lifetime well-being,   =

      + 1 -   . Therefore, one dose of vaccine to allocate will be given to the
5

individual who gains more in terms of increase in expected well-being.

Let 1 be the utilitarian value of vaccinating an old individual in the 1st income quintile. We can
compute the utilitarian value of vaccinating an individual at age a and income group i as a
proportion of the utilitarian value of vaccinating an old individual in the 1st income quintile:

                                  [37 -  12]( )  
                                   =
                                 1     12(1 )    1




                                                 75
                                        12 ( )  
                                        =
                                       1 12(1 )  1

In both expressions, the first term represents the utilitarian social value of a given reduction in
mortality risk  (e.g., a 1 percentage point reduction) experienced by an individual at age a
                                                               
and in income group i as a proportion of the utilitarian value 1 attached to a comparable
reduction accruing to an old individual in the 1st income quintile (Table 4). The second term is the
health benefit of vaccination, as compared with the health benefit enjoyed by an old person in the
                                                
1st income quintile. The terms   1 and   1 are the utilitarian-adjusted mortality risk
                                  1               1

reductions achieved by vaccinating an individual (Table 5). For example, vaccinating a young
individual in the 1st income quintile is equivalent, from a utilitarian point of view, to reducing the
                                                                    1
mortality risk of an old individual in the 1st income quintile by      .
                                                                    1  1


In the ex-ante prioritarian case, social welfare is the sum of strictly increasing and strictly concave
                                                                 
transformations of individual expected well-being:   = 5   ( ) + 1 -  ( ),

with  strictly increasing and strictly concave. The ex-ante prioritarian welfare gain from
vaccinating a young person in income group i is given by
                               
                        =   -      
                                    
                                      .

The second expression derives from approximating the g function around the no vaccination case.
Note that the approximation is good only if the change in expected well-being is sufficiently small
(an assumption that, for the sake of simplicity, we make here). Similarly, the ex-ante prioritarian
welfare gain from vaccinating an old person in income group i is given by
                                   
                         = ( ) - (  )   (
                                          
                                           ) .

The ex-ante prioritarian value of vaccinating an individual at age a and in income group i as a
proportion of the ex-ante prioritarian value of vaccinating an old individual in the 1st income
quintile is

                                   (
                                     
                                      )[37 -  12]( )  
                                 =     
                           1        (1     )12(1 )    1

                                    ( 
                                       
                                        )12( )  
                                  =    
                                1   (1  )12(1 )  1


                                                  76
where, in both expressions, the first term is the ex-ante prioritarian social value  attached

to a given reduction in mortality risk experienced by an individual at age a and in income group i
                                                  
as a proportion of the ex-ante prioritarian value 1 of a comparable risk reduction accruing
to an old individual in the 1st income quintile (Tables 6 and B.1). The results in Tables 7 and B.2
are determined by multiplying the previous expressions by  1 .

In the ex-post prioritarian case, social welfare is the expected sum of concave transformations of
                                                     1
individual    realized    well-being:      =  5  5
                                                 =1( +  ) (51) + 1 -  -

                                                                 1
   (76) + 1 -  -  (1 -  ) (88) +  5 1 -   5
                                          =1( +

 ) (76) + (1 -  -  ) (88), with  () = ( ). The ex-post prioritarian
welfare gain from vaccinating an old person in income group i is given by

                                           
        =   (88) - ( (76))     (76)12( ) =   (76) .

Once again, we implicitly assume that the change in realized well-being is small enough such that
the approximation is good.

The ex-post prioritarian welfare gain from vaccinating a young person in income group i is given
by

               =   (88) -  (51) -   (88) -  (76)

                                 (51)37( ) -    (76)12( )

                =   (51) +   12( )  (51) -   (76).

The ex-post prioritarian value of vaccinating an individual at age a and in income group i as a
proportion of the ex-post prioritarian value of vaccinating an old individual in the 1st income
quintile is

                               (51)37( ) -    (76)12( )  
                         =
                  1                  1 (76)12(1 )        1

                                     (76)12( )  
                                 =
                               1    1 (76)12(1 )  1




                                                77
where, in both expressions, the first term is the ex-post prioritarian value  attached to a

given reduction in mortality risk experienced by an individual at age a and in income group i as a
                                             
proportion of the ex-post prioritarian value 1 of a comparable risk reduction accruing to an
old individual in the 1st income quintile (Tables 8 and B.3). The results in Tables 9 and B.4 are
determined by multiplying the previous expressions by  1 .



Additional tables

Table B.1. Ex-ante prioritarian SVRR compared with the ex-ante prioritarian SVRR
attached to an older person belonging to the 1st income quintile, by age and income group.

                     1st quintile        2nd quintile        3rd quintile        4th quintile        5th quintile

 Young               2.69                2.71                2.72                2.73                2.74

 Old                 1                   0.99                0.98                0.97                0.96

Assumption: Atkinson SWF with priority parameter equal to 1.




Table B.2. Ex-ante-prioritarian-adjusted reduction in COVID-19 mortality risk if the
vaccine is 100% effective for all age groups, by age and income group.

                     1st quintile        2nd quintile        3rd quintile        4th quintile        5th quintile

 Young               0.86%               0.61%               0.5%                0.41%               0.29%

 Old                 4.96%               3.46%               2.8%                2.25%               1.56%

Assumption: Atkinson SWF with priority parameter equal to 1. If the vaccine is less than 100% effective, the values
in the table should be multiplied by the reduced effectiveness (e.g., if effectiveness is 60%, the ex-ante-prioritarian-
adjusted reduction for a young individual in the 1st income quintile is 0.6×0.86%).




                                                          78
Table B.3. Ex-post prioritarian SVRR compared with the ex-post prioritarian SVRR
attached to an older person belonging to the 1st income quintile, by age and income group.

                     1st quintile        2nd quintile        3rd quintile        4th quintile        5th quintile

 Young               3.75                3.87                3.95                4                   4.09

 Old                 1                   1                   1                   1                   1

Assumption: Atkinson SWF with priority parameter equal to 1. When the priority parameter is equal to 1, the

approximated formula of the ex-post prioritarian SVRR for an old person is                         (76) =
                         12
[76( )]-1 12( ) = , which is constant across income groups.
                 76




Table B.4. Ex-post-prioritarian-adjusted reduction in COVID-19 mortality risk if the
vaccine is 100% effective for all age groups, by age and income group.

                     1st quintile        2nd quintile        3rd quintile        4th quintile        5th quintile

 young               1.19%               0.87%               0.73%               0.59%               0.43%

 old                 4.96%               3.51%               2.87%               2.31%               1.62%

Assumption: Atkinson SWF with priority parameter equal to 1. If the vaccine is less than 100% effective, the values
in the table should be multiplied by the reduced effectiveness (e.g., if effectiveness is 60%, the ex-post-prioritarian-
adjusted reduction for a young individual in the 1st income quintile is 0.6×1.19%).




                                                          79
