                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      RUGGED ENTREPRENEURS:
  THE GEOGRAPHIC AND CULTURAL CONTOURS OF NEW BUSINESS FORMATION

                                      John M. Barrios
                                       Yael Hochberg
                                     Daniele Macciocchi

                                     Working Paper 28606
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28606


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




We are grateful to the Startup Cartography Project and Jorge Guzman for the provision of data
used in this project. All errors are our own. Corresponding Author: John M Barrios
(john.barrios@wustl.edu), Washington University in St Louis, Olin School of Business. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by John M. Barrios, Yael Hochberg, and Daniele Macciocchi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rugged Entrepreneurs: The Geographic and Cultural Contours of New Business Formation
John M. Barrios, Yael Hochberg, and Daniele Macciocchi
NBER Working Paper No. 28606
March 2021
JEL No. L26,N3,N9,O1,O43

                                           ABSTRACT

How do geographic and historical-cultural factors shape new business formation? Using novel
data on new business registrations, we document that 75% of the variation in new business
formation is explained by time-invariant county-level factors and examine the extent to which
such variation is driven by historical, cultural, and geographic factors. Current-day new business
formation is positively related to historical attributes that presage individualist culture: frontier
experience and historical birthplace diversity, as well as the county's topographical features. The
relation holds when we exploit plausibly exogenous variation in frontier experience driven by
shocks to the settlement process that arise from historical immigration flows. Our study points to
the fundamental role of geographic and historical-cultural features, especially rugged
individualism, in explaining contemporary new business formation in the U.S.


John M. Barrios                                   Daniele Macciocchi
Washington University in St. Louis                University of Miami
John.barrios@wustl.edu                            Coral Gables, FL
                                                  dmacciocchi@miami.edu
Yael Hochberg
Jones Graduate School of Business
Rice University
6100 Main Street, MS-531
McNair Hall Room 331
Houston, TX 77005
and Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and also NBER
hochberg@rice.edu
                                      1. INTRODUCTION

Entrepreneurial activity has long been recognized as a primary contributor to economic growth

(Davis and Haltiwanger 1992; Jovanovic and MacDonald 1994; Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda

2013; Guzman and Stern 2019). Entrepreneurs are often considered drivers of urban growth in

general and innovation-driven growth in particular (Glaeser and Kerr 2009; Glaeser et al. 2010;

Agrawal et al. 2010; Glaeser et al. 2015). Despite this, our understanding of the factors determining

the geographic distribution of new business formation remains limited. In particular, we know

little regarding how geographic and historical-cultural factors shape new business formation,

despite their importance to other economic activities (Alesina and Giuliano 2015). This paper

seeks to fill this gap.

      An extensive literature in sociology and cultural anthropology hypothesizes that cultural

factors can significantly influence entrepreneurship. This literature dates back as far as Weber

(1904), who argued for a role for the Protestant work ethic in encouraging entrepreneurial

vocations. In the economics literature, cultural factors have been shown to affect economic activity

more broadly. For example, Bazzi et al. (2020a) document that U.S. counties with longer historical

exposure to frontier conditions exhibit greater individualism and opposition to redistribution and

regulation. In the context of a pandemic, Bazzi et al. (2020b) show that such individualism

undermines collective action in the face of crisis. Similarly, variation in the historical immigrant

makeup of U.S. counties has long-run effects on their economic prosperity (Sequeira et al., 2019).

These effects may arise due to culture, genetics, or networks (Ottaviano and Peri, 2006; Ager and

Bruckner, 2013; Grosjean, 2014; Burchardi Chaney, and Hassan, 2019; Bandiera et al., 2017; Ager

and Bruckner, 2017).




                                                 1
      Similarly, through its impact on historical development, geography and topography have

affected economic activity and outcomes (Nunn and Puga, 2012). On the one hand, geographic

ruggedness can be an economic handicap, making it more expensive to transport goods, farmland,

or generally do business. On the other hand, geographic ruggedness has historically served as a

physical impediment to lawlessness, raiding, and other types of conflict activity that may impede

economic development. Moreover, the local terrain's nature may contribute to the cultural

attributes that develop in that area.

      In this paper, we consider three cultural and geographic factors that may shape the contours

of entrepreneurial entry and new business formation in the U.S. First, we consider the frontier

experience, which leads to the development of a more individualist culture in the local area (Bazzi

et al. 2020a). Entrepreneurship is often associated in the public mind with individualism, a desire

to "be one's own boss," or one's wish to have flexibility in the workplace. Consistent with this

notion, Hurst and Pugsley (2011) document that roughly 50% of small business owners in the U.S.

report that such non-pecuniary benefits were one of the primary reasons for starting a business.

Second, we consider the county's historical population's birthplace diversity, which may lead to a

diversity of viewpoints and thought as immigrants transmit their values into the local area

(Giuliano and Tabellini, 2020), spurring creativity that can translate into new business formation.

Finally, we consider the ruggedness of the geographic terrain of the local area. Irregular terrain

makes cultivation difficult, 1 and transportation over irregular terrain is slower and costlier. In

addition, because of the very high costs of earthwork, building costs are significantly higher when




1
  On steep slopes, erosion becomes a potential hazard, and the control of water, such as irrigation, becomes much
more difficult. According to the Food and Agriculture Organization (1993), when slopes are greater than 2 degrees,
the benefits of cultivation often do not cover the necessary costs, and when slopes are greater than 6 degrees,
cultivation becomes impossible.


                                                        2
the terrain is irregular (Rapaport and Snickars, 1999). These factors can affect the nature and extent

of new business formation.

     We begin by motivating our analysis with an assessment of how new business formation

clusters geographically. To do this, we utilize a relatively novel dataset of new business

registrations in a local region, provided by the Startup Cartography Project (SCP). Because a new

company must not only incorporate in a state jurisdiction (which may not be the state they operate

in), but also register with their local Secretary of State to do business (where the business actually

operates), and because such registrations provide an actual operating address for the new company,

utilizing business registration data allows us to observe the full universe of newly incorporated

businesses (Guzman and Stern 2020). The SCP dataset provides us with counts, by zip-code and

quarter, of all new for-profit businesses, allowing us to observe entrepreneurial entry at the micro-

level. The SCP data also provides us with an estimate of the quality of the entrepreneurial cohort

in each county in each quarter, where quality is measured as the estimated probability that a new

business in that cohort will achieve a high growth exit (Guzman and Stern 2020; Fazio et al. 2020).

     When we estimate a negative binomial regression at the county level, we find a highly

significant excess variation parameter, suggesting that number and quality of new business

formation is clustered more in certain counties than we would expect merely by chance. We

observe a similar pattern when we expand the unit of analysis to county-quarter-years and estimate

various fixed effects regressions. Specifically, we find that county fixed effects are highly

significant and explain approximately 75% of the new business registration variation over the

entire sample period (1988-2016). These estimates suggest that time-invariant factors drive the

prevalence of entrepreneurial entry in a local area. With these basic patterns established, we next




                                                  3
examine the extent to which such variation is driven by historical, cultural, and geographic factors

that remain constant over time.

     We begin by analyzing the relationship between individualism, as proxied for by Total

Frontier Experience (TFE) (Bazzi et al. 2020a). During the process of westward expansion in the

early years following the formation of the United States, living in a frontier state or county

particularly rewarded those who demonstrated independence and self-reliance, as pioneers had

little infrastructure to rely on. Historians suggest frontier locations historically demonstrated

greater individualism (Turner 1893). Recent work in economics suggests that such individualism

has persisted in these locations in the long run. Consistent with entry into entrepreneurship being

characterized by individualistic nature, in linear panel models with a variety of demographic and

geographic controls, we observe a positive relation between TFE and new business formation per

capita in U.S. counties, with a one standard deviation increase in TFE being associated with a 3%

to 5% increase in per capita new business starts. Similarly, we observe a positive association

between TFE and the entrepreneurial quality index of Guzman and Stern (2020). The magnitude

of this effect, however, is small: a one standard deviation increase in TFE associated with 1.25%

increase in the predicted probability of high-growth exit in the current-day cohort. The small

economic magnitude suggests that while the individualism brought about by TFE leads to

increased entrepreneurial activity, it does not appear to meaningfully change the type of businesses

started (small business versus innovation-driven high-growth startups).

     Of course, TFE may be correlated with economic development and other cultural and

demographic factors in those areas, which likely affect entrepreneurial entry. To exclude

unobservable location-specific confounders and isolate plausibly exogenous variation in TFE, we

follow Bazzi et al. (2020a) and instrument TFE with historical shocks to the settlement process,




                                                 4
which are driven by historical immigration flows to the U.S. in the late 1800s. Immigrants created

population pressures that lead locals and immigrants themselves to move west, pushing out the

frontier. We observe a similar relationship between instrumented TFE and new business formation

in a county, with a somewhat higher economic magnitude (~8% increase in new business

registrations for a one standard deviation increase in TFE). Overall, the analysis suggests that

individualism, as proxied by the county's historical frontier experience, is a significant factor in

explaining the current geographic distribution of new business formation.

     Next, we examine a second key cultural factor: the county's historical diversity in immigrant

backgrounds. To the extent that immigrant values spill over into the local population and these

cultural values persist over time (e.g., Giuliano and Tabellini 2020), the broader diversity of initial

immigrant backgrounds can lead to the diversity of viewpoints and thought, which can lead to

creative recombinations that support innovation and entrepreneurial activity. Alternatively, such

diversity may lead to societal fragmentation and a lack of social cohesion, impeding new business

formation.

      We observe a positive and significant relation between a county's historical diversity (HHI

of population birthplaces by country) and per capita new business starts, suggesting that on

average, the diversity of viewpoints and values brought by immigrants creates a persistent local

culture that facilitates new business formation. The estimated effect is also economically

significant: a one standard deviation increase in diversity of birth countries is associated with a

14% increase in new business registrations per capita. We observe no significant relationship,

however, between diversity in birthplaces and entrepreneurial quality.

     Next, we examine the topographical features of counties. Using the terrain ruggedness index

developed by Riley, DeGloria, and Elliott (1999), we document a positive and significant relation




                                                  5
between a county's terrain ruggedness and the number of new business registrations per capita. A

one standard deviation increase in geographical ruggedness is associated with a 14% increase in

new business registrations per capita, consistent with the notion that rugged terrain imposed

historical constraints that may contribute to individualistic culture and self-reliance. As was the

case for TFE, we also observe a small positive and statistically significant relationship between

geographic terrain ruggedness and entrepreneurial quality.

     Of course, the three factors we examine above may not be entirely independent of each other.

In our final set of analyses, we estimate linear models in which we include all three factors (TFE,

historical birthplace diversity, and terrain ruggedness) as right-hand side variables. When all three

factors are horse raced in the same model, all retain their statistical and economic significance,

with similar magnitudes to those obtained in our single-factor models. We then examine the

interactive effects of these measures, adding interaction terms to our models one by one. We

observe positive and significant interaction effects for historical birthplace diversity with both

terrain ruggedness and TFE, but there is no interaction effect for TFE and terrain ruggedness. In

other words, the models suggest that counties characterized by greater historical diversity see a

magnification in the effects of terrain ruggedness and TFE on new business formation.

     A natural follow-up question related to historical birthplace diversity's long-term effects is

whether such diversity may benefit counties that today hold large concentrations of minority

groups. We thus interact historical diversity with the county's current fraction of the population

that is Hispanic or African-American. The estimates suggest that counties with large

concentrations of minority groups, but low historical birthplace diversity have lower per capita

new business starts. However, high minority areas experience more new business starts when the

county is also characterized by high levels of historical diversity. Hence, our results suggest that




                                                 6
while large concentrations of minority groups in counties with no historical diversity lead to

societal fragmentation and harm new business formation, minority groups integrated into a

historically diverse environment lead to greater entrepreneurial activity. This finding suggests that

the positive effects of societal diversity may take time to materialize fully.

     Our paper makes several contributions to the literature. First, and foremost, our paper

contributes to a growing literature on the factors that drive entrepreneurial entry, a phenomenon

that, despite much research, is still not well-understood. While studies have explored the effects

of non-pecuniary benefits (Hurst and Pugsley 2011), wealth constraints (Hurst and Lusardi 2004),

safety nets (Barrios et al 2020), and regulatory aspects (Djankov et al. 2010), these determinates

fail to fully explain the significant variation in new business formation observed across both time

and space. Our paper documents new factors that can explain such variation. Specifically, our

findings suggest a fundamental role for America's frontier culture and individualism in shaping

new business formation and entrepreneurial activity in the U.S. This, in turn, should spur further

research on the cultural drivers of new business formation.

     Second, and relatedly, by focusing on the historical, geographic, and cultural features that

drive new business entry, our paper contributes to the existing literature on the importance of

culture in business transactions. For example, Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2006) highlight the

role of cultural factors like trust or social capital for business transactions, while Alesina and

Giuliano (2015) focus on the role of culture in institutions. By examining the role that historical

geographic and cultural factors play in shaping new businesses formation, we extend the literature

on culture into the sphere of entrepreneurship in the spirit of Iyer and Schoar (2010) and Landier

and Thesmar (2008).




                                                  7
        Finally, the empirical patterns we document contribute to the literature on agglomeration

economies. The spatial variation in new business formation that we document, and its association

with terrain ruggedness and other historical features, provides new insights that inform the

discussion on the clustering of economic activities in certain areas of the country. Specifically,

variation in clustering fostered by the terrain and historical-cultural features of U.S. regions sheds

light on the origins of economic clustering in the U.S. (Duranton and Pagu, 2004; Glaeser 2010).


                                             2. SAMPLE AND DATA


2.1.       Sample

        Our sample consists of all U.S. counties with a population greater or equal to 10,000 people

in 2010, observed quarterly from 1988 to 2016, the last available business registration data year.

The initial sample consists of 360,364 observations for 3,142 counties (sample size varies in the

analysis depending on the data availability for any particular specification).

2.2.       New Business Formation

        Our outcomes of interest are the quantity and quality of new business launches, measured

using business registrations by location and time period. For this purpose, we obtain data on new

for-profit business registrations from the Startup Cartography Project (SCP, Guzman and Stern,

2020).2 The SCP leverages business registration records, which are public records created when

an individual register's a new business as a corporation, LLC or partnership. Importantly, as noted

by Guzman and Stern (2020), while it is possible to found a new business without business

registration (e.g., a sole proprietorship), the benefits of registration are substantial, and include

limited liability, various tax benefits, the ability to issue and trade ownership shares, and credibility



2
    See http://www.startupcartography.com.


                                                     8
with potential customers. Furthermore, all corporations, partnerships, and limited liability

companies must register with a Secretary of State or equivalent to take advantage of these benefits.

The act of registering the firm triggers the company's legal creation. As such, these records reflect

the population of incorporated businesses operating in a location (which may differ from their state

of incorporation) that take a form that is a practical prerequisite for growth.

      The SCP dataset provided to us covers 49 states plus the District of Columbia, and for each

state the data includes records on the complete population of firms satisfying one of the following

two conditions: (i) a for-profit firm physically located in the local jurisdiction, or (ii) a for-profit

firm whose jurisdiction is in Delaware but whose principal office address is in the local state.

      The SCP dataset provides a number of variables of interest to entrepreneurship researchers.

We focus here on two specifically: (i) the quantity of new business registrations in a Census

incorporated place in a given year-quarter, and (ii) an Entrepreneurial Quality Index, which is a

measure of average quality within any given group of firms and represents a prediction for the

probability of a growth outcome for a firm within a specified population of start-ups in a specific

period (Guzman and Stern 2020).

      To measure the geographic intensity of new business formations, we need to consider the

number of new business registrations relative to the local population's size. We define our main

variable of interest, Log New Business Starts per Capita, as the natural logarithm of one plus the

number of new business registrations in the county-year-quarter scaled by the county's population

in thousands. We graph the county variation of New Business Starts per capita in Figure 1-A. Our

second variable of interest is Entrepreneurial Quality Index (EQI). Data on EQI is available for

only a subset of the SCP data. Our sample is thus restricted to 211,394 observations in the analyses

of the EQI.




                                                   9
2.3.    Cultural and Geographic factors

       We consider three cultural and geographic factors that may shape the contours of

entrepreneurial entry and new business formation in the U.S.. First, we consider the frontier

experience (Total Frontier Experience). Our measure is derived from Bazzi et al. (2020a), and

identifies the frontier line in each year from 1790 to 1890 as the contour lines longer than 500

kilometers, after removing all "inner island lines", that are east of the main frontier line. Counties

within 100 kilometers of this line are defined as frontier counties. This historically grounded

definition of the frontier captures two dimensions of frontier life: population sparsity and isolation

from urban centers. Similar to Bazzi et al. (2020a), we construct a county-level measure of TFE,

which captures the number of decades that a given county spent on the frontier from 1790 to 1890,

the end of the frontier era according to Turner (1893) and the U.S. Census Bureau. Our baseline

analysis focuses on the 3,109 counties whose entire frontier history can be observed from 1790 to

1890. The geographic variation in TFE can be observed in Figure 1-B. In the multivariate analysis,

we standardize the TFE measure to be mean zero and standard deviation one to ease the

interpretation of coefficients.

       Second, we measure a county's historical population's birthplace diversity along the country

of origin, we follow Manson et al. (2019). We measure a county's historical birthplace diversity,

Birthplace Diversity in 1890, as one minus the Herfindahl-Hirschman concentration index for

country of birth in the county's population in 1890. Birth country is defined as the U.S. or a given

country or country grouping abroad. We plot the geographic variation in Birthplace Diversity in

1890 in Figure 1-C. In the multivariate analysis, to ease our findings' interpretation, we standardize

this measure to mean zero and standard deviation one.

       In addition to historical birthplace diversity, we also measure the current concentration of

minority groups in a county, Minority, defined as the average fraction of a county's population in


                                                 10
the period 2000 to 2016 that is African-American or Hispanic. Data on minorities is available for

the period 2000 to 2016, and for a smaller sample of counties (1,161). Hence, our analysis for

Minority is limited to a sample with 76,500 observations. Consistent with the prior measures, we

standardize this variable for ease of coefficient interpretation.

       Finally, we measure terrain ruggedness using the county-level average Terrain Ruggedness

Index (TRI) computed using 30-arc grid data on terrain variability based on Nunn and Puga (2012).

The geographic distribution of TRI is depicted in Figure 1-D. We standardize this measure to be

mean zero and standard deviation one.

2.4.    Controls

       Our regression models include a vector of covariates that control a county's demographic

and geographic characteristics. We obtain annual income per capita from U.S. Census. We control

for the county's average population density, measured as the ratio between the county's population

and area using digitalized U.S. Census data on population for every decade in 1790-2010. The data

on area is calculated using the 2010 county shapefiles from NHGIS using GIS software (Manson

et al., 2019). The county-level population data and other pre-2010 data are harmonized to the 2010

county boundaries. The data for intercensal years is imputed using the procedure detailed in Bazzi

et al. (2020a). We also control for the average Republican vote share in presidential elections. The

data is obtained from ICPSR (8611) Presidential and Congressional Races, 1840­1972 for 1900­

1972 elections, General Election Data for the United States 1950­1990 (ICPSR 13) for 1976­1996

elections, and Dave Leip's Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections for 2000­2016 elections (2017).

We also control for the average effective property tax rate per $100 of value, calculated as the

county's ratio of the average real estate tax over the average house value, with data obtained from




                                                  11
the National Association of Home Builders. They calculated the rates based on the 2010­2014

American Community Survey (ACS) data from the Census Bureau.

     We also utilize data on the geographic characteristics from Manson et al. (2019) and Bazzi

et al. (2020a). We include geographic controls for the log of a county's surface area in square

miles, the absolute latitudinal distance from the equator in decimal degrees, the absolute

longitudinal distance from the Greenwich Meridian in decimal degrees, and the average terrain

elevation, the minimum distance to the coastline, rivers, and lakes in meters. These variables are

calculated from each county's centroid using GIS software and the 2010 county shapefiles from

NHGIS. We provide descriptive statistics for all our variables in Table A1 of the appendix.


                                           3. RESULTS


     We begin our analysis by examining the geographic distribution of new business formation

across U.S. counties. We start at the most basic level, taking a single observation for each county,

and asking whether new business formation rates differ more than would be expected from

sampling variation. We then expand the unit of analysis to the county-year-quarter pair, allowing

us to estimate dynamic panel models with state and then county fixed effects.

     We begin by analyzing whether new business formation tends to cluster regionally more than

predicted by chance. In Exhibit 1 Figure 1-A, we observe preliminary visual evidence suggesting

the clustering of new business formation in some regions of the U.S. However, the figure does not

tell us whether these differences are larger than we would expect from random variation. Exhibit

2 Panel A, presents the estimates from a more rigorous analysis, using a single observation for

each county. We examine three dependent variables: the number of year-quarters for which new

business registrations occurs in a given county (Column 1), the number of year-quarters for which

new businesses have above the median EQI (Column 2), and the number of year-quarters for which


                                                12
new businesses have above the 75th percentile EQI (Column 3), with the population at risk (the

independent variable) being the total number of year-quarters for a given county in the sample.

      Our models are based on the intuition that in a standard Poisson regression, the dependent

variable is Poisson distributed with mean    , where Xi are the covariates that determine the

distribution. Using the Poisson distribution, we allow the distribution to vary by county, so that

the mean becomes     , where  is a multiplicative gamma-distributed term with a mean equal

to one and variance equal to  . A value of 0 for  corresponds to a standard Poisson model,

whereas  > 0 indicates unequal variance, or excess clustering, in new business registrations across

counties, after accounting for each county's size population of year-quarters.

      In Exhibit 2 Panel A we find that the coefficient on the number of county-year-quarters is

significant and close to one across the three models, consistent with expectations. More

importantly, however, the estimated variance parameter  is consistently positive and highly

significant across the three models, allowing us to reject an equal distribution of new business

starts across counties.3

      Our preceding tests have low statistical power and are further limited because county-level

heterogeneity is modeled based on a Poisson functional form (if the true distribution of  is not

gamma, the regression is misspecified). Thus, we next estimate panel models at the county-year-

quarter level and model regional heterogeneity using state fixed effects and county fixed effects,

which are unconstrained by a specific a-priori distribution.

      Panel B of Exhibit 2 reports the results. We estimate the fixed effects model for our two

dependent variables: Log of New Business Starts per capita and the Entrepreneurial Quality Index.




3
 To interpret the magnitude, the result indicates that, for a county one standard deviation above the mean, new
business formation is expected to occur about 38% more frequently than average.


                                                      13
We include year fixed effects as a benchmark model, and then add state fixed effects and county

fixed effects alternatively, to examine their relative importance in explaining variation in our

outcome of interest. The state fixed effects are highly significant and explain approximately 22%

of the new business registration variation over the entire sample period. Similarly, state fixed

effects explain 11% of the variation in the EQI. More interestingly, however, county fixed effects

alone explain approximately 75% of the variation in new business registration (and 16% of the

variation in EQI). These results indicate that most of the variation in new business starts is

explained by time-invariant county level factors. This serves as the basis for examining the

county's geographical and historical-cultural aspects, which we turn to next.

3.1.      The Geographic and Cultural Contours of Variation in New Business Formation

       From this point forward, we take the previously documented patterns as given, and attempt

to better understand why they exist--examining how geographic and historical-cultural factors

affect the quantity and quality of new business formation. We consider three important factors

discussed in the introduction: the county's exposure to frontier conditions, which have been shown

to lead to a persistent culture of rugged individualism; the historical diversity in country of birth;

and the topographical features of counties, as proxied for by terrain ruggedness. Our analyses are

motivated by theories of cultural persistence. While both the individualism induced by the

historical frontier or rugged terrain, and the creativity or fragmentation induced by birthplace

diversity may dissipate over time, they may well have shaped the subsequent evolution of culture

in the county.

3.1.1. Total Frontier Experience

       We begin by estimating the linear relation between total frontier experience (TFE) and new

business formation in a panel regression model with fixed effects:



                                                 14
            , = 0 + 1  + 2 , +  + () + , ,                                         (1)

       Where Yc,t indicates the log of New Business Starts per capita or the Entrepreneurial

Quality Index (EQI) for county c at year-quarter t.  indicates a county's Total Frontier

Experience, which is the number of decades that a given county spent on the frontier from 1790 to

1890. , denotes a vector of covariates that control for important time variant and time

invariant geographic and demographic characteristics, as described in Section 2.4. We include state

fixed effects ( () ) to control for unobserved time-invariant local characteristics. We also include

year fixed effects ( ) to capture time trends in new business registrations. The coefficient 1

identifies a local effect of TFE after accounting for factors that may correlate with both TFE and

modern culture. Standard errors are clustered by county. We conduct all our analysis first including

only fixed effects, then adding demographic controls, and, finally, adding geographic controls.

     Results are reported in Exhibit 3. Panel A graphs the relationship between TFE and new

business starts controlling for demographic and geographic characteristics, as well as state and

year fixed effects. For both outcome variables, we observe a positive relation to TFE. Panel B

presents the estimates for Equation (1). We find that a one standard deviation increase in TFE is

associated with an increase of between 3.7% and 5% in new business registrations (Columns (1)

to (3)). Columns (4) to (6) estimate the relation between TFE and EQI, which allows us to examine

the quality of the new business starts (the mix between new small business and high-growth

oriented business in the county). We observe a positive relation between TFE and EQI, but of

minimal economic magnitude: a one standard deviation increase in TFE is related to an increase

in EQI of approximately 1.25% over the unconditional mean.

     The main threat to causal identification lies in omitted variables correlated with both

contemporary culture and TFE. We address this concern in two ways. First, we note that, across



                                                15
the different specifications with different controls, the coefficient of interest remains stable, and

the increment in the R2 is small. This suggests that omitted correlated variables are unlikely to

affect our results (Oster 2019). Second, we use an IV strategy that isolates plausibly exogenous

variation in TFE due to changes in national immigration flows over time, as in Bazzi et al. (2020a).

     Our IV is based on historical shocks to the settlement process driven by immigration flows

to the U.S. These immigrants contributed to westward expansion by exerting population pressure

on the eastern seaboard, and by going west themselves. Thus, the flow of immigration determined

the time it took for frontier locations in different periods to become established settlements. We

isolate push factors by predicting migrant outflows from 16 European countries from 1820 to 1890

based on climate shocks (Sequeira et al. 2020). As in Bazzi et al. (2020a), we use country-specific

regressions to predict the annual migrant outflows from each European country to the U.S. as a

function of country-specific shocks to temperature and rainfall in the prior year. We then aggregate

across countries to obtain the total predicted migrant inflows to the U.S. for each year. Finally, we

construct the IV for each county by calculating the average annual predicted migrant inflow to the

U.S. over the 30 years starting from the first year in which the given county is just west of the

frontier. Hence, for each county in our sample, the instrument captures predicted climate-induced

emigration flows to the U.S. starting just before the onset of local frontier settlement. These time-

varying, national population shocks are unrelated to frontier counties' local conditions and help

move us closer to a causal interpretation. We label our IV "Log Average Predicted National

Migration Inflows".

     Exhibit 3 of Panel C reports the IV estimates. The first stage regressions (Columns (1) and

(3)), demonstrate a large and statistically significant effect of the IV on TFE, with first-stage F

statistics above relevant thresholds (Stock and Yogo 2005), indicating the relevance of the




                                                 16
instrument. Our instrumented TFE (Columns (2) and (4)) has a positive and slightly larger effect

on New Business Starts per Capita and Entrepreneurial Quality Index than in the OLS estimates.

A one standard deviation increase in TFE leads to an 8% increase in new business starts, and a 4%

increase in EQI (relative to the unconditional mean of 0.048). Taken together, these estimates

suggest that our findings are not driven by unobserved local conditions determining both TFE and

outcomes of interest today.

3.1.2. Historical Birthplace Diversity

     Next, in Exhibit 4 Panels A and B, we examine the role of historical diversity in immigrant

backgrounds in the county. We estimate a linear panel model similar to that in Equation (1), where

we replace TFE with Historical Birthplace Diversity in 1890. As before, we introduce

demographic and geographic controls gradually across the three models, and all specifications

include state and year fixed effects. Panel A shows the relationship between birthplace diversity

and new business starts controlling for demographic and geographic characteristics, as well as state

and year fixed effects. We observe a positive relationship between historical birthplace diversity

and new business registrations, but no relation between historical birthplace diversity and EQI.

     Similarly, the estimates of Equation (1) in Panel B exhibit a positive and significant

association between the historical birthplace diversity and new business starts per capita,

suggesting that on average, the diversity of viewpoints and values brought by immigrants creates

a persistent local culture that facilitates new business formation. The estimated effect is

economically significant: a one standard deviation increase in historical birthplace diversity is

associated with a 14% increase in new business registrations per capita. In contrast, we observe no

significant relationship between historical birthplace diversity and EQI. Taken together, evidence

in Panels A and B of Exhibit 4 suggests that a wider diversity of initial immigrant backgrounds



                                                17
supports greater entrepreneurial activity, but not necessarily a greater proportion of high-growth-

oriented business starts.

3.1.3. Terrain ruggedness and new business formations

     Finally, in Exhibit 4 Panels C and D we examine the relation between the topographical

features of the U.S. counties and new business formations. Once again, we estimate a linear panel

model similar to that in Equation (1), replacing TFE with the Terrain Ruggedness Index. In the

graphs reported in Panel C, and the estimates in Panel D, we observe a positive and significant

association between a county's terrain ruggedness and the number of business starts per capita. A

one standard deviation increase in geographical ruggedness is associated with a 14% increase in

new business registrations per capita. Similar to the results for TFE, we also observe a small

positive and statistically significant relationship between geographic terrain ruggedness and

entrepreneurial quality, in the order of magnitude of a 2% increase in the unconditional mean.

3.1.4. Interactive Effects

     The geographic and cultural factors we examine above are unlikely to be fully independent

of each other. Thus, in our next set of analyses, we estimate linear model similar to Equation (1)

in which we include all three factors as right-hand side variables (Exhibit 5, Panel A). Consistent

to the prior analysis, we first examine the model without controls (Column 1), then introduce

demographic controls (Column 2), and finally add geographic controls (Column 3). For robustness,

we also examine the model with all controls included for a subsample of years post-2000 (Column

4) and post-2005 (Column 5). As can be seen from the exhibit, the coefficients on all three

historical determinants retain their statistical and economic significance, with similar magnitudes

to those obtained in our single factor models.




                                                 18
     Next, in Panel B, we examine the interactive effects of the three factors. We augment our

specification with interactions of TFE with terrain ruggedness, interactions of historical diversity

with terrain ruggedness, or interactions of TFE with historical diversity. Panel B plots the

relationship between new business starts per capita and TFE across the quintiles of terrain

ruggedness and birthplace diversity, and similarly, the relationship between new business starts

per capita and birthplace diversity across quintiles of terrain ruggedness. While we observe a

positive relation between new business starts and historical diversity amongst quintiles of terrain

ruggedness, and a positive relation between new business starts and TFE amongst the upper

quintiles (quintile three and four) of terrain ruggedness, we find that the positive relation between

new business starts and TFE is stronger in the top quintile of historical diversity.

     In Panel C, we report formal estimates of our determinates' interactions in the spirit of

Equation (1). Column (1) adds the interaction of terrain ruggedness with TFE. While the individual

determinants maintain their positive and significant coefficients, the interaction term of TFE and

terrain ruggedness does not load significantly. In contrast, in Column (2), when we add the

interaction of terrain ruggedness with birthplace diversity, both the individual factors and the

interaction term load positively and significantly, and in Column (3), we similarly observe positive

and statistically significant loadings both for the individual factors and for the interaction of

birthplace diversity and TFE. Overall, the figures and tables suggest that in counties defined as

having higher historical birthplace diversity levels, the effects of terrain ruggedness and TFE on

new business formation are magnified.

3.1.5. Differential Minority Effects and Geographic and Cultural Determinates

     Our analysis on the relationship between new business starts and historical birthplace

diversity raises the natural question of whether such historical diversity may also affect



                                                 19
underrepresented minorities today. To examine this relation, we look at counties that today hold

large concentrations of minority groups, interacting historical diversity with the current fraction of

the minority population in the county (see Column 4 of Panel C of Exhibit 5). The estimates

suggest that counties with large concentrations of minority groups with low historical diversity

have lower per capita new business starts. Yet, minority counties characterized by high levels of

historical diversity are associated with higher levels of new business starts per capita.

     Taken together, our results suggest that while large concentrations of minority groups in

counties with no historical diversity lead to societal fragmentation and hinder new business

formation, minority groups integrated in a historically diverse environment lead to greater

entrepreneurial activity. This finding suggests that the positive effects of societal diversity may

take time to fully materialize.


                                       4. CONCLUSIONS

     This paper examines the role of geographic and key historical-cultural factors on shaping

new business formation. Using novel business registration data, we document that county fixed

effects explain approximately 75% of the new business registration variation over the entire sample

period (1988-2016). We provide evidence that time-invariant historical-cultural and geographic

factors explain a significant portion of the prevalence of entrepreneurial entry in a local area. Our

study document a fundamental role for America's frontier culture in shaping new business

formation and entrepreneurial activity in the U.S. These findings suggest a need for further

research exploring the role of cultural drivers of new business formation.




                                                 20
                                        REFERENCES

Agrawal, A., Cockburn, I., & Rosell, C. (2010). Not invented here? Innovation in company
    towns. Journal of Urban Economics, 67(1), 78-89.
Ager, P., & Brückner, M. (2013). Cultural diversity and economic growth: Evidence from the US
    during the age of mass migration. European Economic Review, 64, 76-97.
Ager, Philipp, and Markus Brueckner (2018). Immigrants' genes: Genetic diversity and
    economic development in the United States. Economic Inquiry 56, no. 2, 1149-1164.
Alesina, A., & Giuliano, P. (2015). Culture and institutions. Journal of Economic Literature,
    53(4), 898-944.
Bandiera, O., Burgess, R., Deserranno, E., Morel, R., Rasul, I., & Sulaiman, M. (2017). Social
    connections and the delivery of development programs. Work. Pap., London School Econ.
Barrios, J. M., Hochberg, Y. V., & Yi, H. (2020). Launching with a Parachute: The Gig
    Economy and Entrepreneurial Entry. University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for
    Economics Working Paper, (2020-21).
Bazzi, S., Fiszbein, M., & Gebresilasse, M. (2020a). Frontier culture: The roots and persistence
    of "rugged individualism" in the United States. Econometrica, 88(6), 2329-2368.
Bazzi, S., Fiszbein, M., & Gebresilasse, M. (2020b). Rugged Individualism and Collective (In)
    action During the COVID-19 Pandemic (No. w27776). National Bureau of Economic
    Research.
Burchardi, K. B., Chaney, T., & Hassan, T. A. (2019). Migrants, ancestors, and foreign
    investments. The Review of Economic Studies, 86(4), 1448-1486.
Catalini, C., Guzman, J., & Stern, S. (2019). Passive Versus Active Growth: Evidence from
    Founder Choices and Venture Capital Investment (No. w26073). National Bureau of
    Economic Research.
Davis, S. J., & Haltiwanger, J. (1992). Gross job creation, gross job destruction, and employment
    reallocation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3), 819-863.
Djankov, S., Ganser, T., McLiesh, C., Ramalho, R., & Shleifer, A. (2010). The effect of
    corporate taxes on investment and entrepreneurship. American Economic Journal:
    Macroeconomics, 2(3), 31-64.
Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Pagu (2004). Microfoundations of urban agglomeration economies,
    in J. Vernon Henderson, and JacquesFrancois Thisse, eds.: Handbook of Regional and
    Urban Economics (NorthHolland, Amsterdam).
Ellison, G., & Swanson, A. (2016). Do schools matter for high math achievement? Evidence
    from the American mathematics competitions. American Economic Review, 106(6), 1244-
    77.
Fazio, C., Guzman, J., & Stern, S. (2020). The impact of state-level research and development
    tax credits on the quantity and quality of entrepreneurship. Economic Development
    Quarterly, 34(2), 188-208.




                                               21
Giuliano, P., & Tabellini, M. (2020). The Seeds of Ideology: Historical Immigration and
   Political Preferences in the United States (No. w27238). National Bureau of Economic
   Research.

Glaeser, E. L. (Ed.). (2010). Agglomeration economics. University of Chicago Press.
Glaeser, E. L., & Kerr, W. R. (2009). Local industrial conditions and entrepreneurship: how
    much of the spatial distribution can we explain?. Journal of Economics & Management
    Strategy, 18(3), 623-663.
Glaeser, E. L., Kerr, S. P., & Kerr, W. R. (2015). Entrepreneurship and urban growth: An
    empirical assessment with historical mines. Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(2), 498-
    520.
Glaeser, E. L., Kerr, W. R., & Ponzetto, G. A. (2010). Clusters of entrepreneurship. Journal of
    urban economics, 67(1), 150-168.
Grosjean, P. (2014). A history of violence: The culture of honor and homicide in the US South.
    Journal of the European Economic Association, 12(5), 1285-1316.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., & Zingales, L. (2006). Does culture affect economic outcomes?. Journal
    of Economic perspectives, 20(2), 23-48.
Guzman, J., & Stern, S. (2020). The State of American Entrepreneurship: New Estimates of the
    Quantity and Quality of Entrepreneurship for 32 US States, 1988­2014. American Economic
    Journal: Economic Policy, 12(4), 212-43.
Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. S., & Miranda, J. (2013). Who creates jobs? Small versus large
    versus young. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), 347-361.
Hurst, E., & Lusardi, A. (2004). Liquidity constraints, household wealth, and
    entrepreneurship. Journal of political Economy, 112(2), 319-347.
Hurst, E., & Pugsley, B. W. (2011). What do small businesses do? (No. w17041). National
    Bureau of Economic Research.
Iyer, R., & Schoar, A. (2010). Are there cultural determinants of entrepreneurship?. In
    International differences in entrepreneurship (pp. 209-240). University of Chicago Press.
Jovanovic, B., & MacDonald, G. M. (1994). The life cycle of a competitive industry. Journal of
    Political Economy, 102(2), 322-347.
Landier, A., & Thesmar, D. (2008). Financial contracting with optimistic entrepreneurs. The
    Review of Financial Studies, 22(1), 117-150.
Manson, S., Schroeder, J., Van Riper, D., & Ruggles, S. (2017). Ipums national historical
    geographic information system: Version 12.0 [database]. Minneapolis: University of
    Minnesota, 39.
Nunn, N., & Puga, D. (2012). Ruggedness: The blessing of bad geography in Africa. Review of
    Economics and Statistics, 94(1), 20-36.
Oster, E. (2019). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence. Journal
    of Business & Economic Statistics, 37(2), 187-204.




                                              22
Ottaviano, G. I., & Peri, G. (2006). The economic value of cultural diversity: evidence from US
    cities. Journal of Economic geography, 6(1), 9-44.
Parsons, C. A., Sulaeman, J., & Titman, S. (2018). The geography of financial misconduct. The
    Journal of Finance, 73(5), 2087-2137.
Rapaport, E., & Snickars, F. (1999). gis-based road location in Sweden: A case study to
    minimize environmental damage, building costs and travel time. In Geographical information
    and planning (pp. 135-153). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Riley, S. J., DeGloria, S. D., & Elliot, R. (1999). Index that quantifies topographic heterogeneity.
    intermountain Journal of sciences, 5(1-4), 23-27.
Sequeira, S., Nunn, N., & Qian, N. (2020). Immigrants and the Making of America. The Review
    of Economic Studies, 87(1), 382-419.
Stock, J. H., & Yogo, M. (2005). Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression.
    Identification and inference for econometric models: Essays in honor of Thomas Rothenberg,
    80(4.2), 1.
Turner, F. J. (1893). The Significance of the Frontier in American History. Proceedings of the
    State Historical Society of Wisconsin.
Weber, M. (1904). Die" Objektivität" sozialwissenschaftlicher und sozialpolitischer Erkenntnis.
    Archiv für sozialwissenschaft und sozialpolitik, 19(1), 22-87.




                                                23
                                                                         EXHIBIT 1

     Panel A: Map of New Business Starts per capita                                     Panel B: Map of Total Frontier Experience




     Panel C: Map of Diversity of Birth Population in 1890.                             Panel D: Map of Terrain Ruggedness Index




Notes: This exhibit shows the geographic variation in our measure of new business formations as well as the measures of culture and geographic ruggedne ss. Panel A
shows the county's median variation in the number of new firm registrations per 1,000 people. Panel B shows the variation in Total Frontier Experience. Total frontier
experience is the total number of decades a county was within 100 km of the frontier line between 1790­1890 based on county-level data from NHGIS. The yellow areas
to the west are beyond the 1890 frontier line. Panel C shows the variation in Diversity of Birth Population in 1890, which is defined as one minus the Herfindahl-
Hirschman concentration index for country of birth in the county's population in 1890. Finally, Panel D shows the variation in the Terrain Ruggedness Index, which is
measured using 30-arc grid data on terrain variability (Nunn and Puga, 2012).




                                                                                 24
                                                                            EXHIBIT 2

                                                                                            Number of county-year-quarters with:
                                                                                       new business     above the       top quartile
                                                                                        registrations  median EQI           EQI
                                                                                             (1)           (2)              (3)

                                     Log(Number of County-Year-quarters)                 0.9659***       0.9174***        0.8414***
                                                                                          (0.0409)        (0.0380)         (0.0437)
                                     Costant                                               0.0076          0.0462           0.0252
                                                                                          (0.1941)        (0.1805)         (0.2075)

                                     N                                                      3,142          3,142             3,141
                                     Pseudo R2                                             0.0268          0.0611           0.0133
                                                                                           0.1436          0.0372           0.3155
                                     p- value                                              <0.001          <0.001           <0.001

Panel A: This table presents estimates from negative binomial regressions predicting the number of new business registrations (NBR) and Entrepreneurial Quality Index
(EQI) in each county. The dependent variable is the number of year-quarters with NBR in county c in Column (1), the number of year-quarters with firms with EQI above
the median in Column (2), and the number of year-quarters with firms with EQI in the top quartile in Column (3). The independent variable is the log of the number of
year-quarters in the county. The sample uses all counties in our sample. The parameter     is the estimated standard deviation of random effects at the county level. The p-
value corresponds to a 2 test of the null that    is 0. The significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: *** indicates statistical significance at the 1% level. The
observation unit is at the county level. The robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.




       Dependent Variable                             Year Fixed Effects      State Fixed Effects      County Fixed Effects Observations Adj R-squared
                       (1)                                   (2)                      (3)                      (4)              (5)           (6)

       Log New Business Starts per capita             1115.99 (< .0001)                                                                360,364           0.08
       Log New Business Starts per capita             1444.73 (< .0001)        2017.09 (< .0001)                                       356,820           0.30
       Log New Business Starts per capita             6169.63 (< .0001)                                  527.73 (< .0001)              360,364           0.83

       Entrepreneurial Quality Index                   524.62 (< .0001)                                                                211,394           0.06
       Entrepreneurial Quality Index                   589.61 (< .0001)        577.24 (< .0001)                                        209,781           0.17
       Entrepreneurial Quality Index                   593.86 (< .0001)                                   15.11 (< .0001)              211,378           0.22


Panel B: This table presents estimates from fixed effects panel regressions, where standard errors are clustered at the county level. For each dependent variable (as
reported in Column 1), the fixed effects included are row 1: year fixed effects; row 2: year and state fixed effects; row 3: year and county fixed effects. We also report F-
tests for the joint significance of the various fixed effects. For each F-test we report the value of the F-statistic and the p-value. Column 5 reports the number of
observations, and column 6 the adjusted R2s for each regression.




                                                                                    25
                                                                            EXHIBIT 3




Panel A: This panel plots our two measures of new business formation, log of New Business Starts per capita (left graph), and Entrepreneurial Quality Index (right graph)
against the county's Total Frontier Experience. Each plot includes controls for demographic characteristics of the county (population density, income per capita, republican
vote share and average property tax) and geographic characteristics (log of a county's surface area in square miles, the absolute latitudinal distance from the equator in
decimal degrees, the absolute longitudinal distance from the Greenwich Meridian in decimal degrees, the county-level average terrain elevation, the minimum distance
to the coastline, rivers, and lakes in meters), and year-state indicators.

                                                           Log New Business Starts per capita                           Entrepreneurial Quality Index
                                                          (1)           (2)               (3)                     (4)              (5)                (6)

                Total Frontier Experience             0.0373**         0.0501***           0.0470***            0.0000            0.0006***      0.0006***
                                                      (0.0155)          (0.0151)            (0.0154)           (0.0002)            (0.0002)       (0.0002)

                Demographic Controls                     No               Yes                Yes                 No                  Yes             Yes
                Geographic Controls                      No               No                 Yes                 No                  No              Yes
                State Fixed Effects                      Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes             Yes
                Year Fixed Effects                       Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes             Yes

                N                                       356,820         355,128         352,516              209,781           209,427            206,940
                Adj. R2                                  0.299           0.344           0.357                 0.172             0.186             0.189
Panel B: This table presents OLS estimates of equation (1). The dependent variables are log of New Business Starts per capita (Columns 1 -3) or the Entrepreneurial
Quality Index (Columns 4-6) measured at the county c and year-quarter t. Total Frontier Experience, is the number of decades that a given county spent on the frontier
from 1790 to 1890. The variable is standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. The specifications include controls for demographic characteristics
of the county: population density, per capita income, republican vote share and average property tax. We also control for geographic characteristics of the county: log of
a county's surface area in square miles, the absolute latitudinal distance from the equator in decimal degrees, the absolute longitudinal distance from the Greenwich
Meridian in decimal degrees, the county-level average terrain elevation, the minimum distance to the coastline, rivers, and lakes in meters. All specifications include state
and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by county. *p<0.10. **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

                                                                         Log New Business Starts per capita                Entrepreneurial Quality Index
                                                                             (1)                  (2)                       (3)                      (4)
                                                                         First Stage        Second Stage                First Stage            Second Stage

               X: Pred Total Frontier Experience                              ­                    0.0794**                  ­                  0.0020***
                                                                                                   (0.0341)                                      (0.0005)

               IV: Log Average Predicted National Migration Inflows      -0.6907***                    ­                -0.6476***                  ­
                                                                          (0.0287)                                       (0.0303)

               DemographicControls                                           Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes
               Geographic Controls                                           Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes
               State Fixed Effects                                           Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes
               Year Fixed Effects                                            Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes

               N                                                           352,516                 352,516                206,940                206,940
               Adj. R2                                                      0.590                   0.083                  0.617                  0.017
               First Stage F Statistic                                     580.20                                          456.70
Panel C: This panel reports instrumental variables estimates of equation (1) based on the instruments described in Section 3.1.1. The IV is based on annual migration
inflows to the US predicted by weather shocks in Europe. The first stage is reported in Columns 1 and 3 for each of the outcome measures ( log of New Business Starts
per capita and Entrepreneurial Quality Index). The second stage results are reported in Columns 2 and 4. Each specification includes controls for demographic
characteristics of the county: population density, per capita income, republican vote share and average property tax. We also control for geographic characteristics of the
county: log of a county's surface area in square miles, th e absolute latitudinal distance from the equator in decimal degrees, the absolute longitudinal distance from the
Greenwich Meridian in decimal degrees, the county-level average terrain elevation, the minimum distance to the coastline, rivers, and lakes in meters. All specifications
include state and year fixed effects. The first-stage F statistics Standard errors are clustered by county. *p<0.10. **p<0.05, ***p<0.0.



                                                                                      26
                                                                             EXHIBIT 4




Panel A: This panel plots our two measures of new business formation, log of New Business Starts per capita (left graph) and Entrepreneurial Quality Index (right graph)
against the county's Diversity in Birth Population in 1890. Each plot includes controls for demographic characteristics of the county (population density, income per
capita, republican vote share and average property tax) and geographic characteristics (log of a county's surface area in square miles, the absolute latitudinal distan ce
from the equator in decimal degrees, the absolute longitudinal distance from the Greenwich Meridian in decimal degrees, the county-level average terrain elevation, the
minimum distance to the coastline, rivers, and lakes in meters), and year-state indicators.
                                                                 Log New Business Starts per capita                             Entrepreneurial Quality Index
                                                               (1)            (2)                  (3)                    (4)                 (5)             (6)

                 Diversity of Birth Population in 1890      0.1922***        0.1450***         0.1421***            0.0031***               0.0001          0.0001
                                                             (0.0270)         (0.0257)          (0.0273)             (0.0006)              (0.0004)        (0.0004)

                 Demographic_Controls                          No               Yes               Yes                    No                   Yes            Yes
                 Geographic_Controls                           No               No                Yes                    No                   No             Yes
                 State Fixed Effects                           Yes              Yes               Yes                    Yes                  Yes            Yes
                 Year Fixed Effects                            Yes              Yes               Yes                    Yes                  Yes            Yes

                 N                                           352,064          350,372           347,760                 207,670            207,316         204,829
                 Adj. R2                                      0.313            0.351             0.365                   0.175              0.189           0.191
Panel B: This table presents OLS estimates of equation (1). The dependent variables are the log of New Business Starts per capita (Columns 1-3) or the Entrepreneurial
Quality Index (Columns 4-6) measured at the county c and year-quarter t. Diversity of Birth Population in 1890 is defined as one minus the Herfindahl-Hirschman
concentration index for country of birth in the county's population in 1890. We standardize this measure to be mean zero and standard deviation one. The specifications
include controls for demographic characteristics of the county: population density, per capita income, republican vote share, and average property tax. We also control
for geographic characteristics of the county: log of a county's surface area in square m iles, the absolute latitudinal distance from the equator, the absolute longitudinal
distance from the Greenwich Meridian, the county-level average terrain elevation, the minimum distance to the coastline, rivers, and lakes in meters. All specifications
include state and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by county. *p<0.10. **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




Panel C: This panel plots our two measures of new business formation log of New Business Starts per capita (left graph) and Entrepreneurial Quality Index (right graph)
against the county's Terrain Ruggedness Index. Each plot includes controls for demographic characteristics of the county (population density, income per capita,
republican vote share and average property tax) and geographic characteristics (log of a county's surface area in square miles, the absolute latitudinal distan ce from the
equator in decimal degrees, the absolute longitudinal distance from the Greenwich Meridian in decimal degrees, the county-level average terrain elevation, the minimum
distance to the coastline, rivers, and lakes in meters), and year-state indicators.
                                                               Log New Business Starts per capita                        Entrepreneurial Quality Index
                                                             (1)            (2)                 (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)

                 Terrain Ruggedness Index                0.1120***         0.1348***           0.1428***        -0.0002             0.0006***          0.0009***
                                                          (0.0210)          (0.0201)            (0.0211)       (0.0002)              (0.0002)           (0.0003)

                 Demographic_Controls                        No                Yes                Yes            No                     Yes                Yes
                 Geographic_Controls                         No                No                 Yes            No                     No                 Yes
                 State Fixed Effects                         Yes               Yes                Yes            Yes                    Yes                Yes
                 Year Fixed Effects                          Yes               Yes                Yes            Yes                    Yes                Yes

                 N                                         356,820           355,128            352,516        209,781               209,427             206,940
                 Adj. R2                                    0.307             0.355              0.366          0.172                 0.186               0.189
Panel D: This table presents OLS estimates in the spirit of equation (1). The dependent variables are the log of New Business Starts per capita (Columns 1-3) or the
Entrepreneurial Quality Index (Columns 4-6) measured at the county c and year-quarter t. Terrain Ruggedness Index is using 30-arc grid data on terrain variability based
on Nunn and Puga (2012). We standardize this measure to be mean zero and standard deviation one. The specifications include controls for demographic characteristics
of the county: population density, per capita income, republican vote share, and average property tax. We also include controls for geographic characteristics of the county:
log of a county's surface area in square miles, the absolute latitudinal distance from the equator, the absolute longitud inal distance from the Greenwich Meridian, the
county-level average terrain elevation, the minimum distance to the coastline, rivers, and lakes in meters. All specifications include state and year fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered by county. *p<0.10. **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
                                                                                       27
                                                                                                 EXHIBIT 5
                                                                                                                     Log New Business Starts per capita
                                                                                                  (1)               (2)             (3)                 (4)                            (5)

                                 Total Frontier Experience                                     0.0318**          0.0398***              0.0336**           0.0432**             0.0435**
                                                                                                (0.0156)          (0.0152)               (0.0158)           (0.0179)            (0.0182)
                                 Terrain Ruggedness Index                                      0.1016***         0.1219***              0.1291***          0.1427***           0.1434***
                                                                                                (0.0209)          (0.0202)               (0.0213)           (0.0240)            (0.0244)
                                 Diversity of Birth Population in 1890                         0.1887***         0.1317***              0.1329***          0.1532***           0.1520***
                                                                                                (0.0268)          (0.0256)               (0.0270)           (0.0311)            (0.0320)

                                 Demographic_Controls                                             No                Yes                    Yes                Yes                 Yes
                                 Geographic_Controls                                              No                No                     Yes                Yes                 Yes
                                 State Fixed Effects                                              Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes                 Yes
                                 Year Fixed Effects                                               Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes                 Yes
                                 Sample Years                                                    ALL               ALL                    ALL              Post-2000           Post-2005
                                 Observations                                                   352,064           350,372                347,760            191,872             131,912
                                 Adj. R2                                                         0.323             0.364                  0.375              0.365               0.360
Panel A: This panel presents OLS estimates in the spirit of equation (1) where we include Total Frontier Experience, Diversity of Birth Population in 1890, and Terrain
Ruggedness Index as contemporaneous right-hand side variables. In each specification we delineate which controls are used. We include controls for demographic
characteristics of the county: population density, per capita income, republican vote share, and average property tax. We also include controls for geographic characteristics
of the county: log of a county's surface area in square miles, the absolute latitudinal distance from the equator, the absolu te longitudinal distance from the Greenwich
Meridian, the county-level average terrain elevation, the minimum distance to the coastline, rivers, and lakes in meters. The last two columns examine two different
subsamples of years: post-2000 (Column 4) and post-2005 (Column 5). All specifications include state and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by county.
*p<0.10. **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




Panel B: This panel plots the relationship between new business starts per capita and TFE across the quintiles of terrain ruggedness and birthplace diversity, and similarly,
the relationship between new business starts per capita and birthplace diversity across quintiles of terrain ruggedness. The plotted coefficients are obtained by estimating
an augmented equation (1). The specifications include interactions of TFE with terrain ruggedness, interactions of birthplace historical diversity with terrain ruggedness,
or interactions of TFE with diversity of birth country. Each specification includes controls for demographic characteristics of the county: population density, per capita
income, republican vote share, and average property tax. We also include controls for g eographic characteristics of the county: log of a county's surface area in square
miles, the absolute latitudinal distance from the equator, the absolute longitudinal distance from the Greenwich Meridian, the county-level average terrain elevation, the
minimum distance to the coastline, rivers, and lakes in meters. All specifications include state and year fixed effects. The plotted coefficients include a two-tailed 95%
confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the county level. We provide a red line through the y-axis at zero for ease of interpretation.

                                                                                                                                         Log New Business Starts per capita
                                                                                                                               (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)

                                                       Total Frontier Experience                                            0.0342**                         0.0565***
                                                                                                                            (0.0158)                          (0.0168)

                                                       Terrain Ruggedness Index                                             0.1397***       0.1236***
                                                                                                                             (0.0214)        (0.0202)

                                                       Diversity of Birth Population in 1890                                                0.1324***        0.1544***        0.2154***
                                                                                                                                             (0.0273)         (0.0271)         (0.0548)

                                                       Minority                                                                                                               -0.0901**
                                                                                                                                                                               (0.0432)

                                                       Total Frontier Experience_X_Terrain Ruggedness Index                   0.0111
                                                                                                                             (0.0159)

                                                       Diversity of Birth Pop_X_Terrain Ruggedness                                           0.0373**
                                                                                                                                             (0.0166)

                                                       Diversity of Birth Pop_X_Total Frontier Experience                                                    0.0358**
                                                                                                                                                             (0.0178)

                                                       Diversity of Birth Pop_X_Minority                                                                                      0.1364***
                                                                                                                                                                               (0.0418)

                                                       Demographic_Controls                                                    Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
                                                       Geographic_Controls                                                     Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
                                                       State Fixed Effects                                                     Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
                                                       Year Fixed Effects                                                      Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes

                                                       N                                                                     352,516         347,760          347,760          76,500
                                                       Adj. R2                                                                0.367           0.375            0.367            0.407
Panel C: This panel presents OLS estimates in the spirit of equation (1) where we examine interactions between our various cultural/geographic measures. The dependent
variable is the Log New Business Starts per capita. We include interactions between TFE and Terrain Ruggedness Index (Column 1), Diversity of Birth Population in
1890 and Terrain Ruggedness (Column 2), TFE and Diversity of Birth Population in 1890 (Column 3), and Diversity of Birth Population in 1890 and Minority, which is
the average fraction of a county's Hispanic or African -American population from 2000 to 2010. Each specification includes controls for demographic characteristics of
the county: population density, per capita income, republican vote share, and average property tax. We also include controls for geographic characteristics of the county:
log of a county's surface area in square miles, the absolute latitudinal distance from the equator, the absolute longitudinal distance from the Greenwich Meridian, the
county-level average terrain elevation, the minimum distance to the coastline, rivers, and lakes in meters. All specifications include state and year fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered by county. *p<0.10. **p<0.05, ***p<0.01
                                                                                                            28
                                                                 APPENDIX


                                                                    Table A1
      Summary statistics                                       mean                     sd                p10           p50            p90
                                                                (1)                     (2)               (3)           (4)            (5)

      Dependent variables:
       Log New Business Starts per capita                     0.7969                  0.8036            0.0000        0.5640          1.9211
       Entrepreneurial Quality Index                          0.0484                  0.0397            0.0222        0.0411          0.0626

      Independent variables:
       Total Frontier Experience                              1.9478                  1.4504            0.0000        1.8000          4.0000
       Terrain Ruggedness Index                               0.0617                  0.0779            0.0082        0.0305          0.1670
       Diversity of Birth Population in 1890                  0.1854                  0.1931            0.0028        0.1061          0.4953
       Minority                                               0.2135                  0.1860            0.0329        0.1520          0.4916

      Control variables:
       Population density                                     196.66                 910.30              4.4042        44.459        351.52
       Income per capita                                      13,675                  3,108              10,334        13,312        17,381
       Average Republican Presidential vote share             59.577                 13.038              42.187        60.562        75.582
       Property tax rate                                      0.9776                 0.4654              0.4734        0.8846        1.6147
       Log county area                                        6.5232                 0.7714              5.7275        6.4413        7.4947
       Latitude                                               38.296                 4.8554              31.724        38.363        44.829
       Longitude                                             -91.775                 11.496             -107.75       -90.186        -78.363
       Mean elevation                                         435.13                 534.50              46.000        277.90        1087.8
       Distance to the coast                                 593,116                 427,034             51,565       558,069       1,212,278
       Distance to rivers                                     43,904                 39,195              7,674         33,960        90,282
       Distance to lakes                                     164,809                 111,423             32,929       147,863        314,570


Notes: This table presents the summary statistics for the variables used in the analysis. We report the mean, the standard deviation, the bottom
decile, the median and the top decile of the distribution for each variable. The variables are described in the Section 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4 in the paper.




                                                                         29
