                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                AFRICA'S LATENT ASSETS

                                        Soeren J. Henn
                                      James A. Robinson

                                      Working Paper 28603
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28603


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




We thank Avi Ahuja, David Kanos and Michel-Ange Lokota Illondo for their research assistance
and for many ideas and suggestions. We are grateful to Chima Korieh, Jeong Hyun Oh, Vincent
Tanutama, and Jenny Trinitapoli for very helpful discussions and to Alex Carr and Shelby
Grossman for editorial suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Soeren J. Henn and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Africa's Latent Assets
Soeren J. Henn and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 28603
March 2021
JEL No. H11,J6,O1,O11

                                         ABSTRACT

Despite the past centuries' economic setbacks and challenges, are there reasons for optimism
about Africa's economic prospects? We provide a conceptual framework and empirical evidence
that show how the nature of African society has led to three sets of unrecognized "latent assets."
First, success in African society is talent driven and Africa has experienced high levels of
perceived and actual social mobility. A society where talented individuals rise to the top and
optimism prevails is an excellent basis for entrepreneurship and innovation. Second, Africans,
like westerners who built the world's most successful effective states, are highly skeptical of
authority and attuned to the abuse of power. We argue that these attitudes can be a critical basis
for building better institutions. Third, Africa is "cosmopolitan." Africans are the most
multilingual people in the world, have high levels of religious tolerance, and are welcoming to
strangers. The experience of navigating cultural and linguistic diversity sets Africans up for
success in a globalized world.


Soeren J. Henn
Innovations for Poverty Action &
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1307 E 60th St.
Chicago, IL 60637
soeren.henn@gmail.com

James A. Robinson
University of Chicago
Harris School of Public Policy
and Department of Political Science
1307 East 60th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637
and NBER
jamesrobinson@uchicago.edu
1        Introduction

Supposedly, it is (Sub-Saharan) Africa's "Turn" (Miguel, 2009), it is "Emerging" (Radelet, 2010),
"Rising" (Frankema and van Waijenburg, 2018), and full of "Lions on the Move" (McKinsey,
2010). But are there real grounds for such optimism and if so what are they? Development
economists have been wrong on Africa before. In 1961 Paul Rosenstein-Rodan, one of the
founders of development economics, made some projections based on his understanding of the
"economic fundamentals." He argued that "prospects of good ... rates of growth seem to appear
for Tanganyika, Nigeria, Kenya, Uganda, and Ghana" (p. 111) indeed, higher than in Singapore,
South Korea or Taiwan.
        Since Rosenstein-Rodan wrote, Africa has had a tough time economically and socially.1 In
fact, Africa hasn't just had a bad 60 years, one could say it has had a bad 400 years. Since the
ramping up of the Transatlantic slave trade in the 17th century, Africa has experienced sustained
economic stagnation and many adverse changes in society. This was connected to slavery (Inikori,
1983, Nunn, 2008, Nunn and Wantchekon, 2011, Teso, 2019), colonialism (Mamdani, 1996,
Young, 1997, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2016,
Lowes and Montero, 2019), post-colonial realities of autocracy (Bates, 1981), the Cold War
(Dube, Kaplan and Naidu, 2011, Schmidt, 2013, Cheeseman, 2015) and possibly foreign aid
(Nunn and Qian, 2014).2
        But prior to 1978 China had a very bad 200 years. By the second half of the 18th century
the Qing state was collapsing fiscally and wracked by corruption. The granary system of social
insurance withered away, the Grand Canal silted up, and China was convulsed by civil wars like
the Taiping Rebellion which claimed perhaps 20 million lives. The Imperial state disintegrated,
there was rampant warlordism, a communist revolution, the Great Leap Forward, and then the
Cultural Revolution. But despite all these calamities, it turned out that China has large latent
advantages, or assets, on which economic prosperity could be built, even though apparently
necessary institutions were missing in many dimensions. A central asset was a social norm that,
as Confucius put it, one should "promote those who are worthy and talented" (2003, p. 138).
The norm of meritocracy, turned out to be a powerful plinth on which to build an inclusive
market economy. It probably reaches back even further than Confucius

          Ning Yue was a man from the outskirts of Zhongmou; he was bitter at the labor of
    1
     Africa of course is not a country but a very heterogeneous continent with many cultures and traditions. In
fact, this diversity, and its many benefits, is one of our key arguments. We present data which presents the picture
of Africa "on average" but we also try to explore as much of this heterogeneity as possible.
   2
     We cannot do justice here to large scholarly literature on all these topics.


                                                         1
        tilling and sowing and said to his friend: "How can I escape this bitterness?" His
        friend replied: "The best is to learn. After learning for thirty years, you will fulfill
        [your goals]." Ning Yue said: "I pledge to make it within fifteen years. When others
        are to rest, I shall not dare to rest; when others are asleep, I shall not dare to sleep."
        He learned for fifteen years and became the teacher of Lord Wei of Zhou. (quoted in
        Pines 2013, pp. 177-178)

      The story of Ning Yue, reproduced in a text written during the Warring States period
just before the rise of the first Chinese dynasty in 221 BC, depicts a society characterized by
remarkable social mobility and meritocracy. Ning Yue was a nobody, but he could aspire to be
a teacher of Lord Wei. The norm was so deeply rooted that China and the surrounding areas
it influenced (particularly Vietnam and Korea) became the only part of the world which had a
pre-modern elite chosen by an examination system.3
      In this essay we pose the question: if China could have a bad 200 years but still maintain, or
even develop, latent assets, could the same thing be true about Africa? None of these mattered
for economic prosperity in China until some basic issues of governance were solved, as they were
by Deng Xiaoping and successive Chinese political elites. Such governance challenges certainly
exist in Africa. But could Africa possess, have sustained, or created such latent assets?
      We argue that the answer to this question is yes and it is here that genuine optimism about
African prosperity begins. To give a sense of where one might expect such assets, in the next
section we provide a simple framework for thinking about African society based mostly on our
reading of the relevant anthropological, historical and sociological literatures. African society
was, and is, organized around networks. These networks are used to access economic resources
and create political power and they can be invested in. Their focus is on people and personal
relationships and they imply a great deal of social mobility because links to more capable or
talented people are more valuable. They bridge other social structures, even ethnicity, and
were forged in historic periods of migration and movement which bred very flexible attitudes
towards strangers (people, whoever they were, were always valued). The basis of political power
in personalized networks combined with what Vansina (1990) describes as an intense desire
to "safeguard the internal autonomy of each community" (p. 119) to keep the scale of African
polities small. They were based on networks and wary of the abuse of authority. This framework
implies the presence of three sets of latent assets in African society.
      The first asset is that, like China, the majority of African societies are built on achieved,
  3
      There were of course other pre-modern meritocratically organized states, for example in Ancient Egypt.


                                                        2
not ascribed status. Unlike in India with its religiously enforced caste system, or Latin America
with its ingrained "castas" and inequalities, in Africa anyone can get ahead just like Ning Yue
did. Like the type of meritocracy that has deep roots in China, the achievement basis of African
society is also deep seated, if rarely institutionalized via an examination system. In historic
Africa, even slaves who had the capacities got to the top. We illustrate this fact with several
sources of information. First, survey data on perceived and expected social mobility shows
Africa to be the most socially mobile part of the world. Africans are also the most optimistic
about future mobility. Perceptions are important because they determine people's actions and
effort and also their policy preferences (Alesina, Stantcheva and Teso, 2018). Nevertheless, we
also show with data on observed educational mobility that Africa is more socially mobile than
Latin America or South Asia and some countries in Africa are as mobile as Western Europe.
What would be the basis for such optimism? Despite the clich´
                                                            e that Africa is a continent of
corruption where connections and social networks are critical to people's opportunities, in fact
Africans are more likely to say that the way to get ahead economically is via hard work. Their
opinions about this are similar to those of people in the United States. These beliefs manifest
themselves in the types of attitudes they transmit to their children.
       Though there is a great deal of corruption in Africa, so is there in China, yet in the Chinese
case the incentives and opportunities created by the norm of meritocracy seem more powerful
quantitatively. Why not in Africa?
       The second latent asset we call "skepticism of authority." Unlike many societies in East Asia,
Africa is much more like Western liberal democracies in its anticipation that political power will
be abused. African oral history and political theory is full of the anticipation of miss-rule,
often in the form of a "drunken king" (de Heusch, 1982), and it generally lacks the notion of a
"redeemer" (Krauze, 2011) or charismatic personal rule so central to the emergence of populism
in Latin America and elsewhere. This skepticism has of course not stopped power being abused
in post-colonial Africa, but we argue that, just as in the United States at the time of the
Constitution, this skepticism can provide the basis for building inclusive and effective political
institutions. We illuminate this by presenting data on attitudes in Africa towards one-man rule
and we show how these are related to the history of political development in Africa.
       The final asset we identify is "cosmopolitanism."4 Because of the heterogeneous and small
scale nature of African society, Africans endlessly have to deal with differences: different lan-
guages, different cultures, different histories. This history is reflected in African languages where
   4
    We borrow this word inspired by Appiah (2007), but we use it in a positive sense, not as a normative ideal
as he proposes.



                                                      3
the word for "stranger" is typically the same word as for "guest." We argue that this makes
Africans the most able culturally to cope with a modern globalized world; people who can deal
with difference and adapt will succeed. Though much social science attempts to portray this
diversity as a burden, which may be true in some specific contexts, we argue that it is in fact
an asset. One way we illustrate this asset is by showing that Africa is the most multi-lingual
continent in the world. Though it may not be specifically advantageous to speak Lingala or
Kikongo in New York, London or Paris, we argue that the ability and willingness of Africans to
master so many languages is indicative of the great suppleness of cosmopolitan African society
and in line with a recent literature in social psychology, it helps Africans to take and appreciate
the perspectives of others (see Kinzler, 2020, for an overview).
    Thus far these assets are latent and we do not under-estimate the challenges to building
better institutions in Africa in the difficult context that colonial powers bequeathed (Acemoglu
and Robinson, 2012). Moreover, the analogy to China is made complicated by the fact that
unlike Africa, China has a long history of consolidated state authority with a common system
of writing and something approximating a common culture. These features almost certainly
helped Deng Xiaoping move the country onto a path of reform. Yet, these features also helped
implement the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution. It is not obvious that the type
of challenges that Deng overcame are larger than those that face African leaders. Moreover,
many doubt that the hegemony of authoritarianism is consistent with sustaining the prosperity
that China has generated in the past 40 years. Here Africa may have systematic advantages
over China.


2    A Simple Framework

There is a great deal of agreement amongst scholars of Africa about some basic elements of
African society which are relevant to our arguments. African society is built around personalized
networks and was mostly organized in small scale polities.

African society is built around flexible networks

African society was, and is, highly personalized and organized around networks. These included
genetically related kin, but also fictive kin. In many contexts wealth was measured in "people"
(Miers and Kopytoff, 1977, coined the expression "wealth in people" to describe this) as much
as in material form--a person was rich if they had a lot of social connections (Bledsoe, 1980,
and Guyer, 1993, are seminal studies). This priority is manifested in proverbs. For example, a



                                                4
Yoruba one states

      A gift of money is not equal in value to a [gift of a] person (Owomoyela, 2005, p.
      292).5

    The networked nature of African society is not a historical curiosity but rather provides
a framework for understanding its contemporary nature. Smith (2004, p. 227) notes in his
ethnography that "The enduring salience of these "wealth in people" proverbs in contemporary
Nigeria reflects the continued importance of "having people" in a different kind of political
economy" and that "very striking in the interviews and observations of peoples' daily lives was
the continued importance of "having people" as the means through which individuals, families,
and communities gain access to social resources in an economic context based on patron-client
ties" (p. 233).6
    These networks were related to and interwoven with two sets of institutions which are also
important to our discussion. One was social structures such as lineages, clans, age sets and
age grades, and various types of association and societies. The second was the continuum of
different types of status which ran from free at one end to slave at the other.
    Early work by anthropologists attempted to clarify the relationship between these networks
and social structures. For example, Gulliver observes that even in segmentary lineage societies,
where it might appear that one's position in a particular descent group determined all one's
relationships "The network is still there ... but it is simpler, and it has been possible to ignore
its persisting non-group features" (1971, p. 347).
    A key aspect is that while networks might start with kinship, they are much broader and more
flexible than that. Gulliver (1971) notes in his study of the Ndendeuli of Tanzania that "even
with declared non-kin, interaction was oriented in terms of kinship ... That the "objective"
facts of genealogical connection could be ignored, blurred, or even altered did not diminish
the real value of the kinship idiom" since it "provided an language ... by which to standardize
expectations and to provide guide-lines of a kind everyone could follow" (p. 351). An implication
of these observations is that networks were not determined by actual kinship and "in actuality
men joined [networks] for a variety of reasons, only one of which, if at all, was the straight kinship
tie" (p. 225). Gulliver recorded how some people were much better at creating these networks
   5
     The concept also appears centrally in Yoruba Ifa Divination Verses. Number 131-1 tells the story of Ajaolele
who "had become an important person" because he had "become someone with a following" (Bascom, 1969, pp.
369-371).
   6
     This model of African society is at the root of concepts such as "patrimonialism" and "prebendalism" heavily
used by political scientists to describe post-colonial African states, for example Turner and Young (1985) and
Bratton and van de Walle (1997).


                                                       5
than others. One was a man called Kabaya who "began to gain a reputation for influence and
leadership, and then be acknowledged as a "big man"" (p. 103). Kabaya's particular skill was
"his ability to smooth out disputes arising from conflicts in the timetabling of agricultural work-
parties" (p. 103). The endogenous and "fictive" elements of networks are common features
of the literature (Berry, 1993, for an overview). For example Glazier (1985), studying the
Mbeere in Kenya, noted how "genealogically unconnected [clan] segments developed into kin-
based corporations whose major raison d'etre is the control of land" (p. 181, 183) and to
establish rights to land descent is not sufficient, or even necessary, but "contributions of money
and labor are essential" (p. 183). In Mbeere society Glazier even showed that the rate at which
people "advanced through the age grades depended in their investment in seniority" (1985, p.
90).7
       So social structures shape networks and the types of links that form, but do not determine
them in a rigid way. The same seems to be true of the other important set of issues surrounding
status (see Smith, 1966, and Southall, 1970, for overviews). Here too, a key feature seems to
be the fluidity with which one could change one's social position. For example, historically,
slavery in Africa was radically different from chattel slavery in the Americas. Slaves were
quickly absorbed into kinship systems and became part of one's "people." Tuden and Plotnicov
discuss how amongst the Ila "slaves were introduced ... as types of kinsmen" and "The bondage
period itself was temporary and the inferior position transitory" (1970, p. 13) and they go on
to conclude "the Ila represent the general conditions of slavery in Africa" (p. 13). As Klein
put it "The acquisition of slaves ... was one way either big men or descent groups increased
their numbers and thus, their power" (2009, p. 172). Therefore slaves fitted into the "wealth
in people" model. Within this there was a great deal of flexibility and in many contexts, if
they had ability, they could get to the top (Jones, 1963, for some famous examples in southern
Nigeria like Jaja who became King of Opobo). Lovejoy (2000, p. 187) notes in this context
"Rank was acquired, and slavery was not a serious obstacle to improving one's status." Tuden
and Plotnikov discuss the "rapid mobility within traditional African slavery" (p. 23).8
       Outside the institution of slavery there certainly were more rigid systems of caste stratifi-
cation that appeared in parts of Africa, notably the Sahel (Tamari, 1991, Conrad and Frank,
1995) and the Great Lakes region, particularly Rwanda (Maquet, 1961) and surrounding poli-
ties like Ankole with similar institutions (Doornbos, 1978). Ethiopian "feudalism" also diverged
   7
   See also the essays in Mitchell (1969).
   8
   Smith (1959) documented that slaves were found at all socio-economic levels in Hausa society and could hold
important offices in the state and thus wield power over free people.



                                                      6
from the general pattern (Crummey, 1980). But quantitatively these do not seem to be large
relative to other parts of the world. The Rwandan distinction between Hutu and Tutsi was only
institutionalized in the 19th century (Vansina, 2004) and the social innovations here seem to be
rather anomalous (right down to the hereditary nature of the military). Tuden and Plotnicov
(1970) conclude their overview of systems of stratification in Africa societies by making a similar
observation "In most, mobility is both great and rapid, but there are also distinct exceptions,
such as ... Rwanda" (p. 7). Fallers (1973) emphasized the achievement basis of society in
Buganda, an interesting case since it was one of the most centralized states of the pre-colonial
period.
       The thrust of this literature therefore is that while social structure and status may influence
ones' options, they interact with networks which are flexible and endogenous to peoples efforts--
hence the emphasis on "big men." Networks may "tax" people and redistribute,9 but they also
provide opportunities and people invest in them (Berry, 1989, Parkin, 1972). In our view this
model of fluid and responsive networks is the theoretical basis to expect African society to be
achievement based today.
       These mechanisms applied to women as well as men. Women were deeply involved in eco-
nomic activities, particularly agriculture (Boserup, 2007, Chapter 1) and this spread into trade.
In West Africa, for example, market trade was dominated by women (Boserup, 2007, Chapter
5, Achebe, 2020, Chapter 3).10 Women were valuable members of networks and were just as
capable as building them as men.
       The achieved nature of status in Africa was likely accentuated by the history of migration
and the occupation of the territory. As Kopytoff (1987) put it, in many ways Africa is a "frontier
society." The nature of the frontier society is evident in the dominance in oral histories of the
role of outsiders in the founding of polities, for example Shambaa (Feierman, 1974) and Ufipa
(Willis, 1981) in Tanzania, or Mamprusi, Dagomba and Gonja in Ghana (Rattray, 1932) and
in all the states of that formed in the Congolese Savanna (see Vansina, 1966, on the Luba and
Lunda).
       These frontier movements, like the Bantu or the Mande expansions, created considerable
opportunities for the formation of new networks and upward mobility. There seem to have been
three ways in which the frontier aspect strengthened the networked basis of society. First, to
settle new areas one needed people. Thus wealth in people became very important, otherwise
  9
    This topic is the focus of a large literature, e.g., Jakiela and Ozier (2016).
  10
    Clark's work (1994, 2010) on market women in Ghana is particular testament to their abilities to take
advantage of opportunities and the potential for social mobility.




                                                    7
it is hard to convince people to move. Second, most areas were already settled by someone.
Domination and occupation was not a sustainable mode of expansion, but instead far more
consensual forms of incorporation took place. Third, and related to the second, new rulers
usually incorporated the successful aspects of previous societies to gain skills and legitimacy.                 11 .

       The more consensual nature of these expansions is illustrated by the evidence that, because
people were wealth, outsiders, or "strangers" were welcomed. Miers and Kopytoff (1977, p. 14)
argue

         African societies were receptive to all opportunities for bringing outsiders into their
         midst as dependents and retainers. This readiness and willingness to absorb people
         is a fact.12

       These attitudes are again heavily represented in proverbs. A Yoruba one states: "The visi-
tor's host is the visitor's father" (Owomoyela, 2005, p. 339). Colson (1970, p. 41) notes based on
Zambian materials that "Innumerable Tongan proverbs play upon the desirability of being visited
by strangers and the good treatment that should be extended to the stranger/guest". Southall
described a process in Uganda with the emergence of the Alur state, also the construction of
outsiders, which is likely representative of the Bantu expansion more generally: "Although in
each initial settlement situation the proliferating segments of the chiefly lineages were a layer
of higher rank as it were over the populations among whom they settled, this situation was not
perpetuated in caste terms, but by limited intermarriage and acculturation moved towards a
more homogeneous society in which there were no absolute discontinuities of rank" (Southall,
1956, p. 54).13 Southall documents how the Alur were invited to form a state by a number
of stateless societies. This was a very different process from the settlement of Indian by Aryan
groups who incorporated indigenous peoples at the bottom of the caste hierarchy. In Fourshey,
Gonzales and Saidi's (2018) account, the African pattern went along with the emergence of
norms of hospitality and reciprocity.
       This merging of peoples is clear from well documented ethnographic work. Schapera (1952,
p. 65) for instance noted that in the Ngwato reserve of Botswana, a mere 20% of people were
Ngwato. The rest were strangers who had been integrated into the polity (see Wilson (1979)
  11
     Examples include the existing hunter-gatherers in the rain forest, or local ritualists who might be incorporated
into the new kingdom (for example on Idwji island in Lake Kivu (see Newbury, 1992)).
  12
     Wilson (1979) states "Strangers were welcome; they added to the dignity and power of a chief" (p. 55) while
Colson observes "No matter how different the system is from which the foreigner stems, he can be absorbed"
(1970, p. 43).
  13
     See Fourshey, Gonzales and Saidi (2018) on the broad applicability of this model, see also the essays in Shack
and Skinner (1979).



                                                         8
for other similar examples). In the Tswana case political institutions facilitated this integration
while in other cases strangers started new clans. Often they were merged into the kinship
system even when "no kinship is known to exist" (Colson, 1970, p. 42). In the Tonga case
Colson studied this was done by the "placing of a person within the clan system" (p. 42).
      It might seem surprising that a network based society would have survived the spread of
markets, commercialization and "modernization", but the evidence is overwhelming that it has
and that networks have flexibly re-formed and spread to cope with change and new challenges.
Berry (1993) concludes "Over the course of the twentieth century, the growth of markets in
right to land, labor and capital goods did not diminish the importance of social relationships
for farmers' access to productive resources" which have "remained clearly linked to membership
in descent groups, communities and patron-client networks" (p. 159) and to "multiply their
options in a rapidly changing world, Africans have created new networks as well as multiplied
their membership in existing ones" (p. 165).

Historical African polities were small scale

The networked nature of African society is connected to perhaps the salient political fact of
historical African polities: they were small scale.14 Southall (1970) notes that "before they were
cut short by the nineteenth century onslaught of the Western imperial powers, the indigenous
societies and autonomous polities of Africa had to be counted in the thousands" (p. 231).
This political fact, often gets lost in the contemporary discussion of "ethnic groups." The
Yoruba or Mende, for example, might be a linguistic or cultural group, but they were never
unified politically and in the pre-colonial period were organized into independent states. This
fragmentation is even more evident amongst less centralized societies like the Igbo or Kikuyu.
Talbot (1926) for example, divided Igboland into thirty "sub-tribes" and twice that number of
clans (pp. 39-41) but one might more appropriately take a "village group" as the fundamental
polity of which there were about 200 (Forde and Jones, 1950).
      A quantitative sense of the extent to which Africans were living historically in small scale
societies can be gained by combining the classification of political institutions according to "levels
of jurisdictional hierarchy" in Murdock's Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock, 1967) with estimates
of historical population sizes. Murdock coded a variable which ran from 1, meaning "No levels
(no political authority beyond community)", 2 ("petty chiefdoms"), 3 ("larger chiefdoms"), to 4
"Three levels (e.g., states)" and finally 5 "Four levels (e.g., large states)". Using the estimates of
population in Africa in 1880 from the HYDE (Historical Database of the Global Environment)
 14
      Gluckman (1966) relates this fact to many different aspects of African society.


                                                         9
project we can calculate the proportion of Africans that lived in states in 1880. We present
these findings in Table 1. If one takes as states ethnic groups in the Murdock dataset that are
coded as having 4 or 5 levels of jurisdictional hierarchy then only 30% of Africans were living
in polities which had a state in 1880. If one takes the more restrictive definition of large state,
then the proportion is only 4.4%. Either way, a large majority of Africans were not living in
states in the pre-colonial period.
          There are many mechanisms that can account for this small scale,15 but one is likely the
networked nature of society. Political power based on personal connections, similar to the big
man notions we have mentioned, based on accumulating followers and "wealth in people," is
intrinsically difficult to scale up. Moreover, it cannot be managed at a large scale and inhibits
the concentration and institutionalization of power. As a Mende proverb from Sierra Leone puts
it

            when a big tree falls, the birds in it scatter (quoted in Little, 1954, p. 113)

          Personalized power is intrinsically hard to pass on and when someone who possesses it dies
(the "big tree falls") their people dissipate and cannot be passed on ("the birds . . . scatter").
          This is not the only reason for small political scale. Perhaps the most influential argument
is that of Vansina (1990) who suggests that

            Africans grappled in an original way with the question of how to maintain local
            autonomy paramount, even while enlarging the scale of society (p. 101).

          In his theory of Central African political development people created institutions in order to
"safeguard the internal autonomy of each community" (p. 119) and though familiar pressures
such as population growth, or the need to provide public goods, did lead to the "birth of some
chiefdoms, even kingdoms" it mostly "led to the birth of new forms of association to safeguard
the autonomy of the basic community in a time of expansion" (p. 119). In Vansina's account,
the type of lineages of a people like the Tiv, which we discuss shortly, or the societies of the
Igbo, both arose as "a defensive reflex for the autonomy of small groups against the growing
centralization and at the same time a mechanism to defend the advantageous positions gained
... within such a structure" (p. 154). In other words, because Africans were concerned that
state institutions would be abused at the expense of local communities they devised political
     15
    Political scientists like Herbst (2000) have focused on structural features of Africa, such as low population
density and the lack of inter-state warfare, but there is little empirical evidence supporting these claims, e.g.,
Osafo-Kwaako and Robinson (2013). Goody (1971) instead emphasized how state formation was inhibited by the
presence of the tse-tse fly which made it impossible to use cavalry in much of Africa--Alsan (2015) for evidence.


                                                       10
institutions that would stop this. The desire to "safeguard ... autonomy" is everywhere evident
in the ethnographic literature. Gulliver, while he observed the presence of Big Men also noted
that "they were not so ambitious that they sought to acquire authority" since that would "defeat
his own ends" given that "His neighbours would have reacted strongly against the suspicion of
authoritarianism, or pretension to it" (1971, pp. 244-245).
   One of the best documented accounts of this desire to "safeguard ... autonomy" is Bohannan's
studies of the Tiv of Nigeria. Bohannan tried to identify the politics which had kept them
"stateless" prior to the colonial period. He showed empirically, through studying a cult called
Nyambua, that this was because

     Men who had acquired too much power ... were whittled down by means of witchcraft
     accusations ... Nyambua was one of a regular series of movements to which Tiv
     political action, with its distrust of power, gives rise to so that the greater political
     institutions - the one based on the lineage system and a principle of egalitarianism
     - can be preserved (1958, p. 11)

   In Bohannan's argument, larger political scale could not emerge in Tiv society because the
type of hierarchy it would have involved was not trusted. It was anticipated that authority
would be abused and the best solution for this was to avoid putting anyone into positions of
authority, as with the Ndendeuli. The form that this whittling down took was to accuse people
of committing witchcraft and being a man of "tsav," which signified both legitimate charisma,
but also illicitly acquired power. As Bohannan put it "The most powerful men, no matter how
much they are respected or liked, are never fully trusted. They are men of tsav - and who
knows?" (Bohannan, 1958, p. 3)
   Another well studied case in Nigeria is Igboland. In their seminal studies Meek (1937), Green
(1947) and Afigbo (1981) pointed out how political power was distributed in many institutions
in Igbo society in such a way as to maintain the autonomy of the constituent groups and stop
more centralized political institutions emerging. Villages themselves tended to be divided into
two halves (Meek (1937, p. 88-89) calls them "kindreds" and that word is commonly used today
in Igboland) which were in "balanced opposition" to each other. In the part of Igboland studied
by Margaret Green (see also Jones, 1949), the Abaja village group, they were called Ama and
Owerri

     The working village affairs was considerably bound up with the system of checks and
     balances and of institutionalized rivalry introduced by this dualism (Green, 1947, p.

                                                11
        16).

      Like that of the Tiv, the desire to preserve their autonomy is widely noticed about Igbo
society.16 James Africanus Horton, whose father was an Igbo, noted about the Igbo in 1868 that

        They would not, as a rule, allow anyone to act the superior over them; nor sway
        their conscience by coercion, to the performance of any act, whether good or bad,
        when they have not the inclination to do so ... in fact everyone likes to be his own
        master (2011, p. 182).

      The Igbo case is particularly interesting because it foregrounds the role of women in preserv-
ing autonomy. As Achebe (2020) puts it "Authority was divided between men and women in a
dual-sex political system in which each sex managed and controlled its own affairs. The Igbo
had two arms of government, male and female" (p. 96). The power of women disciplined male
authorities (van Allen, 1972) and was also central in opposing colonial rule, leading to the Aba
Women's War of 1929 which forced the British to dismantle the hated and ineffective Warrant
chief system (Achebe, 2005). In fact that study of Green (1947) (and Leith-Ross, 1939) was
motivated by a desire on the part of British colonial authorities to understand the unexpected
power of Igbo women.
      The role of women is central to understanding the nature of African polities. This is obviously
so when they assumed political office, as in Mendeland (Day, 2012) in Sierra Leone, amongst the
Mamprusi of Ghana (Brown, 1975) or the Lovedu of South Africa (Krige and Krige, 1947). But
it is more subtly and broadly true when they assumed complementary political offices, what
Achebe calls a system of "joint sovereignty" (p. 71). Emblematic examples of this are the
Queen Mothers of Swaziland or Asante (Aidoo, 1982, Stoeltje, 1997) or the Mammy Queens of
Temneland in Sierra Leone (see Achebe, 2020, Chapter 2 for many other examples).
      Vansina did not advance an explanation for why Africans were so concerned to "safeguard
... autonomy" but the literature on African studies suggests several ideas. One, due to Horton
(1993), is that the nature of African religious beliefs were very synergetic with small scale society.
Horton points out that

        In many ... traditional African belief systems, ideas about the spirits and actions
        based on such ideas are far more richly developed than ideas about the supreme
        being and actions based on them. In these cases, the idea of God seems more the
 16
      Henderson (1972) is a famous study.



                                                  12
     pointer to a potential theory than the core of a seriously operative one. This perhaps
     is because social life in the communities involved is so parochial that their members
     seldom have to place events in the wider context that the idea of the supreme being
     purports to deal with (p. 211).

   Horton's argument is that religious beliefs kept society local and small scale, or as he puts
it "parochial."
   Our discussion of the Tiv and Igbo does not exhaust the types of institutions that were used
to sustain autonomy. Elsewhere in Africa the same types of forces were dealt with using very
different types of social organizations and institutions than they were in Southern Nigeria. In
East Africa, for example, small scale political society is guaranteed through the organization of
society around age sets and age grades. In a society like the Maasai, for instance, power was
allocated according to age. Power was held by the most senior elders, but they inevitably passed
away and were replaced by a new age set.

     Age Class systems are unique, for not only do they regulate the attainment of indi-
     vidual maturity and autonomy, but they regulate the distribution and rotation of all
     forms of power (Bernardi, 1985, p. 9).

   Bernardi says of the Maasai that "their age class system shows how the distributive nature of
the system is assured against possible individual attempts at personal power" (p. 57). Elsewhere
he notes that these systems made sure that "no clan and no class, or no party, [can] stay in the
limelight too long" (p. 107) and that "it is likely that the succession of classes to power served
as a check impeding the formation of a centralized state" (p. 107). Thus the Maasai achieved
what the Tiv and Igbo did, but using very different mechanisms.
   The personalized nature of power was not only difficult to scale up, but when it was, it
tended to create unstable states. State failure is not novel to post-colonial Africa, there was
rather a lot of it in pre-colonial Africa (Jones (1983) for a brilliant case study in 19th century
Sierra Leone). Gluckman (1965) pointed out that very few pre-colonial states in Africa had
clear and institutionalized lines of succession. Usually large numbers of people were eligible to
succeed to high office and he pointed out that this led to constant civil wars. The fundamental
reason, in his account, for this absence of institutionalization was that it provided a mechanism
to stop fission and tie valuable people to the state--it created an expectation that any sub-group
could aspire to hold power at the center.
   This account of African political development and philosophy illustrates the depth of the


                                               13
skepticism towards authority in the continent, indeed it is central to its political history.17 It is
also intimately related to the networked nature of African society.

Effects of colonialism on African society

Whatever the nature of social, economic, and political institutions in the late nineteenth century,
colonialism and the independence period clearly had large effects. However, as we outlined above,
research suggests that some key aspects of African society, like it's networked nature, have been
highly persistent. In terms of achieved status colonialism clearly unleashed many mechanisms.
On the one hand, the African frontier was decisively closed. Models of indirect rule and colonial
governance may have distorted traditional mechanisms of accountability and solidified elites
(Mamdani, 1996). In settler colonies Africans were expropriated en masse, losing their land and
being forced into wage labor on European farms or in mines. Even before the permanent arrival
of Europeans, the Atlantic slave trade in the seventeenth and eighteenth century intensified and
transformed slavery and institutions (Lovejoy, 2000). On the other hand, in non-settler colonies,
greater market integration allowed for considerable upward mobility in the production of export
crops, for example in Nigeria (Berry, 1975, Hogendorn, 1978), the C^
                                                                   ote d'Ivoire (Bassett, 2001),
and Ghana (Hill, 1963, Austin, 2008). The spread of markets, particularly the emergence of a
labor market, also created new options for young men who could escape gerontocratic authority
(Peel, 1983, Berry, 1985). In addition, to the extent that slavery retarded mobility, it was
abolished. New types of status appeared, though these often had pejorative connotations, like
"verandah boy" in Ghana, or ´
                            evolu´
                                 e in the Congo, these were clear instances of social mobility,
even if only for a few (these and many other mechanisms are discussed in Southall, 1961, Cohen
and Middleton, 1970, see also Berry, 1989).18
       These mechanisms impacted both men and women, though often in different ways. Colonial
regimes changed laws, for example with respect to marriage or property rights that negatively
influenced women (see Berger, 2016 Chapter 1, and Robertson, 1984, Allman and Tashjian, 2000,
for detailed studies). But similarly in places like West Africa women were very well positioned
to take advantage of economic opportunities, for example in cocoa and export agriculture.
       Relevant here is the empirical literature which studied the emerging post-colonial elite as
well as the pre-colonial one. The thrust of this work tends to support the studies of Fallers which
  17
     Even apparently heroic state-builders like King Shyaam of the Kuba are morally ambiguous. Shyaam created
the Kuba state by cheating in a contest where contenders for power had to throw iron axes into Lake Iyool with
the winner being the person whose axe floated. Shyaam made a fake axe out of wood to ensure victory (Vansina,
1978, pp. 48-49).
  18
     See Meier zu Selhausen, van Leeuwen and Weisdorf (2018) for evidence that the net effect was positive in
Uganda.


                                                     14
emphasized the extent of social mobility into this elite (see for instance, Smythe and Smythe,
1960, Clignet and Foster, 1964, Lloyd, 1966, and Vincent, 1968). Nugent (1996) makes a direct
connection between pre-colonial notions of wealth and social mobility and the post-colonial
political elite, making use of the big man metaphor (see also Barber, 1991).
    Ultimately it is an empirical question what the net effect of all these mechanisms has been
on African society and to what extent the types of mechanisms we identified which facilitated
social mobility, for example, remain operational today. Tuden and Plotnikov's early synthesis
noted about the post-colonial elite that, "the picture appears to show ancestral backgrounds
that are highly heterogeneous" and that "The development of a modern elite ... in Africa has
taken place under conditions ... of rapid upward mobility" (1970, pp. 21, 23-24).              19

    We now move to examine the data. The main purpose of this section was to present a
simple model of African society which we believe is consistent with our three latent assets: an
achievement based society; skepticism of authority; and cosmopolitanness.


3    A Continent of Achieved Status

Our first latent asset is immediate in the above framework. The fluidity and endogeneity of
networks and attitudes of achieved status, even amongst those of lower "status," implicit in the
idea of big men (and big women) suggest a high degree of social mobility on average, though
clearly there will be considerable heterogeneity between countries and regions. Vansina's (1990)
model of the historical evolution of society in Central Africa begins with communities led by
"big men" who "achieved rather than inherited their status" (p. 73). He characterizes what
he calls the "ancestral social tradition" as having an "emphasis on leadership by achievement"
(p. 55). Though much has changed since the period for which Vansina developed this model,
our analysis above suggested that many of the mechanisms he and other scholars identified may
still be relevant. Has this ancestral tradition survived the eras of colonialism and the economic
decline of the post-independence period?
    The achievement basis of African society today is easy to illustrate empirically. Panel A of
Figure 1 uses data from the Afrobarometer which collects information on social mobility. People
are asked to place their parents on an 0-10 income scale and then place themselves on the same
scale. In the figure we use the size of the sphere to capture a larger number of datapoints - the
larger the sphere, the more people report that particular pair of values. In a society with little
social mobility, one would expect the observations to be clustered onto the 45 degree line. For
  19
     Ricart-Huguet (2020) provides some systematic empirical evidence linking post-colonial political elites to
colonial era educational investments.


                                                      15
example, in the analogous question for Latin America in the Latinobarometro shown in Panel
B, 52.3% of respondents view their economic score as the same as their parents. One sees that
the largest spheres, the preponderance of the data, are on the 45 degree line. In Africa, this
figure is only 20.5% - the data is not at all concentrated on the 45 degree line suggesting a very
high degree of social mobility. Most African's do not report that their economic outcomes is
similar to that of their parents.
      How does this compare to other parts of the world? Africa is certainly more socially mobile
than Latin America, but what about Asia, or the United States? Remarkably, comparing the
Afrobarometer to comparable data, Africans report more mobility than anywhere else in the
world. In Asia 47.96% of respondents view their economic score as the same as their parents
(Panel C). In the U.S. 40% of respondents view their economic score as the same as their parents
(the number is 38% in Europe).20
      But this is perceptions of mobility which possibly is too subjective. Perhaps people systemat-
ically miss-perceive or miss-represent their social mobility and this problem could be exacerbated
in Africa where levels of education tend to be lower than elsewhere in the world. Empirical evi-
dence on realized intergenerational mobility in Africa is mixed. The most comprehensive study
comparing income and educational mobility across the world finds average mobility lowest in
Africa though with some signs of recent improvement (World Bank, 2018). However, intergen-
erational mobility in Africa varies starkly by country (Beegle et al., 2016). Recent work by
Alesina et al. calculate intergenerational mobility in 27 African countries using census data
(2021). They find high levels of variation in mobility between and within countries, with some
African countries (e.g., South Africa and Botswana) exhibiting levels of educational mobility
as high as developed countries. Additionally, social mobility varies by ethnicity and religion
(Alesina et al., 2020). These recent studies add much needed breadth to the literature on mobil-
ity in developing countries, which was previously limited to select cases due to data availability
(for a review see Iversen et al., 2019). Previous studies have found high levels of mobility in
some African settings such as Senegal (Lambert and van de Walle, 2014), Ghana and Uganda
(Bossuroy and Cogneau, 2013), and Ethiopia (Hertz et al., 2007) and low levels of mobility in
other contexts such as C^
                        ote d'Ivoire, Guinea, and in Madagascar (Bossuroy and Cogneau, 2013).
      To investigate this Figure 2 shows data on actual social mobility in education using data
from the World Bank's intergenerational mobility database. For each country with available
data, the World Bank calculated the average correlation between the educational outcomes
 20
      These numbers come from the ISSP's Social Inequality Survey from 2009.




                                                      16
of parents and their children.21 A correlation of 1 would imply complete immobility while a
correlation of 0 would be complete mobility (parental education has no predictive power for the
subject's education). Here we plot the distribution of these country-level values of educational
persistence by region. According to this measure, as Panel A shows, Africa is less socially mobile
than high income countries, or East Asia, or Europe and Central Asia. One sees this in the
figure because the mass of the distribution for Africa is to the right of the other distributions
- concentrated more towards higher correlations. Yet Panel B shows that observed mobility
in Africa is higher than South Asia, the Middle East and North Africa, and Latin America.
Interestingly, a number of African countries, such as Botswana, Kenya, Mauritania and Cape
Verde, have rates of educational mobility as high as high income countries.
       If African societies are achievement based, then contrary to all the stereotypes, the way to
get ahead is not via connections, but hard work. In fact, this is what the data suggests people
believe. The World Value Survey (henceforth WVS) asks respondents to choose between "In
the long run, hard work usually brings a better life" and "Hard work doesn't generally bring
success--it's more a matter of luck and connections." We plot the distribution of answers by
continent (1=hard work brings a better life; 10=it's more luck and connections) in Figure 3. The
values in between 1 and 10 are meant to allow the respondents to report intermediate values.
Fully 35% of Africans report a value of 1, the most definitive emphasis on the importance of
hard work. In Europe, less than 20% of people give this answer while even in the United States
and Asia it is lower than Africa.
       None of these findings would be surprising from the perspective of the ethnographic or soci-
ological literature we discussed in the previous section. Lloyd (1974) sums up his investigation
of Yoruba social mobility by stating that "he sees his own attainment of an enhanced status
lying in his own efforts" (p. 219). Though this literature also suggests a great deal of variation,
even within Nigeria (e.g., Le Vine, 1966) our data suggests that on average the situation is one
of high rates of mobility.
       How can this evidence be reconciled with the overwhelming evidence and logic that in a
networked based society connections are important? Our answer is that both things can be
true because networks are endogenous and if you work hard you can create more advantageous
networks.
       Though there is certainly evidence for the persistence of identities and the social consequences
  21
     The database offers different options to calculate this correlation. We use the average education of the parents
(instead of the max or only the father's or mother's) and the educational outcome of all their children (instead
of just the sons' or daughters' outcome).




                                                         17
of slavery in particular contexts (e.g., Bellagamba, Greene and Klein eds., 2012) the data we
present shows that slavery in Africa does not seem to have had the negative legacy for social
mobility as it seems to have had in the United States or elsewhere in the Americas. Tuden
and Plotnikov perhaps identify the reason when they state "Although slavery in Africa was
widespread, it was an ephemeral and transitory status. Is has had no major influence on the
systems of stratification that have since emerged" (p. 15). They argue that this was because
slavery in Africa "lacked a strong ideology of status inferiority" and "the abolition of slavery ...
was accompanied by only minor shifts in the structuring of society" (p. 15).
   The distinctiveness of patterns of social mobility in Africa becomes even more striking when
we look at the data in the Afrobarometer about people's expectations about the incomes of their
children. We plot this data in Figure 4 Panel A. On the horizontal axis we plot the parents
own reported income, the same as we used in Panel A of Figure 1 while on the vertical axis
we plot the respondents' reported expectation of their children's income on the same scale. In
Panel A the mass of the data are above the 45 degree line showing that a vast majority (in fact
81%) of Africans anticipate that their children will have higher incomes than they will. Panel
B shows that this is not true in Latin America while Panel C shows that while Asians are more
optimistic, they are far less so than Africans.
   It is worth emphasizing here something we mentioned in the introduction. Though this
survey evidence is about perceptions and expectations the literature finds that these actually
influence behavior and policy preferences.
   How will the children of Africans enjoy such economic mobility? Via hard work is part of
the answer again. The World Value Survey also asks people about what values they would like
their children to have from a list of: Independence; Hard work; Feeling of responsibility; Imagi-
nation; Tolerance and respect for other people; Thrift, saving money and things; Determination,
perseverance; Religious faith; Unselfishness; Obedience; Self-expression. People can mark any
five of these they think are important. Figure 5 plots the cross-regional data on the proportion
of people who mark "hard work." Africa leads the world in the proportion of people who mark
hard work as a value that they think is important in their children.
   The evidence is overwhelming that Africans experience high rates of social mobility and,
perhaps even more interesting, anticipate very high rates of social mobility. This may come
as a surprise for many given the long periods of economic stagnation in post-independence
Africa and the perception that most growth has been narrowly concentrated and driven by
commodity exports. What it shows is that despite the many economic challenges the average



                                                  18
African undoubtedly faces they are extremely creative and entrepreneurial at finding niches and
opportunities in whatever context they find themselves, even if in the rural or informal sectors,
or via migration to urban areas or different countries. The fact that this mobility is evident
everywhere is shown by our break-down of the mobility data from the Afrobarometer between
urban and rural which we present as Figure A1. One sees the same patterns as Figure 1 and
Figure 4 in both urban and rural areas. While perhaps these beliefs about children are hard
to square with observed mobility, the fact that Africans are so optimistic about their children's
future is actually an important fact because it undoubtedly influences behavior.
         Even more important, A2 shows that, in line with our theoretical expectations, our findings
so far apply to women as well as men. Reported social mobility and expected future mobility
amongst women in the Afrobarometer is very similar to that of men.22


4         Skepticism of Authority

Our second latent asset we capture with the notion of "skepticism of authority." Any society faces
severe principal agent problems in building political institutions. Hierarchy must be constructed
and controlled and often, for example with respect to taxation, the quid is long separated from
the pro quo. We argue that there are interesting cultural differences in the expectations that
people bring to this relationship. The western tradition, at least since the time of Locke has
been deeply skeptical of the use of authority. After arguing that government was desirable
relative to the state of nature which lacked third party dispute resolution, Locke immediately,
and skeptically, noted

           remember that absolute monarchs are but men; and if government is to be the
           remedy of those evils, which necessarily follow from men's being judges in their own
           cases, and the state of nature is not to be endured; I desire to know what kind of
           government that is, and how much better it is than the state of nature. (Locke 2003,
           p. 105)

         This skepticism was a defining feature of the process that led to the creation and implemen-
tation of the U.S. Constitution. In Federalist 51 Madison wrote

           If men were angels, no government would be necessary. If angels were to govern men,
           neither external nor internal controls on government would be necessary. In framing
    22
    Though we do not report figures, it is also true that women have very similar attitudes towards hard work
and the inter-regional pattern of realized educational mobility is similar, though African women are actually more
mobile then men when compared to Latin America, the Middle East and North Africa and South Asia. Women
also have similar opinions to men about the importance of various qualities for their children.


                                                       19
      a government which is to be administered by men over men, the great difficulty lies
      in this: you must first enable the government to control the governed; and in the
      next place oblige it to control itself. (Madison, Hamilton and Jay, 1987, p. 94).

    The Federalists like Madison were skeptical about the incentives of those in control of a
central state, and the anti-Federalists, who forced the Bill of Rights to be adopted, were skeptical
that the solutions the Federalists had developed were sufficient to stop the abuse of power.23
    This attitude of skepticism is very different from attitudes towards authority common in
Chinese or eastern political theory. Here rule is regarded as far more virtuous and subject to
perfection. Confucius put it in the following way: "Ji Kangzi asked Confucius about governing
... Confucius responded, "In your governing ... One who rules through the power of Virtue is
analogous to the Pole Star: it simply remains in its place and receives the homage of the myriad
lesser stars" (Confucius, 2003, p. 8). The literature on the political economy of western countries
sees this skepticism as a distinct advantage in creating a political equilibrium where the state
works in the interest of society. Our point here is that the African attitudes to authority are
much closer to western attitudes than eastern ones.
    We can illustrate this skepticism, so evident in the ethnographic literature we discussed
above, using cross-national survey data. Figure 6 plots data from both the Afrobarometer, Panel
A and the Asiabarometer, Panel B, on peoples' attitudes towards one-man rule. Respondents
are asked whether they would approve or disapprove if "Elections and Parliament/National
Assembly are abolished so that the President/Prime Minister can decide everything." Almost
60% of Africans strongly disapprove of such one-man rule. In Asia this is just over 30%, about
half. These numbers are systematically reflected in related questions in the WVS which can be
seen in the Appendix Figure A3.
    The Afrobarometer allows us to delve more deeply into this issue and relate it to some of
the arguments we made above about the nature of African society and political development.
The ethnographic evidence from Nigeria discussed previously suggests that people like the Tiv
or Igbo, who prior to colonialism lived in societies without a centralized state, ought to be even
more skeptical about one-man rule than say the Hausa or Fulani who did live in states. Figure
7 therefore breaks down the responses to the same question amongst these four Nigerian ethnic
groups where we also add the Ibibio, another previously stateless society, and the Yoruba an
intermediate case who lived in city states but with quite elaborate mechanisms of accountability
compared to the Fulani or Hausa. The data confirm the ethnography: amongst Nigerians the
   23
      There is a vast literature on this topic but Holton (2008) is a representative recent historical account which
is consistent with our emphasis. See also the synthesis in Acemoglu and Robinson (2019).


                                                        20
Tiv and Igbo are far more likely to respond that they strongly disagree with one-man rule. Both
Hausa and Fulani people are about 20 percentage points less likely to choose this answer. The
Yoruba and Ibibio are intermediate but are generally significantly more likely to disapprove of
such rule compared to the Hausa or Fulani. In the Appendix Figure A4 we show a very similar
pattern of answers to the question about whether presidents should not be term limited. Ibibio,
Igbo, and Tiv are far more likely to think that this is a bad idea.
   Figure 8 extends this argument to the continent. We again take the variable in Murdock's
Ethnographic Atlas which codes an ethnic groups' political institutions according to "levels of
jurisdictional hierarchy" we used earlier. Groups like the Ibibio, Igbo, and Tiv score 2, while
the Hausa and Fulani score 4. Splitting the sample into ethnic groups that score 1-3 and those
that score 4-5 ("states") and merging the data with answers to the Afrobarometer by ethnicity
we see that those peoples from societies without states are distinctly more strongly disproving
of one-man rule.
   So far we have stressed that this skepticism of one-man rule is far more similar to western
political thought than eastern traditions. But if this is the case why is it that Africa has suffered
so much from single-party and one-man rule since independence? We would argue that this is
not because Africans are happy with this situation, but because they have not been able to stop
it. As we delve into more in the next section, the type of mechanisms we have identified here
resulted in the preponderance of African polities remaining small historically. From a continental
perspective, the experience of the Ibibio, Igbo, and Tiv is more representative than that of the
Fulani and Hausa. This created an enormous problem at independence of aggregating all of
the diverse and often contradictory institutions into a post-colonial social contract. The result,
often aided by departing colonial powers, was a vacuum at the center which allowed for the rise
of dictators and autocrats.
   Yet the type of polities we have been discussing do create some optimism about the potential
for building such contracts in the future. Schapera (1938) noted of the Tswana, "single persons
or families may similarly change their tribal affiliation ... membership of a tribe is defined not
so much by birth as of allegiance to the Chief" (p. 5). African polities were defined politically,
not ethnically, and the flexible mechanisms that were and are available for incorporating people
can be the basis for more effective social contracts.
   Despite the connection to Locke and Madison, one could argue that the skeptical attitude of
Africans to authority now makes it difficult to build more effective states. Africans are rightly
nervous about what they might do. We do not underestimate the difficulty of this problem



                                                 21
but Figure 9 present some evidence which shows that this skepticism also has a participatory
aspect which does bode well for institution building. We again use data from the Afrobarometer
(pooled rounds IV to VII) at the ethnicity level in Nigeria. Here one sees that Ibibio, Igbo and
Tiv people are more likely to say that they attended community meetings. The political cultures
of these societies were not only skeptical of authority, but they went along with very dense and
broad political participation, likely an asset in building inclusive and effective state institutions.


5    Cosmopolitanness

Skepticism of authority is one of the reasons African society has historically been organized
in small scale polities. This small scale organization has led to an impressive degree of "cos-
mopolitanness" in African societies. These societies featured different institutions, different
social structures and customs, and different languages. Africans continually moved, migrated,
and traded, frequently coming into contact with each other. They had to learn to negotiate
higher levels of difference and diversity than anyone else in the world. Though Medieval Europe
might have had hundreds on polities, they had a lingua franca in Latin and religion in common.
Africans have neither, though some languages like Swahili, Lingala, and various types of Creoles
(Krios) emerged to facilitate trade and commerce.
    As a result, Africans have had to learn to navigate these differences. This has led to a
high degree in flexibility and tolerance. We start by looking at language. It quickly becomes
apparent that Africa is the most multi-lingual part of the world. Panel A of Figure 10 shows the
percentage of Afrobarometer respondents who speak 1, 2, 3, and 4 or more languages. Panel B
shows the results for the Eurobarometer. The percentage of the population in Europe who speak
only one language is just less than 50%. In Africa this fraction is around 25%. For comparison,
according to the American Community Survey in the United States over 75% of the population
speak only one language (English).
    Many arguments have been advanced in favor of the benefits of multilingualism. Our ar-
gument is not that it is directly useful to speak Chiluba or Lingala. Rather, the fact that
multilingualism is the way of life in Africa is indicative of a much broader openness and cultural
nimbleness. Many mechanisms link multilingualism to better outcomes, for example cognitive
development (see Diamond, 2010, and Antoniou, 2019). More relevant for us is a great deal of
recent evidence in social psychology that suggests that multi-lingual people and societies have
many advantages over mono-lingual people and societies (see Kinzler, 2020, for an overview of
this literature). For example, evidence suggests that people are more rational and less emotional


                                                 22
in a second language. This facilitates more rational private behavior (Keysar, Hayakawa and An,
2012) and assessments of collective situations (Costa, Foucart, Hayakawa, Aparici, Apesteguia,
Heafner and Keysar, 2014). More fundamentally, as Kinzler argues, language is the most im-
portant way that humans use to sort themselves into in-groups and out-groups. Her research
has persistently found language to be more important than race (e.g., Kinzler and Dautel, 2011)
and she argues that "Raising children in an environment that values multilingualism can expand
their horizons ... and may create a world in which mutual understanding allows people to unite
across borders ... Even just being exposed to a second language can make us better problem
solvers and better at social understanding" and maybe even be "part of the key to stopping
bias--linguistic or otherwise--in its tracks" (Kinzler, 2020, p. 152,161). Indeed, a study by
Fan, Liberman, Keysar and Kinzler (2015) illustrates that bi-lingual children are better able to
see things from another child's perspective. It is important to emphasize these findings are not
about specific languages, they are about multilingualism in general.
       Many Western societies, especially in the era of nation states, have an obsession with mono-
lingualism which perhaps dates all the way back to the Bible's Book of Genesis. There it relates
that after surviving the flood, mankind still all speaks the same language. But they build
the Tower of Babel to reach to heaven and God punishes them for their pride and decides to
"confound their language, that they may not understand one another's speech. So the LORD
scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of the earth." Multilingualism arises as a
punishment from God. It is interesting to contrast this account with that of the Bassari people
of Togo and Ghana who have a myth similar to the Tower of Babel (see Campbell, 1988, p.
14). Their creator God Unumbotte "made a human being. Its name was Man. Unumbotte
next made an antelope, named Antelope. Unumbotte made a snake, named Snake." Then God
leaves some seeds and a tree grows that bears red fruit. Snake encourages man (and woman
who has now appeared) to eat the fruit. Unumbotte returns and asks why they did this without
his permission. They all say they are hungry, so

         Unumbotte then gave sorghum to Man, also yams and millet. And the people gath-
         ered in eating groups that would always eat from the same bowl, never the bowls of
         the other groups. It was from this that differences in language arose.24

       Witzel (2012) comments on this passage that "It is remarkable that, differently from the
Bible, this myth does not speak of primordial guilt, or of an expulsion from paradise, or of a
  24
    This myth was original transcribed by Leo Frobenius and published in 1924. He asserted that he visited the
Bassari prior to any missionaries. Even earlier Frazer (1919) noted the independent existence of Tower of Babel
type myths.


                                                      23
punishment of the snake. It merely assigns roles to the living beings" (p. 365). Multi-lingualism
appears, but not as a consequence of divine retribution.
       Africans are also used to dealing with high levels of religious diversity. Not only did different
African societies have their own religious beliefs. Muslim raiding and trading from the North
and East resulted in the spread of Islam and colonial missionaries competed for influence and
introduced a variety of Christian faiths. The notoriety of groups like Boko Haram has led to
the perception of Africa as being a hotbed of religious intolerance. Yet, we argue that this case,
and others like them, for example in Somalia, are the exception. In fact, diversity in religious
beliefs has led to high degrees of religious tolerance across the continent. Respondents in the
Afrobarometer are asked "whether they would like having people from a different religion as their
neighbors, dislike it, or not care." Figure 11 shows the percentage of Afrobarometer respondents
who would somewhat or strongly dislike having a neighbor of a different religion. Across Africa
on average 11% object and only in 4 countries is the number higher than 20%.
       Openness and tolerance are not new features of African societies, but likely date back at
least to the Bantu and other frontier expansions as we noted in Section 2. Migrant people
were generally absorbed into existing populations peacefully, who in turn largely welcomed the
newcomers. A remnant of this openness can be found in African languages. Many African
languages have the same word for stranger/foreigner and guest (Fourshey, Gonzales, and Saidi,
2018). We have collected the names for stranger/foreigner and guest in the 32 most widely
spoken African languages and 91 non-African languages using GoogleTranslate and dictionaries.
20 out of 31 (65%) African languages have the same words for stranger/foreigner and guest,
while only 1 non-African language, Hawaiian, out of 91 has the same feature. The full tables
can be found in the appendix (Tables A3-A5).          25

       There is one more way to think about the cosmopolitanness of Africans. This is via kinship
terminology. In his famous 19th century research, Henry Morgan, one of the founders of anthro-
pology, proposed a classification of the way different peoples classified their kin. For example,
the standard European-American system is what is known as a descriptive kinship system and
has an elaborate array of terminology for describing different kin: mother, father, uncle, aunt,
brother, sister, niece, nephew, cousin etc. In contrast many African societies have what Morgan
called a Hawaiian kinship system which is not descriptive, but classificatory. Here there are
just four terms: mother, farther, sister, brother. A person who would be an uncle in the United
  25
    These observations only scratch the surface of the important differences African languages can make. For
example Bantu languages have neither gendered nouns nor gendered pronouns (no distinction between his and
hers) thus providing less of a basis for gender distinctions and discrimination, see Jakiela and Ozier (2019).




                                                     24
States, would be called father. Similarly, nephews and nieces would be brothers and sisters. The
flexibility of this system enormously facilitates the type of fictive kinship which we discussed
in the context of Gulliver's (1971) study because just as brother and sister can be extended to
cousins, they can be extended to non-genetically related people. Murdock's Ethnographic Atlas
provides systematic information on these kinship systems. Using historical data on population
roughly around the time that the information in the Atlas pertains to (say 1900) we can estimate
the proportion of Africans who used different types of kinship terminology. Table 2 shows the
percentage of historical populations in Africa and the rest of the world. Interestingly, while
for the rest of the world sample, 40% of people used descriptive kinship systems, only 8% of
Africans do so. Rather over 20% of Africans use the Hawaiian system, relative to only 6% of
people in the rest of the world. We believe the importance of Hawaiian kinship terminology in
Africa is yet another asset in relating to strangers in a globalized world.
    Cosmopolitanness is deeply rooted in the history of Africa and the development of African
societies, kinship systems and languages. In contrast to the evolution of Europe, with its nation-
alistic antagonisms, wars of religion and fixation with monolingualism, Africans have found a
far more consensual and fluid way of relating to each other. We argue that in the intensely glob-
alized world that we now find ourselves in, and which is unlikely to recede, this gives Africans
a significant advantage. They are the most instinctively globalized people.


6    Statistical Significance

So far our presentation of the data attempting to establish the presence of Africa's latent assets
has been intuitive. We now present some slightly more formal hypotheses tests in order to justify
the use of the word "significant" which we have avoided thus far. In Table A1 we conduct some
simple t-tests of difference in the means of our main variables of interest between Africa and the
various other parts of the world we have discussed in the text.
    Africans perceive significantly more social mobility than Asians or Latin Americans and they
anticipate significantly more social mobility for their children than either. They are significantly
more likely to believe that hard work is more important for getting ahead than luck and connec-
tions. Politically they are also significantly more opposed to one-man rule than Asians. They
are significantly more likely to speak more than one language than Europeans (and indeed, more
likely than in any other part of the world), and it is significantly more likely that the word guest
will be the same as the word for stranger in an African language compared to the languages of
any other part of the world.


                                                25
    Table A2 conducts a similar exercise using first the distinction between Tiv and Igbo versus
Hausa and Fulani, and then the breakdown across Africa between people who formally lived
in societies with 0-2 levels of jurisdictional hierarchy as opposed to those who lived in societies
with 3-4 levels. The pattern in both rows of the table is that Africans who today are associated
with formerly stateless societies are significantly more likely to strongly disapprove of one-man
rule.


7       Conclusion

In this paper we have proposed a new way of thinking about African prosperity by focusing on
its latent assets. We have argued that as of yet, these assets have not born fruit because, as
in China, in order for this to happen, some basic institutional problems have to be solved. We
do not underestimate the task of building better institutions in Africa. But it is also not clear
to us that these problems are more insurmountable than the problems facing Chinese political
elites in the 1970s and 1980s. Though we have pointed out some of the problems of making
analogies to the Chinese experience, particularly the differences in the incidence of centralized
state authority, we conclude by pointing out that in fact the analogies between Africa and China
may be even closer than we have argued so far.
    To see this, note that a large literature has emphasized the drawbacks of the networked
nature of African society. While our emphasis has been on the endogeneity of networks and
the flexible way they allow for social mobility, others have emphasized instead how the resulting
`patrimonialism' undermines the state, or the redistributive effects in networks undermines effort
incentives. Though there is certainly evidence for both phenomena, the question is the net effect.
In a famous passage Confucius recorded

        The Duke of She said to Confucius, "Among my people there is one we call `Upright
        Gong.' When his father stole a sheep, he reported him to the authorities."

        Confucius replied, "Among my people, those who we consider `upright' are differ-
        ent from this: fathers cover up for their sons, and sons cover up for their fathers.
        `Uprightness' is to be found in this. (Confucius, 2003, p. 147)

    Here Confucius is arguing that one's first loyalty is to one's family not to abstract laws. This
is very similar to traditional African notions of the law, captured, for example, in the research
by Bohannan (1957). This notion of morality, even stretches in Chinese to the organization of
the state. A passage of one of Confucius' most famous followers Mengzi talks about how Lord


                                                 26
Shun was treated badly by his younger brother Xiang and yet he gave him the province of Youbi
to govern. Mengzi explains the logic of this in the following way

     Benevolent people do not store up anger against their younger brothers. They simply
     love and treat them like kin. Treating them as kin, they desire them to have rank.
     Loving them, they desire them to have wealth. He gave him Youbi to administer
     to give him wealth and rank. If he himself was the Son of Heaven, and his younger
     brother was a common fellow, could this be called loving and treating him as kin?
     (Mengzi, 2008, p. 120).

   In effect Mengzi justifies Lord Shun engaging in patronage--one desires ones kin to have rank
and wealth. Here we see yet another African norm deeply embedded in the Chinese intellectual
canon. Such patronage and favoring of kin is a common practice in China today and part of
what is known as Guanxi--usually translated as "connections" (Gold, Guthrie and Wank eds.,
2002). How China has combined Guanxi with meritocracy in their economic reversal since the
1970s appears to have a lot of lessons for Africa.




                                               27
Tables

                Table 1: African Population in 1880 by Judicial Centralization

        Number of levels beyond            Number of        Population       Percentage of
        local community                     Groups            1880            population
        Missing Data                             50           8,599,348           10.05%
        None                                    114            9,075,557          10.60%
        One                                     173           20,489,696          23.94%
        Two                                     101           22,109,596          25.84%
        Three                                    45           21,521,027          25.15%
        Four                                     4             3,784,628           4.42%
        All                                     487          85,579,852           100%
  Notes : This table shows the African population in 1880 by historical centralization. Data on historical
  centralization comes from the Murdock Ethnographic Atlas which codes up the levels of jurisdictional
  hierarchy beyond the community level. We overlay the boundaries of these communities with 1880
  population density data from HYDE to calculate the 1880 population of each ethnic group.




                                                  28
                    Table 2: Historical Population by Kinship System

                                       Panel A: Africa
            Kinship term        Number of        Historical       Percentage of
            for cousins          Groups          Population        population
            Missing data             187         68,731,017           32.01%
            Crow                      16          4,250,292            1.98%
            Descriptive               21         17,548,571            8.17%
            Eskimo                     4          1,150,646            0.54%
            Hawaiian                  70         43,971,986           20.48%
            Iroquois                  82         44,748,023           20.84%
            Omaha                     30         33,908,676           15.79%
            Sudanese                   2           200,922             0.09%
            Mixed                      2           233,996             0.11%
            All                      414        214,744,129          100.00%

                                 Panel B: Rest of the World
            Kinship term        Number of        Historical       Percentage of
            for cousins          Groups          Population        population
            Missing Data             146         64,044,763           33.27%
            Crow                      42           314,339             0.16%
            Descriptive               53         77,709,233           40.37%
            Eskimo                    97          7,854,092            4.08%
            Hawaiian                 268         11,926,783            6.20%
            Iroquois                 175         28,436,813            14.77%
            Omaha                     48           329,877              0.17%
            Sudanese                  12          1,881,941            0.98%
            Mixed                     10              0                0.00%
            All                      851        192,497,841           100.00%
Notes : This table shows the historical population of ethnic groups around the world by kinship
system. Data on kinship system comes from the Murdock Ethnographic Atlas which codes up what
system of kinship an ethnic group uses to describe cousins. Fenske (2013) has matched this data with
population density at the time for when the Ethnographic Atlas data was documented. From this we
calculate the population for each ethnic group. Panel A shows the Ethnographic Atlas sample for all
African groups, and Panel B shows the rest of the world.




                                              29
Figures

                             Figure 1: Perceived Mobility by Region

                Panel A: Africa                                  Panel B: Latin America




                 Panel C: Asia




  Notes : This figure shows the perceived mobility of respondents by region. Respondents are asked
  to rate their own economic position from 0 to 10 (y-axis) as well as their parents' economic position
  (x-axis). The data for Sub-Saharan Africa come from Round 2 of the Afrobarometer (Panel A), data
  for Latin America come from Latinobarometer 2000-13 (Panel B), and data for Asia come from the
  Asian Barometer Wave 4 (Panel C). A list of the countries included in each survey can be found in
  Appendix Section A.




                                                 30
                                Figure 2: Educational Mobility

                         Panel A: Regions More Mobile Than Africa




                          Panel B: Regions Less Mobile Than Africa




Notes : This figure shows the distribution of intergenerational persistence in education across countries
according to the World Bank Intergenerational Mobility Database 2018. Panel A plots regions with
a lower level of intergenerational persistence in education and Panel B plots regions with higher
persistence. A list of countries included in the data can be found in Appendix Section A.




                                                 31
         Figure 3: Importance of Hard Work vs. Luck & Connections by Region




Notes : This figure shows the perceived importance of hard work vs. luck and connections across
regions. The data come from Round 6 of the World Value Survey. Respondents are asked on a 1 to
10 scale, whether they believe "in the long run, hard work usually brings a better life" (1) or "hard
work doesn't generally bring success--it's more a matter of luck and connections" (10). A list of the
countries included can be found in Appendix Section A.




                                               32
                             Figure 4: Future Mobility by Region

              Panel A: Africa                                   Panel B: Latin America




               Panel C: Asia




Notes : This figure shows the perceived future mobility of respondents by region. Respondents are
asked to rate their own economic position from 0 to 10 (x-axis) as well as their expectation for their
children's economic position in the future (y-axis). The data for Sub-Saharan Africa come from
Round 2 of the Afrobarometer (Panel A), data for Latin America come from Latinobarometer 2000-
13 (Panel B), and data for Asia come from the Asian Barometer Wave 4 (Panel C). A list of the
countries included in each survey can be found in Appendix Section A.




                                               33
                 Figure 5: Important Qualities for Children: Hard Work




Notes : This figure shows the percentage of respondents to the World Value Survey across regions
who think hard work is an important quality for children to learn. The data come from Round 6
of the World Value Survey. Respondents are asked two identify up to 5 qualities which they believe
are especially important to teach children. A list of the countries included can be found in Appendix
Section A.




                                               34
          Figure 6: Skepticism of Authority: Feelings Towards One-man Rule

             Panel A: Africa                                     Panel B: Asia




Notes : This figure shows the attitudes towards one-man rule in Africa and Asia. Respondents
were asked whether they approved or disapproved with the statement "Elections and Parliament are
abolished so that the president can decide everything." Data on Africa come from Round 7 of the
Afrbarometer (Panel A). Data on Asia come from Wave 4 of the Asian Barometer (Panel B). A list
of the countries included can be found in Appendix Section A.




                                             35
Figure 7: Skepticism of Authority: Feelings Toward One-man in Nigeria by Ethnic Group




Notes : This figure shows the attitudes towards one-man rule in Nigeria by ethnic group. Respondents
were asked whether they approved or disapproved with the statement "Elections and Parliament are
abolished so that the president can decide everything." Data come from Rounds 4 to 7 of the
Afrobarometer and include 5,821 respondents.




                                              36
Figure 8: Skepticism of Authority: Feelings Towards One-man Rule in Africa by Historical
Centralization




   Notes : This figure shows the attitudes towards one-man rule in Africa by historical centralization.
   Respondents were matched to the Murdock Ethnographic Atlas. Results are shown separately for
   ethnicities with no or little state structures (Panel A) and those with 3 or more levels of jurisdictional
   hierarchy beyond the village level (Panel B). Respondents were asked whether they approved or dis-
   approved with the statement "Elections and Parliament are abolished so that the president can decide
   everything." Data come from Rounds 4 to 7 of the Afrobarometer and include 42,009 respondents.




                                                    37
Figure 9: Skepticism of Authority: Community Participation in Nigeria by Ethnic Group




Notes : This figure shows community participation in Nigeria by ethnic group. Respondents were
asked if they "attended a community meeting." Data come from Rounds 4 to 7 of the Afrobarometer
and include 6,073 respondents.

              Figure 10: Cosmopolitanism: Numbers of Languages Spoken

             Panel A: Africa                                    Panel B: Europe




Notes : This figure shows the numbers of languages spoken by respondents in Africa and Europe.
Data for Africa come from Round 4 of the Afrobarometer (Panel A). Data on Europe come from
the Special Eurobarometer 386 (Panel B). A list of countries included in the data can be found in
Appendix Section A.


                                             38
               Figure 11: Cosmopolitanism: Religious Tolerance in Africa




Notes : This figure shows religious tolerance by country in Africa. Data come from Round 7 of the
Afrobarometer. The figure shows the percentage of respondents who would not object to having a
neighbor of a different religion.




                                             39
Bibliography

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001) "Colonial Origins
of Comparative Development," American Economic Review, 91, 5, 1369­1401.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2012) Why Nations Fail, New York:
Crown.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2019) The Narrow Corridor: States,
Societies and the Fate of Liberty, New York: Penguin.
   Achebe, Nwando (2005) Farmers, Trders, Warriors and Kings: Femail Power and Au-
thority in Northern Igboland, 1900-1960, Portsmouth: Heinemann.
   Achebe, Nwando (2020) Female Monarchs and Merchants Queens in Africa, Athens:
Ohio University Press.
   Afigbo, A.E. (1981) Ropes of sand: Studies in Igbo history and culture, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
   Aidoo, Agnes Akosua (1982) "Asante Queen Mothers in Government and Politics in the
Nineteenth Century," in Filomena C. Steady ed. The Black Woman Cross-Culturally, Rochester:
Schenkman.
   Alesina, Alberto, Sebastian Hohmann, Stelios Michalopoulos, Elias Papaioannou
(2021) "Intergenerational Mobility in Africa," Econometrica, 89(1), 1-35.
   Alesina, Alberto, Sebastian Hohmann, Stelios Michalopoulos, Elias Papaioannou
(2020) "Ethnic and Religious Intergenerational Mobility in Africa," Working Paper.
   Alesina, Alberto, Stefanie Stantcheva and Edoardo Teso (2018) "Intergenerational
Mobility and Preferences for Redistribution," American Economic Review, 108(2), 521-54.
   Allman, Jean and Victoria Tashjian (2000) "I will Not Eat Stone": A Woman's History
of Colonial Asante, Oxford: James Curry.
   Alsan, Marcella (2015) "The Effect of the TseTse Fly on African Development," American
Economic Review, 105(1), 382-410.
   Antoniou, Mark (2019) "The advantages of bilingualism debate," Annual Review of Lin-
guistics, 5, 395-415.
   Appiah, Kwame Anthony (2007) Cosmopolitanism: Ethics in a World of Strangers ,
New York: W.W. Norton & Co..
   Austin, Gareth (2008) Labour, Land and Capital in Ghana: From Slavery to Free Labour
in Asante, 1807-1956, Rochester: University of Rochester Press.
   Barber, Karin (1991) I could speak until tomorrow: oriki, women and the past in a Yoruba


                                             40
town, Edinburgh: University of Edinburg Press.
   Bascom, William (1969) Ifa Divination: Communication between Gods and Men in West
Africa, Bloomington: University of Indiana Press.
   Bassett, Thomas J. (2001) The Peasant Cotton Revolution In West Africa (Cote d'lvoire,
1880-1995), New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Bates, Robert H. (1981) Markets and States in Tropical Africa, Berkeley: University of
California Press.
   Beegle, Kathleen, Luc Christiaensen, Andrew Dabalen and Isis Gaddis (2016)
Poverty in a Rising Africa, Washington, DC: World Bank.
   Bellagamba, Alice, Sandra E. Greene and Martin Klein eds. (2012) The Bitter
Legacy, Princeton: Markus Wiener Publishers.
   Berger, Iris (2016) Women in Twentieth Century Africa, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
   Bernardi, Bernardo (1985) Age, Class and Systems: Social Institutions and Polities
Based on Age, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Berry, Sara (1975) Cocoa, Custom and Socio-economic Change in Rural Western Nigeria,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
   Berry, Sara (1985) Fathers work for their Sons, Berkeley: University of California Press.
   Berry, Sara (1989) " Social Institutions and Access to Resources," Africa, 59, 1, 41-55.
   Berry, Sara (1993) No Condition in Permanent, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
   Bledsoe, Caroline (1980) Women and Marriage in Kpelle Society, Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
   Bohannan, Paul (1957) Justice and Judgment Among the Tiv, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
   Bohannan, Paul (1958) "Extra-processual Events in Tiv Political Institutions," American
Anthropologist, 60, 1-12.
   Boserup, Esther (2007) Women's Role in Economic Development, London: Earthscan.
   Bossuroy, Thomas and Denis Cogneau (2013) "Social Mobility in Five African Coun-
tries", Review of Income and Wealth, 59(SI), S84-S110.
   Bratton, Michael and Nicolas van de Walle (1997) Democratic Experiments in Africa:
Regime Transitions in Comparative Perspective, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Brown, Susan Drucker (1975) Ritual aspects of the Mamprusi kingship, Cambridge:
African Studies Centre.



                                             41
   Campbell, Joseph (1988) Historical Atlas of World Mythology: Volume I Part 1, New
York: Harper & Row.
   Cheeseman, Nic (2015) Democracy in Africa: Successes, Failures, and the Struggle for
Political Reform, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Clark, Gracia (1994) Onions are my Husband, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
   Clark, Gracia (2010) Africa Market Women, Indiana: University of Indiana Press.
   Clignet, Remi P. and Philip Foster (1964) "Potential Elites in Ghana and the Ivory
Coast: a preliminary comparison", American Journal of Sociology, 70, 349-362.
   Cohen, Ronald and John Middleton eds. (1970) From tribe to nation in Africa;
studies in incorporation processes, Scranton: Chandler Pub. Co.
   Colson, Elizabeth (1970) "Assimilation of Aliens among Zambian Tonga," in Ronald Co-
hen and John Middleton eds. From tribe to nation in Africa; studies in incorporation processes,
Scranton: Chandler Pub. Co.
   Confucius (2003) Analects, Indianapolis: Hackett.
   Conrad, David C. and Barbara E. Frank eds. (1995)Status and Identity in West
Africa, Bloomington: University of Indiana Press.
   Costa, Albert, Alice Foucart, Sayuri L. Hayakawa, Melina Aparici, Jos´
                                                                        e
Apesteguia, Joy Heafner and Boaz Keysar (2014) "Your Morals Depend on Language,"
PLoS One, 2014; 9(4): e94842.
   Crummey, Donald (1980)Land and Society in the Christian Kingdom of Ethiopia: From
the Thirteenth to the Twentieth Century, Champaign-Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
   Day, Lynda (2012) Gender and Power in Sierra Leone, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
   de Heusch, Luc (1982) The Drunken King, or, The Origin of the State, Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
   Diamond, Jared (2010) "The Benefits of Multilingualism," Science, Vol. 330, Issue 6002,
pp. 332-333.
   Doornbos, Martin R. (1978) Not all the King's Men: Inequality as a Political Instrument
in Ankole, Uganda, The Hague: Mouton Publishers.
   Dube, Arindrajit, Ethan Kaplan and Suresh Naidu (2011) "Coups, Corporations,
and Classified Information" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 3, 1375­1409.
   Fallers, Lloyd A. (1973) Inequality: Social Stratification Reconsidered,, Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
   Fan, Samantha P., Zoe Liberman, Boaz Keysar, Katherine D. Kinzler (2015)



                                              42
"The exposure advantage: Early exposure to a multilingual environment promotes effective
communication," Psychological science, 26 (7), 1090-1097.
   Feierman, Steve (1974) The Shambaa Kingdom, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
   Fenske, James (2013) "Does Land Abundance Explain African Institutions?," The Eco-
nomic Journal, 123 (573), 1363­1390.
   Forde, Daryll and G.I. Jones (1950) The Ibo and Ibibio-speaking Peoples of South-
Eastern Nigeria, London: International African Institute.
   Fourshey, Catherine Cymone, Rhonda M. Gonzales and Christine Saidi (2018)
Bantu Africa: 3500 BC to Present, New York: Oxford University Press.
   Frankema, Ewout and Marlous van Waijenburg (2018) "Africa Rising? A Historical
Perspective," African Affairs, 117, 469, 543-568.
   Frazer, James G. (1919) Folk-lore in the Old Testament: Studies in Comparative Religion,
Volume II, London: Macmillan and Co..
   Glazier, Jack (1985) Land and the uses of tradition among the Mbeere of Kenya, New
York: University Press of America.
   Gluckman, Max (1965) Politics, Law and Ritual in Tribal Society, Chicago: Aldine Pub-
lishing Company.
   Gluckman, Max (1966) Custom and Conflict in Africa, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
   Gold, Thomas, Doug Guthrie and David Wank eds. (2002) Social Connections
in China: Institutions, Culture, and the Changing Nature of Guanxi, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
   Goody, Jack (1971) Technology, Tradition, and the State in Africa, Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
   Green, Margaret M. (1947) Ibo Village Affairs, London: Sidgwick & Jackson.
   Gulliver, Philip H. (1971) Neighbours and Networks: The Idiom of Kinship in Social
Action among the Ndendeuli of Tanzania, Berkeley: University of California Press.
   Guyer, Jane I. (1993) "Wealth in People and Self-Realization in Equatorial Africa," Man,
28, 2, 243-265.
   Henderson, Richard N. (1972)The King in Every Man: Evolutionary Trends in Onitsha
Ibo Society and Culture, New Haven: Yale University Press.
   Herbst, Jeffrey I. (2000) States and Power in Africa, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
   Hertz, Thomas, Tamara Jayasundera, Patrizio Piraino, Sibel Selcuk, Nicole



                                               43
Smith, and Alina Verashchagina (2007) "The Inheritance of Educational Inequality: In-
ternational Comparisons and Fifty-Year Trends," The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis &
Policy, 7(2): 1­48.
   Hill, Polly (1963) The Migrant Cocoa Farmers of Southern Ghana: a Study in Rural
Capitalism, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Hogendorn, Jan S. (1978) Nigerian Groundnut Exports: Origins and Early Development,
New York: Oxford University Press.
   Holton, Woody (2008) Unruly Americans and the Origins of the Constitution, New York:
Hill and Wang.
   Horton, James Africanus (2011) West African Countries and Peoples, British and Na-
tive and A Vindication of the African Race, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Horton, Robin (1993) "African traditional thought and western science," in his Patterns
of thought in Africa and the West, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Inikori, Joseph E. (1983) Forced Migration: The Impact of the Export Slave Trade on
African Societies, Africana Publishers.
   Iversen, Vegard, Anirudh Krishna and Kunal Sen (2019) "Beyond Poverty Es-
capes--Social Mobility in Developing Countries: A Review Article," The World Bank Research
Observer, 34(2): 239­273.
   Jakiela, Pamela and Owen Ozier (2016) "Does Africa Need a Rotten Kin Theorem?
Experimental Evidence from Village Economies," Review of Economic Studies, 83(1): 231-268.
   Jakiela,      Pamela       and      Owen        Ozier    (2019)     "Gendered      Language,"
https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/gendered-language.pdf
   Jones, Adam (1983) From slaves to palm kernels: A history of the Galinhas country (West
Africa), 1730-1890, Stuttgart: F. Steiner.
   Jones, G.I. (1949) "Dual Organization in Ibo Social Structure," Africa: Journal of the
International African Institute, 19, 2, 150-156.
   Jones, G.I. (1963) The Trading States of the Oil Rivers, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
   Keysar, Boaz, Sayuri L. Hayakawa and Sun Gyu An (2012) "The Foreign Language
Effect: Thinking in a foreign tongue reduces decision biases," Psychological Science, 23, 661-668.
   Kinzler, Katherine D. (2020) How You Say It: Why You Talk the Way You Do--And
What It Says About You, New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
   Kinzler, Katherine D. and Jocelyn B. Dautel (2011) "Children's Essentialist reason-
ing about language and race," Developmental Science, 15(1), 131-138.



                                               44
   Klein, Martin (2009) "Slavery and the Early State in Africa," Social Evolution & History,
8(1), 168-194.
   Kopytoff, Igor ed. (1987) The African Frontier: : The Reproduction of Traditional
African Societies, Bloomington: University of Indiana Press.
   Krauze, Enrique (2011) Redeemers: Ideas and Power in Latin America, New York:
Harper.
   Krige, Eileen and Jack Krige (1947) The Realm of a Rain Queen, London: Oxford
University Press.
   Lambert, Sylvie, Martin Ravallion and Dominique van de Walle (2014) "Intergen-
erational mobility and interpersonal inequality in an African economy" Journal of Development
Economics, 110, 327-344.
   Leith-Ross, Sylvia (1939) African Women: A Study of the Ibo of Nigeria, London: Faber
& Faber.
   Le Vine, Robert A. (1966) Dreams and Deeds: Achievement Motivation in Nigeria,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
   Little, Kenneth (1954) "The Mende of Sierra Leone" in Daryll Forde ed. African Worlds,
New York: Oxford University Press.
   Lloyd, Peter C. ed.        (1966) The New Elites of Tropical Africa, New York: Oxford
University Press.
   Lloyd, Peter C. (1974) Power and Independence: Urban Africans' Perception of Social
Inequality, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
   Locke, John (2003) Two Treaties of Government, ed. Ian Shapiro, New Haven: Yale
University Press.
   Lovejoy, Paul E. (2000) Transformations in Slavery, 2nd Edition, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
   Lowes, Sara and Eduardo Montero (2019) "Concessions, Violence, and Indirect Rule:
Evidence from the Congo Free State," http://www.saralowes.com/research.html
   Madison, James, Alexander Hamilton and John Jay (1987) The Federalist Papers,
New York: Penguin.
   McKinsey         (2010)   "Lions   on   the    Move"   https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-
insights/middle-east-and-africa/lions-on-the-move
   Mamdani, Mahmood (1996) Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa and the Legacy
of Late Colonialism, Princeton: Princeton University Press.



                                                 45
   Maquet, Jacques (1961) The Premise of Inequality in Ruanda: A Study of Political
Relations in a Central African Kingdom, London: Oxford University Press.
   Meier zu Selhausen, Felix P., Marco H.D. van Leeuwen and Jacob L. Weisdorf
(2018) "Social Mobility among Christian Africans: Evidence from Ugandan Marriage Registers
1895-2011," Economic History Review, 71, 4, 1291-1321.
   Meek, C.K. (1937) Law and Authority in a Nigerian Tribe, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
   Mengzi (2008) Mengzi, Indianapolis: Hackett.
   Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou (2016) "The long-run effects of the
scramble for Africa," American Economic Review, 106 (7), 1802-48.
   Miers, Suzanne and Igor Kopytoff eds. (1977) Slavery in Africa, Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press.
   Miguel Edward (2009) Africa's Turn?, Cambridge: MIT Press.
   Mitchell, J.Clyde ed. (1969) Social networks in urban situations: Analyses of personal
relationships in Central African towns, Manchester: University of Manchester Press.
   Murdock, George P. (1967) Ethnographic Atlas: A Summary, Pittsburgh: The University
of Pittsburgh Press.
   Newbury, David. (1992) Kings and Clans: Ijwi Island and the Lake Kivu Rift, 1780­1840,
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
   Nugent, Paul (1996) Big Men, Small Boys and Politics in Ghana: Power, Ideology and
the Burden of History, 1982-1994, London: Pinter Pub Ltd.
   Nunn, Nathan (2008) "The Long Term Effects of Africa's Slave Trades," Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics, 123, 1, 139-176.
   Nunn, Nathan and Nancy Qian (2014) "US Food Aid and Civil Conflict," American
Economic Review, 104, 6, 1630-66.
   Nunn, Nathan and Leonard Wantchekon (2011) "The Slave Trade and the Origins of
Mistrust in Africa," American Economic Review, 101, 7, 3221-3252.
   Osafo-Kwaako, Philip and James A. Robinson (2013) "Political Centralization in
Pre-Colonial Africa", Journal of Comparative Economics, 41(1), 6-21.
   Owomoyela, Oyekan (2005) Yoruba Proberbs, Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
   Parkin, David J. (1972) Palms, Wine, and Witnesses, Prospect Heights: Waveland Press.
   Peel, J.D.Y. (1983) Ijeshas and Nigerians, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Pines, Yuri (2013) "Between Merit and Pedigree: Evolution of the Concept of "Elevat-



                                             46
ing the Worthy" Pre-imperial China," in Daniel Bell and Chenyang Li eds. The East Asian
Challenge for Democracy, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Radelet, Steven (2010) Emerging Africa: How 17 Countries Are Leading the Way, Wash-
ington: Center for Global Development.
   Rattray, Robert (1932) The Tribes of the Ashanti Hinterland, 2 Volumes, Oxford: Claren-
don Press.
   Ricart-Huguet, Joan (2020) "Colonial Education, Political Elites, and Regional Political
Inequality in Africa," Forthcoming at Comparative Political Studies.
   Robertson, Claire C. (1984) Sharing the Same Bowl, Bloomington: Indiana University
Press.
   Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul (1961) "International Aid for Underdeveloped Countries," Re-
view of Economics and Statistics, 43,2, 107-138.
   Schapera, Isaac (1938) A Handbook of Tswana Law and Custom, London: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
   Schapera, Isaac (1952) The Ethnic Composition of Tswana Tribes, London: London
School of Economics.
   Schmidt, Elizabeth (2013) Foreign Intervention in Africa: From the Cold War to the
War on Terror, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Shack, William A. and Elliott P. Skinner eds. (1979) Strangers in African Societies,
Berkeley: University of California Press.
   Smith, Daniel Jordan (2004) "Contradictions in Nigeria's Fertility Transition: The Bur-
dens and Benefits of Having People," Population and Development Review, Jun., 2004, Vol. 30,
No. 2 (Jun., 2004), pp. 221-238.
   Smith, M.G. (1959) "The Hausa system of social status," Africa, 29, 239-252.
   Smith, M.G. (1966) "Pre-Industrial Stratification Systems," in Seymour Martin Lipset
and Neil J. Smelser eds. Social structure and mobility in economic development, London: Rout-
ledge Keegan & Paul.
   Smythe, Hugh H. and Mabel M. Smythe (1960) The New Nigerian Elite, Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
   Southall, Aidan (1956) Alur Society: A Study in Processes and Types of Domination,
Cambridge: W. Heffer.
   Southall, Aidan ed. (1961) Social Change in Modern Africa, London: Oxford University
Press.



                                              47
   Southall, Aidan (1970) "Stratification in Africa" in Leonard Ploticov and Arthur Tuden
eds. Essays in Comparative Stratification, Pittsburg: University of Pittsburg Press.
   Stoeltje, Beverly J. (1997) "Asante Queen Mothers: A Study in Femal Authority," in
Flora E. Kaplan eds. Queens, Queen Mothers, Priestesses and Power, New York: New Ypur
Academy of Sciences.
   Talbot, Percy A. (1926 The Peoples of Southern Nigeria, Volume IV, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
   Tamari, Tal (1991) "The Development of Caste Systems in West Africa," Journal of
African History, 32, 2, 221-250.
   Teso, Edoardo (2019) "The Long-Term Effect of Demographic Shocks on the Evolution of
Gender Roles: Evidence from the Transatlantic Slave Trade," Journal of the European Economic
Association, 17(2), 497-534.
   Tuden, Arthur and Leonard Plotnicov eds. (1970) Social Stratification in Africa,
New York: The Free Press.
   Turner, Thomas E. and Crawford Young (1985) The Rise and Decline of the Zairian
State, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
   van Allen, Judith (1972) "Sitting on a Man: Colonialism and the Lost Political Institu-
tions of Igbo Women," Canadian Journal of African Studies, 6, 2, 165-181
   Vansina, Jan (1966) Kingdoms of the Savanna, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
   Vansina, Jan (1978) The Children of Woot, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
   Vansina, Jan (1990) Paths in the Rainforests: Toward a History of Political Tradition in
Equatorial Africa, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
   Vansina, Jan (2004) Antecedents of Modern Rwanda: The Nyiginya Kingdom, Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.
   Vincent, Joan (1968) African Elite: the big men of a small town, New York: Columbia
University Press.
   Willis, Roy (1981) A State in the Making: Myth, History, and Social Transformation in
Pre-colonial Ufipa, Bloomington: University of Indian Press.
   Wilson, Monica (1979) "Strangers in Africa: Reflections on Nyakyusa, Nguni, and Sotho
Evidence," in William A. Shack by and Elliott P. Skinner eds. Strangers in African Societies,
Berkeley: University of California Press.
   Witzel, E.J. Michael (2012) The Origins of the World's Mythologies, New York: Oxford
University Press.



                                              48
   World Bank (2018) Fair Progress?            Economic Mobility across Generations Around
the World, https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/poverty/publication/fair-progress-economic-
mobility-across-generations-around-the-world
   Young, Crawford (1997) The African Colonial State in Comparative Perspective, New
Haven: Yale University Press.




                                               49
A    Countries Included in the Surveys Used

Afrobarometer Round 2 (Figure 1, 4, A1): Botswana, Cape Verde, Ghana, Kenya,
Lesotho, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania,
Uganda, Zambia


Afrobarometer Round 4 (Figure 10): Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde,
Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria,
Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe


Afrobarometer Round 7 (Figure 6, 8, 11): Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Cap
Verde, Cameroon, Cote d'Ivoire, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Sao
Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra leone, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe


Asian Barometer Wave 4 (Figure 1, 4, 6):                Cambodia, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Mongolia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam


Special Eurobarometer 386 (Figure 10): Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxemburg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom


Latinobarometer 2000-2013 (Figure 1, 4): Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico,
Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela


World Bank Intergenerational Mobility Database 2015 (Figure 2): Afghanistan,
Albania, Angola, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colom-
bia, Comoros, Congo, Rep, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,


                                            50
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, South Korea, Kosovo,
Kyrgyz Republic, Lao PDR, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Macedonia,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Vietnam, West Bank and Gaza, Yemen, Zambia


World Value Survey Round 6 (Figure 3, 5): Algeria, Azerbaijan, Argentina, Aus-
tralia, Armenia, Brazil, Belarus, Chile, China, Taiwan, Colombia, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt,
Estonia, Georgia, Palestine, Germany, Ghana, Haiti, Hong Kong, India, Iraq, Japan, Kaza-
khstan, Jordan, South Korea, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania,
Russia, Rwanda, Singapore, Slovenia, South Africa, Zimbabwe, Spain, Sweden, Thailand,
Trinidad, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United States, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Yemen




                                            51
B

                              Figure A1: Perceived Mobility in African

           Panel A: Rural Past Mobility                           Panel B: Urban Past Mobility




         Panel C: Rural Future Mobility                          Panel D: Urban Future Mobility




    Notes : This figure shows perceived past and future mobility of urban and rural respondents in Africa.
    For perceived mobility in Panels A and B, respondents are asked to rate their own economic position
    from 0 to 10 (y-axis) as well as their parents' economic position (x-axis). For perceived future mobility
    in Panels C and D, respondents are asked to rate their own economic position from 0 to 10 (x-axis) as
    well as their expectation for their children's economic position in the future (y-axis). The data come
    from Round 2 of the Afrobarometer. A list of the countries included in each survey can be found in
    Section A.




                                                     52
                           Figure A2: Perceived Mobility by Gender

   Panel A: Women Perceived Mobility                         Panel B: Women Future Mobility




    Panel C: Men Perceived Mobility                           Panel B: Men Future Mobility




Notes : This figure shows the perceived mobility of African respondents by gender. The first row shows
the responses of women and the second row the responses of men. In Panels A and C respondents
are asked to rate their own economic position from 0 to 10 (y-axis) as well as their parents' economic
position (x-axis). In Panels B and D respondents are asked to rate their own economic position from 0
to 10 (x-axis) as well as their expectation for their children's economic position in the future (y-axis).
The data come from Round 2 of the Afrobarometer. A list of the countries included in each survey
can be found in Section A.




                                                 53
 Figure A3: Skepticism of Authority: Support for Authoritarianism Across the World




Notes : This figure shows the percentage of respondents to the World Value Survey across regions
who are in support of authoritarian government. Respondents are asked whether they rejected or
supported the statement "Having a strong leader who does not have to bother with parliament and
elections." The data come from Round 6 of the World Value Survey. A list of the countries included
can be found in Appendix Section A.




                                             54
Figure A4: Skepticism of Authority: Feelings Towards Abolishing Term-limits in Nigeria by
Ethnic Group




   Notes : This figure shows the attitudes towards abolishing term-limits in Nigeria by ethnic group.
   Respondents were asked whether they approved or disapproved with the statement "There should be
   no constitutional limit on how long the president can serve." Data come from Rounds 4 to 7 of the
   Afrobarometer and include 5,821 respondents.




                                                55
     C

                                                                Table A1: Overview of Evidence

                                                                       Africa                    Other
                                                                N       Mean     SD       N       Mean     SD     T-stat           Data Source

         Perceived past mobility                              21,970     0.34   0.48    13,933     0.27    0.45   14.23          Afrobarometer R2;
         (own score higher than parents)                                                                                      Asian Barometer Wave 4

         Perceived future mobility                            21,970     0.82   0.38    13,933     0.62    0.49   42.11          Afrobarometer R2;
         (children's score higher than own)                                                                                   Asian Barometer Wave 4

         Perceived past mobility                              21,970     0.34   0.48   134,679     0.25    0.43   27.22          Afrobarometer R2;
         (own score higher than parents)                                                                                     Latinobarometro 2000-2013

         Perceived future mobility                            21,970     0.83   0.38   120,232     0.48    0.50   117.96         Afrobarometer R2;




56
         (children's score higher than own)                                                                                  Latinobarometro 2000-2013

         Hard work vs luck/connections                        16,733     3.75   2.82    70,574     4.30    2.89   -22.66       World Value Survey R6
         (1="hard work"; 10="luck & connections")

         Feeling towards one-man rule                         42,626     1.78   1.14    12,459     2.45    1.37   -49.78        Afrobarometer R7;
         (1="strongly disapprove"; 5="strongly approve")                                                                   East Asian Barometer Wave 4

         More than 1 language spoken                          27,708     0.67   0.47    26,751     0.36    0.21   99.23         Afrobarometer R4;
                                                                                                                             Special Eurobarometer 386

         Guest=Stranger                                         32       0.59   0.50      91       0.01    0.10    6.56             Own coding
         Notes : This table shows the result of two-sided t-tests comparing the sample mean of our outcomes of interest in Africa and the rest of the world.
                          Table A2: Skepticism of Authority Today in formerly Stateless Societies vs Ones with a State

                                                          Stateless                With State
                                                    N       Mean      SD       N      Mean      SD     T-stat         Data Source

                Tiv & Igbo vs Fulani & Hausa      1,516      1.65     0.91   2,285     2.12     1.11   -14.10       Afrobarometer R4-7




57
                0-2 levels vs 3+ levels          28,913      1.67     1.03   11,274    1.79     1.04   -10.79      Afrobarometer R4-7
                                                                                                                Murdock Ethnographic Atlas
     Notes : This table shows the result of two-sided t-tests comparing the sample mean of our skepticism of authority outcomes across stateless societies
     and ones with states across Nigeria and Africa. Respondents were asked whether they approved or disapproved with the statement "Elections and
     Parliament are abolished so that the president can decide everything." Values range from 1, "strongly disapprove," to 5, "strongly approve." Data
     come from Rounds 4 to 7 of the Afrobarometer.
        Table A3: Guest, Stranger, and Foreigner in Different African Languages

                 Word for           Word for                     Word for
Language         "Guest"            "Stranger"                   "Foreigner"              Overlap
Amharic          inigida            inigida                      yeba`idi ¯
                                                                          ageri sewi      Yes
Berber           inebgi             ajentad                      awerdani                 No
Fulani           beero; kodo                                     beero                    Yes
Gikuyu           mugeni                                          ageni                    Yes
Hausa            bakon              bakon                        bakon                    Yes
Igbo             onye obia          onye obia                    onye obia                Yes
Kikongo          nzenza             nzenza                                                Yes
Kinyarwanda      umushyitsi         umunyamahanga                umunyamahanga            No
Kirundi          umushitsi          umunyamahanga                umunyankiko              No
Lingala          mopaya             mopaya, mob´utu              mopaya, mob´ utu         Yes
Luganda          omugenyi           omugenyi                     omugenyi, omunnagwanga   Yes
Luo              wendo, welo        wendo, welo                  jadak, jamwa             Yes
Malagasy         vahiny             vahiny                       vahiny                   Yes
Mossi/More       saan                                            saan                     Yes
Ndebele          isivakatjhi        umyeni                       iphandle                 No
Nyanja (Chewa)   mlendo             mlendo                       mlendo                   Yes
Oromo            keessummaa         keessummaa, alaagaa          alaagaa, orma            Yes
Shona            muenzi             mweni, mueni, mutorwa        mutorwa                  No
Somali           marti              ajnabiyad, shisheeye         ajnabiyad                No
Sesotho          moeti              osele                        motho osele              No
Sudanese         tamu               muhrim                       urang asing              No
Swahili          mgeni              mgeni                        mgeni                    Yes
Tigrinya         gasha              wexa'`               engda
                                          etena; gasha; '`       ba'¨
                                                                    edi; wexa'`
                                                                              etena       Yes
Tshiluba         mwenyi                                          mwenyi                   Yes
Tsonga           Muendzi            munhu                                                 No
Twi              ohohoo             ohohoo                       ohohoo                   Yes
Umbundu          ukombe, omokiwa    osombekua                    onundapala, ongoya       No
Venda            mueni, vhaeni      mutsinda, vhatsinda                                   No
Wolof            gan                gan                          laakakat, waaliyaan      Yes
Xhosa            undwendwe          umntu wasemzini              owasemzini               No
Yoruba           a
                 `lej`
                     o              `lej`
                                    a   o                        `
                                                                 alej`
                                                                     o                    Yes
Zulu             isivakashi         isihambi                     idebe                    No




                                          58
Table A4: Guest, Stranger, and Foreigner in Different Non-African Languages

                  Word for       Word for          Word for
 Language         "Guest"        "Stranger"        "Foreigner"          Overlap
 Arabic           zayir          shakhs ghurayb    'ajnabi              No
 Albanian         mysafir        i huaj            i huaj               No
 Armenian         hyur           antsanot'         otarerkrats'i        No
 Azerbaijani      Qonaq          qerib             xarici               No
 Basque           gonbidatua     arrotza           atzerritarra         No
 Belarusian       hos´c          nieznajomy        iinsaziemiec         No
 Bengali          Atithi         Aparicita         Bid¯ e´
                                                         si             No
 Bosnian          gost           stranac           stranac              No
 Bulgarian        gost           nepoznat          chuzhdenets          No
 Burmese          ny sai         luuhcaim          ninenganhkyarrsarr   No
 Catalan          convidat       desconegut        estranger            No
 Cebuano          bisita         langyaw           langyaw              No
 Chinese          K`er´en        M` osh¯eng r´
                                             en    W` aigu´ o r´
                                                               en       No
 Corsican         invitatu       stranieru         stranieru            No
 Croatian         gost           stranac           stranac              No
 Czeck            host           cizinec           cizinec              No
 Danish           gæst           fremmed           udlænding            No
 Dutch            gast           vreemdeling       buitenlander         No
 Estonian         k¨
                   ulaline       v~o~
                                    oras           v¨alismaalane        No
 Filipino         bisita         estranghero       dayuhan              No
 Finnish          vieras         muukalainen       ulkomaalainen        No
 French           client         ´
                                 etranger          ´
                                                   etranger             No
 Frisian          gast           frjemd            b^utenlanner         No
 Galician         gast           estra~no          estranxeiro          No
 Georgian         st'umari       utskho adamiani   utskhoeli            No
 German           Gast           Fremder           Ausl¨ ander          No
 Greek            episk´ eptis   x´enos            x´enos               No
 Gujarati         Mah¯  em¯ana   Aj¯an¯i vyakti    Vid¯ e´
                                                         s¯
                                                          i             No
 Hatian Crejole   Guest          etranje           etranje              No
 Hawaiian         malihini       malihini          haole                Yes
 Hebrew           or´eakh         ar
                                 z´                z´ar                 No
 Hindi            atithi         ajanabee          paradeshee           No
 Hmong            qhua           neeg txawv        neeg qhua            No
 Hungarian        vend´ eg       idegen            k¨ulf¨
                                                        oldi            No
 Icelandic        gestur         ´
                                 okunnugur         u
                                                   ´tlendingur          No
 Indonesian       tamu           orang asing       orang asing          No
 Irish            aoi            strains´eir       eachtrannach         No
 Italian          ospite         sconosciuto       straniero            No
 Japanese         Gesuto         Sutorenj¯ a       Gaikoku hito         No
 Javanese         tamu           wong liyo         wong asing           No
 Kannada          Atithi         Aparicita         Vid¯ e´
                                                         si             No
 Kazakh           qonaq          beytanis          ¸
                                                   seteldik             No
 Khmer            phnhiev        chn chamlek       chonobartes          No
 Korean           sonnim         nachseon salam    oegug-in             No




                                        59
Table A5: Guest, Stranger, and Foreigner in Different Non-African Languages

                     Word for         Word for          Word for
Language             "Guest"          "Stranger"        "Foreigner"              Overlap
Kurdish (Kurmanji)   m^ evan          xer^ib            b^iyan^ i                No
Kyrgyz               konok            c
                                      ¸oo¸cun           ¸
                                                        cet eldik                No
Lao                  aekhk            khon aepk na      khontangpathed           No
Latvian              viesis           sve sinieks       arzemnieks
                                                        ¯                        No
Lithuanian           sve  cias        svetimas          u zsienietis             No
Luxermbourgish       Gaascht          friem             Ausl¨ anner              No
Macedonian           gostin           stranec           stranec                  No
Malay                tetamu           orang asing       orang asing              No
Malayalam            atithi           aparicitan        vid¯e´si                 No
Maltese              mistieden        barrani           barrani                  No
Maori                manuhiri         tangata tauhou    tangata iwi ke           No
Marathi              Atith¯  i        An¯ olakh¯ i      Parad¯    e´s¯
                                                                     i           No
Mongolian            zochin           u
                                      ¨l tanikh kh¨un   gadaad                   No
Myanmar (Burmese)    ny sai           luuhcaim          ninenganhkyarrsarr       No
Nepali               P¯ahun¯   a      Aparicita         Vid¯ e´s¯i               No
Norwegian            gjest            fremmed           utlending                No
Odia                 Atithi           Aparichita        Bideshi                  No
Pashto               melma            ajnabi            baharan´      ay         No
Persian              mehm^     an     garibe
                                                        x^areji                  No
Polish               Go´ s´c          nieznajomy        cudzoziemiec             No
Portuguese           h´ospede         desconhecido      estrangeiro              No
Punjabi              Mahim¯     ana   Ajanab¯  i        Vid¯ e´s¯i               No
Romanian             oaspete          strain            str ain                  No
Russian              gost'            neznakomets       inostranets              No
Samoan               malo             tagata ese        tagata mai fafo          No
Scots Gaelic         aoigh            coigreach         c`
                                                         ein                     No
Serbian              gost             stranac           stranac                  No
Sindhi               mehm^     an     ajnabi            parde    s¯i             No
Sinhala              amuttang¯    e   agantukaya
                                      ¯                 vid¯e´sikay¯   a         No
Slovak               hos  t           cudzinec          cudzinec                 No
Slovenian            gost             neznanec          tujec                    No
Spanish              invitado         desconocido       extranjero               No
Swedish              g¨
                      ast               amling
                                      fr¨               utl¨anning               No
Tajik                mehmon           begona            xori¸c¯i                 No
Tamil                Viruntinar       Anniyan           Velin¯  attavar          No
Tatar                qunaq            cit kese          cit il kesese            No
Telugu               Atithi           Aparicitudu       Vid¯ e´s¯iyudu           No
Thai                 Khaek            Khn paelk hna     Chaw tang chati          No
Turkish              misafir          yabanci           yabanci                  No
Turkmen              myhman           n¨atany¸ s        da¸sary y    ´urtly      No
Ukrainian            hist'            neznayomets'      inozemets'               No
Urdu                 mehm¯     an     ajnab¯ i          ghayr mulki              No
Uyghur               dost             natonush          yabanchi                 No
Uzbek                mehmon           begona            chet ellik               No
Vietnamese           kh´ ach moi      nguoi la          nguoi nuoc ngo`     ai   No
Welsh                gwestai          dieithryn         estron                   No
Yiddish              gast             fremder           fremderd                 No




                                          60
