                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PATENT AUCTIONS AND BIDDING COALITIONS:
                      STRUCTURING THE SALE OF CLUB GOODS

                                        John Asker
                                   Mariagiovanna Baccara
                                       SangMok Lee

                                     Working Paper 28602
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28602


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




We thank three anonymous referees and the editor Nicola Persico for helpful comments and
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by John Asker, Mariagiovanna Baccara, and SangMok Lee. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Patent Auctions and Bidding Coalitions: Structuring the Sale of Club Goods
John Asker, Mariagiovanna Baccara, and SangMok Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 28602
March 2021
JEL No. D44,D47,K21,L14,L24,L4,O34

                                           ABSTRACT

Auctioneers of patents are observed to allow joint bidding by coalitions of buyers. These auctions
are distinguished by the good for sale being non-rivalrous, but still excludable, in
consumption{that is, they auctions of club goods. This affects how coalitional bidding impacts
auction performance. We study the implications of coalitions of bidders on second-price (or
equivalently, ascending-price) auctions. Although the formation of coalitions can benefit the
seller, we show that stable coalition profiles tend to consist of excessively large coalitions, to the
detriment of both auction revenue and social welfare. Limiting the permitted coalition size
increases efficiency and confers benefits on the seller. Lastly, we compare the revenues generated
by patent auctions and multi-license auctions, and we find that the latter are superior in a large
class of environments.

John Asker                                        SangMok Lee
Department of Economics                           Washington University in St Louis
University of California, Los Angeles             One Brookings Drive
Bunche Hall 8363                                  Saint Louis, MO 63130
405 Hilgard Avenue                                United States
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                        sangmoklee@wustl.edu
and NBER
johnasker@econ.ucla.edu

Mariagiovanna Baccara
Olin School of Business
Washington University in St.Louis
St.Louis, MO 63130
mbaccara@wustl.edu
1         Introduction
On June 27th, 2011 an auction began in which the patent portfolio of Nortel was put up for
sale as part of its bankruptcy proceedings.1 The auction used an ascending-price mechanism,
and it proceeded in rounds, with each bidder being required to outbid the leading bid in each
round to retain eligibility in subsequent rounds. The initial bid of $900 million dollars from
Ranger (a subsidiary of Google) was followed by over 19 rounds of bidding, culminating in
a winning bid of 4.5 billion dollars on June 30th, 2011.2 When the Nortel auction began,
it had five bidders: Ranger, Apple, Intel, Norpax (an affiliate of RPX Corporation, which
is an membership-based aggregator including over 320 firms as of 2020), and Rockstar (a
consortium of Research in Motion, EMC, Ericsson, Sony, and Microsoft).3 Importantly, both
at the beginning and during the course of the auction, the seller explicitly accommodated the
presence of bidding coalitions.4
        This article studies the incentives for coalitions, like those observed in the Nortel auction,
to form in patent auctions. It then examines the impact that bidding coalitions have on
auction revenues and market efficiency. It also identifies measures that sellers may implement
so as to mitigate any adverse impact that such coalitions have on the ultimate sale price.
Because of their relevance in practice, as well as their analytical tractability, we study these
issues in the context of second-price auctions (or equivalently, ascending-price auctions).5
        Central to the analytical approach are two attributes of intellectual property (IP), and
patents in particular: First, patents are `non-rivalrous,' in the sense that they can be pro-
    1
      This account of the Nortel auction follows the report of Ernst & Young (2011).
    2
      This result was described in subsequent court hearings as `record breaking ... in the patent industry
generally' (see Brickley, 2011).
    3
      Norpax dropped out in round two. Rockstar did not submit a bid in round five, resulting in a loss of
eligibility. However, Rockstar regained eligibility in the same round after joining forces with Apple, with
consent of the seller. Intel dropped out in round six. At the end of round six, two eligible bidders remained
­ Ranger and the reconstituted Rockstar. The seller at this point gave consent to Ranger and Rockstar to
enter into partnership discussions with Intel and Norpax. After round eight, Ranger and Intel entered into
a bidding partnership, with Ranger as the lead partner. In subsequent rounds, competition between Ranger
and Rockstar drove the price of the Nortel patent portfolio up to the final price.
    4
      The Nortel auction is a prominent example of the distinctive presence of bidding coalitions in patent auc-
tions. Although data on the patent market is limited (a consequence of the decentralized nature of the market),
industry sources report RPX and AST (another membership-based aggregator) as the largest purchasers of
patents in the U.S. in 2017 (see Richardson et al., 2018).
    5
      Ascending-price mechanisms similar to the ones used in the Nortel auction have been used extensively
across industries, as documented for exampe by Milgrom (2004) and Klemperer (2004) in the context of
spectum rights auctions.



                                                       1
ductively used by multiple firms, although at some point negative externalities among users
may emerge. Second, patents are `excludable,' because additional users can be prevented from
accessing a new technology protected by a patent. These attributes make patents an example
of a `club good.'6 Hence, although we focus on the patent application, the analysis presented
here applies to any other club good.7 The non-rivalrous but excludable nature of club goods
colors the incentives for coalitions to form in auctions, and the costs and benefits that the
seller internalizes from their presence. In particular, the non-rivalrous nature of consumption
means that coalition formation can increase bidders' valuations, and therefore revenues, at
least over some range of coalition sizes. The narrative of coalition formation in the Nortel
patent auction is suggestive of this feature. On the other hand, coalitions tend to depress the
degree of competition on the market and may have a negative effect on the seller's revenue.
       We explore these economic forces with a model in which a seller owns a patent that
has multiple different applications. Let the number of applications be n. There is a pool of
N potential firms interested in buying access to the underlying technology. The timing of
our game is as follows: first, firms are allowed to aggregate into coalitions. Once coalitions
are formed, every coalition establishes its own value for the patent based on its members'
independent and private values' realizations. Once these values are determined, the auction
takes place and coalitions are allowed to participate in the auction as individual bidders. Once
the auction has taken place, the winning coalition allows its members to access the underlying
technology (through, say, licensing).8
       The process that determines each coalition's value for the patent accounts for the presence
of potential negative externalities among patent users: once the patent's applications are
implemented by n firms, distributing licenses further among members generates no additional
value for the coalition.9 Therefore, if the winning coalition is larger than n, it does not
distribute licenses to all of their members, but only to n of them.
   6
      See Buchanan (1965).
   7
      Our setup also applies to auctions in which a bundle of goods, rather than a single one, are sold together,
and coalitions of buyers (each with a single-unit demand) are allowed to participate as individual bidders
(see Avery and Hendershott, 2000). In addition, Albano, Spagnolo, and Zanza (2008) and Albano (2017)
have documented and discussed the widely common presence of joint bidding in procurement auctions. An
argument used to justify the practice is the fact that projects are complex, and they may require very different
skills and expertises to be completed. Our analysis applies to these scenarios as well.
    8
      The Nortel auction has nuances that we abstract from for the sake of tractability. Notably, we do not
allow coalitions to form or change during the course of the auction.
    9
      For example, if two firms commercialize the same application, some value is destroyed by market compe-
tition.


                                                       2
   We model how each coalition's value for the patent is formed in two alternative ways. In
the first environment, which we name `the limited-value case,' after the coalition formation
stage, each coalition larger than n arbitrarily chooses n members who then obtain a private
and independent realization for the patent's value, drawn by the same distribution. Therefore,
the valuation for the patent for each coalition is the sum of the realizations of the individual
private valuations of its members, up to a maximum of n realizations. In the limited-value
case, any coalition (weakly) larger than n has the same value distribution, and therefore the
same probability of winning the auction. In the second environment, which we name `the
optimized-value case,' if a coalition is larger than n, all firms in the coalition obtain a value
realization for the patent, and the coalition selects the firms with the n highest realizations
to distribute the patent to. Hence, the coalition's valuation for the patent is the sum of the n
highest realizations. If a coalition's size is less than or equal to n, the limited-value case and
the optimized-value case are equivalent.
   We consider the process of coalition formation, which takes place before the values realize.
Foreseeing each coalition's value, as well as the equilibrium outcome of the auction, firms
endogenously form coalitions. Stable coalition profiles are ones that satisfy natural equilibrium
constraints in the coalition-formation stage: a coalition profile is stable if no firm has a
profitable unilateral deviation in joining a different coalition, or in participating in the auction
as individual bidder.
   Our first main results illustrate the effect of increasing the concentration of bidders by
moving one firm i from a (weakly) smaller to a larger coalition, when both coalitions are
strictly smaller than n. Such a move has several implications on the two coalitions' expected
auction outcomes: (i) it changes the value distribution of the patent of both coalitions by
adding firm i's realization to the valuation of the larger coalition and subtracting firm i's
realization from the valuation of the smaller one; (ii) it changes the expected price paid by
either of the two coalitions conditional on winning, and (iii) it increases the probability of
winning the auction for the larger coalition, and it decreases the probability of winning for
the smaller coalition. First, we show that such a move always increases the expected valuation
of the auction's winner, and therefore increases total welfare. Second, we show that the overall
benefits generated by such move for the larger coalitions are higher than the expected costs
generated for the smaller one, so that the move strictly increases the joint expected payoffs of
the two coalitions in the auction. In other words, an individual firm generates strictly more

                                                 3
additional coalitional value by joining a larger coalition than a smaller one.10
       The latter result has several important implications. First, it suggests that when coalitions
of firms are allowed to participate in patent auctions there is a strong incentive for them to
aggregate in coalitions large enough to exploit all the patent's applications. In particular,
stable coalition profiles never include multiple coalitions strictly smaller than n. However, this
tendency toward aggregation is mitigated by the presence of negative externalities: once a
coalitions becomes large enough (i.e., it already includes at least n firms), the additional value
generated by additional members decreases, diminishing their ability to attract more firms.
The result allows us to identify a set of necessary conditions for stable coalition profiles, which
depends on the interplay between n and the total number of firms on the market, N.
       Second, it allows us to derive implications on the seller's revenue under stable coalition
profiles. These implications depend on the way coalitions form their valuation for the patent.
In the limited-value case, we find that, once a coalition has already expanded to n firms, the
addition of new firms to that coalition always (weakly) reduces the expected revenue of the
seller in the auction. This result allows us to identify upper bounds for the seller's revenue:
If the number of applications n is large relative to N , the expected revenue for the seller
is very small. In particular, the expected second highest realization between the sum of n
individual valuations, and the sum of N - n ones constitutes an upper bound for the expected
revenue of the seller across all stable coalition profiles . As n approaches N, the seller's
revenue converges to zero. On the other hand, if n is smaller, there can be enough firms in
the industry to aggregate into multiple coalitions of size n. In this case, the upper bound we
identify for the seller's revenue is more significant, and it amounts to the expected second
highest realization among N/n coalitions, all of size n except at most one. These results
allow us to deliver a specific recommendation to allow the seller to generate the previously
identified revenue's upper bound in the limited-value case. In particular, we show that if the
seller introduces a ceiling on the coalitions' size equal to n (i.e., before coalitions form the
seller announces that only coalitions of size up to n are allowed to participate in the auction),
there is a uniquely stable coalition profile. As it turns out, such profile achieves the upper
bound for the seller's revenue previously identified, and it also maximizes the expected welfare
across all the coalition profiles.
  10
    As these results pertain to coalitions strictly smaller than n, they hold both in the limited-value case and
in the optimized-value one.



                                                       4
   Next, we study the seller's revenue in the optimized-value case. In this case, even coalitions
that are already of size n or larger can still increase their own expected value by adding new
members (as they will be able to select the n highest among a larger number of draws). On
one hand, for any given coalition profile, large coalitions would bid more aggressively, hence
improving the seller's revenue. On the other hand, firms have an even stronger incentive
to aggregate into large coalitions, resulting in fewer coalitions and lower seller's revenue. To
illustrate this tendency, we show that even in the presence of very strong negative externalities
(n = 1), the grand coalition is the only stable coalition. Although this outcome achieves the
first best from a welfare perspective (because the patent is guaranteed to be implemented by
the firms with the n highest realizations in the economy), this comes at the detriment of the
seller's revenue.
   In addition to selling a patent through an auction, IP owners typically have the option
of retaining ownership of the patent and licensing it to multiple parties through a multi-
object auction. In the last part of our analysis we compare the two auction formats from
the seller's revenue perspective. The comparison between the two selling mechanisms involves
the following trade-off: in a multi-license auction, each firm participates in the auction as an
individual bidder, and the seller's revenue is determined by the highest realization of the new
technology's value among the losers of the auction. For a relatively high number of licenses
on sale, this realization can be rather low. On the other hand, in a patent's auction, bids
coincide with the sums of the coalition members' realized valuations. Therefore, the winning
bid is the highest sum, and the seller's revenue is the second highest sum, of randomly chosen
realizations. We focus our attention on gamma-distributions and, by simulation, we find
that multi-license auctions dominate patent auctions as selling mechanism across the vast
majority of the parameter space we investigate. We also find that patent auctions have the
best chance to perform well vis-`
                                a-vis multi-license auctions when the number of applications
n is relatively large, and the distribution of the valuations is relatively right-skewed (i.e., the
difference between the highest realizations and the others is relatively large).




                                                5
Related Literature.

The question of how to sell IP has been examined in a literature starting from Katz and
Shapiro (1985). This line of work considers the strategic choice of selling, unilaterally ex-
ploiting, or licensing IP when the seller and buyers are competitors in the product market,
and transactions typically occur in the IP market via bargaining or take-it-or-leave it offers.
Our approach is different as we focus on the performance and structure of auctions as selling
mechanisms for IP and other club goods.
       Related theoretical work has considered the commercialization of licenses in the context
of auctions with negative externalities (see Hoppe, Jehiel, and Moldovanu, 2006, Jehiel and
Moldovanu, 1996, and Jehiel, Moldovanu, and Stacchetti, 1996). By contrast, we focus on the
club-good nature of IP, rather than the fact that the losing participants in a patent auction
may experience negative externalities on the final marketplace. In this sense, our work follows
a relatively sparse literature on club goods started by Buchanan (1965), with more recent
work by Deb and Razzolini (2001), Baik, Kim, and Na (2001), Norman (2004), and Fang
and Norman (2010). In this literature, Loertscher and Marx (2017) study optimal pricing
mechanisms for intermediaries of club goods. This article differs from this literature in allowing
buyers to form coalitions which act as individual entities on the club-good marketplace.
       This article is also related to different strands of the auction literature. Comparing alter-
native auction formats and studying the optimal auction problem from the seller's perspective
is a classic question in auction theory.11 In this literature the set of bidders is typically exoge-
nous and fixed across the different auction formats and, except for a few notable exceptions,
the bidders are symmetric. Our methodological approach is fundamentally different because
in this article the auction format chosen by the seller endogenously determines the set of
(potentially asymmetric) bidders. We choose to focus on second-price auctions (or, equiva-
lently, ascending-price auctions) because they are empirically relevant and analytically easier.
Clearly, if we had chosen a different auction format (say, a first-price auction), a different sets
of bidders would arise in the coalition-formation process. In particular, studying stable coali-
tion profiles would require characterizing the equilibrium bidding behavior for a large range of
asymmetric bidders' profiles, which is well-known to be challenging for first-price auctions.12
  11
    See Milgrom (2004) for a comprehensive overview.
  12
    Asymmetric auctions have been studied, among others, by Maskin and Riley (2000a and 2000b), Cantillon
(2008), and, more recently, by Kirkegaard (2009, 2012). For example, Kirkegaard (2012) ranks second- and



                                                   6
    Considering coalitions of buyers in auctions draws a natural parallel to the large literature
on bidding rings (see the excellent overview provided by Marshall and Marx, 2012).13 In
this literature, because collusive behavior tends to hurt the seller's revenue and is deemed
illegal under the antitrust laws, bidders' cartels need to be self-enforcing (see for example
McAfee and McMillan, 1992). Our perspective is different, because in the case of an auction
for a club good, coalition formation can benefit the seller, and need not be presumptively
anticompetitive. Therefore, we completely abstract from self-enforcement issues and we study
plausible patterns of coalitions when they are allowed to form.
    A strand of the literature on bidding rings considers the formation of collusive agreements
between two bidders. Specifically, this line of research considers variations on a game in
which, after individual valuations are realized, the two bidders can try to reach an agreement
to prevent one of them from bidding in an upcoming auction. Because values are realized
before the negotiation, the behavior of the bidders in the negotiation can signal their private
information. This information can be valuable to the rival in the event that no collusive
agreement is reached. This problem has been addressed by Eso and Schummer (2004) and
Toyan (2017) in the context of second-price auctions, and by Rachmilevitch (2013) and Zheng
(2019a) in the context of first-price auctions.14 Our article is distinguished from this line
of work in several ways, notably by considering more than two bidders, adopting a different
coalition formation protocol, and by focusing on club goods, for which a coalition's valuation
first-price auctions in the case of two asymmetric bidders. In our setting, characterizing stable coalition profiles
in first-price auctions would require an analysis of auction outcomes for multiple asymmetric bidders. In turn,
this would yield to a comparison between first- and second-price auctions in which the (endogenous) sets of
bidders for each auction format are potentially different from each other. Hence, comparing alternative patent
auctions' formats would be an interesting next step, but it is clearly beyond the scope of this article.
   13
      For more recent contributions in this literature, see Chassang and Ortner (2019) Che, Condorelli, and Kim
(2018), Decarolis, Goldmanis, and Penta (2020), and Decarolis and Rovigatti (2020). In particular, Decarolis,
Goldmanis, and Penta (2020) study the role of bidding intermediaries in the context of online advertisment
auctions. Interestingly, they address the stability of a collusive coalition, in which the members' individual bids
are coordinated by one bidding intermediary. Our set-up is different in many dimensions, primarly because
the incentives to form coalitions are fudamentally affected by the public-good nature of a patent. Also, in the
coalition-formation game, we allow any number of coalitions to arise endogenously.
   14
      Other contributions include Zheng (2019b), Chen and Tauman (2006) and Kivetz and Tauman (2010).
Earlier work by Brusco and Lopomo (2002) considers a setting in which bidders coordinate during the course
of an ascending price auction on the allocation of multiple objects among them. Agranov and Yariv (2018)
undertake closely related experiments on the formation of collusive agreements through communication prior
to an auction.




                                                         7
depend on the coalition's size.15 , 16
       A related line of literature considers the question of how to optimally design a sale when
buyers can collude (for example, see Laffont and Martimort, 1997 and 2000, Pavlov, 2008,
and Che and Kim, 2006 and 2009). These articles model cartel formation as being facilitated
by an uninformed third party that proposes a mechanism to coordinate the activity of the
cartel.17 This, in turn, puts further constraints on the principal's mechanism design problem.
This article differs from that line of literature by taking a more applied approach and by
considering the (positive) question of how bidders form coalitions given a specific set of auction
environments for club goods. Notably, our approach allows for multiple coalitions to form and
compete in the auction, which the approach taken by this line of work does not allow for.
       Thematically this article is perhaps closest to Cho, Jewell and Vohra (2002), who consider
coalition formation among budget-constrained bidders who compete in a first-price sealed
bid auction. All bidders have the same budget constraint and valuation, and these are both
common knowledge among all players. The coalition-formation stage is modeled using a
dynamic coalition-formation game developed in Ray and Vohra (1999).18 Although there
are clear distinctions (in Cho, Jewell and Vohra, 2002, coalitions form to mitigate budget
constraints, there is complete information in the auction, and the coalition-formation stage
unfolds through bargaining), in both our setting and Cho, Jewell, and Vohra (2002)'s the
seller may benefit from the formation of coalitions among bidders
       Finally, the notion that the set of players in a strategic situation is, in itself, endogenous
is present in some work on club formation (see, e.g., Ellickson, Grodal, Scotchmer, and Zame,
1999, and Wooders, Cartwright, and Selten, 2006). More recently, Baccara and Yariv (2013
and 2016) have studied the (endogenous) homogeneity of players in the context of public-good
games.
  15
     Somewhat related is Garratt, Troger and Zheng (2009) which considers an ascending auction with resale.
They show that the ex-post knockout structure can arise in equilibrium in ascending auctions with resale
(see Porter, 1992, and Marshall and Marx, 2012, for discussion of knockout auctions in practice). This is in
contrast to the ex-ante knockout studied by Graham and Marshall (1987) and Asker (2010).
  16
     Also, Chatterjee, Mitra, and Mukherjee (2017) consider a dynamic model of coalition formation with
multiple bidders with heterogeneous and publicly known valuations.
  17
     Graham and Marshall (1987) provide an early contribution that studies the optimal size of a bidding ring
that uses an ex-ante knockout auction. Lopomo, Marshall and Marx (2005) consider the efficiency of the
collusive mechanism, finding that, without pre-auction communication, budget-balanced collusive mechanism
can yield inefficient outcomes in an auction.
  18
     Ray and Vohra (2015) provide a survey of related coalition formation models applied in a variety of
settings.


                                                     8
2        The Model
Set-Up
A seller owns a patent on a new technology, and several ex-ante identical firms are all potential
adopters. Let N be the set of firms on the market, and N  |N | > 1.19 The patent is made
available for sale in a second-price auction, in which coalitions of firms can participate as
individual bidders. If the patent is sold to a coalition of firms, the coalition can make it
available to multiple members.
       Each firm i's private valuation Vi is independently drawn from the same non-degenerate
distribution F over R+ .20 We assume that 0  supp(F ), E (Vi ) = v > 0, and the distribution
has a log-concave density f .21 In our analysis, we denote by V(n,i) the i-th highest realization
among n draws from the distribution F , and by v(n,i) its expected value.

       The game unfolds as follows:

(1) Firms form coalitions (see Section 2.3);

(2) Firms' valuations for the patent are realized. Coalitions determine their value for the
         patent according to either the limited-values or the optimized-value case (see Section
         2.2);

(3) Coalitions participate as individual bidders in a second-price auction (or, equivalently, an
         ascending-price auction) to buy the patent;

(4) Some or all members of the winning coalition gain access to the patent (see Section 2.2).


       Before we discuss how coalitions form and determine their own valuations for the patent,
some other assumptions merit discussion. As mentioned before, the assumption that the
seller uses a second-price auction (or, equivalently, an ascending-price auction) is made, in
  19
     Throughout the article, we assume N to be exogenous and therefore abstract from firms' entry decisions
in the auction. If that is not the case (for example, N grows in the number of applications n), our qualitative
analysis still applies, with the only difference that the results will depend also on way in which n determines
N.
  20
     In the Online Appendix, we present the case in which all firms' valuations are known and symmetric.
  21
     That is, log f is concave on supp(F ). Examples of distributions with log-concave density functions in-
clude the uniform distribution (over any positive-length interval), the exponential distribution, the normal
distribution (including any truncated one over [a, b] for -  a < b  ), the gamma distribution, the beta
distribution, etc.


                                                      9
part, for tractability and because of the empirical relevance of these classes of auctions in
industry applications. As it will become apparent, if coalitions of different sizes arise in the
coalition-formation stage, their valuations have different distributions. A second-price auction
ensures bidding their own value to be each coalition's weakly dominant strategy, allowing us
to characterize the equilibrium outcome of the asymmetric auction.22 Note also that we do
not allow the seller to impose a reserve price on the auction. Any reserve price would affect the
coalition-formation stage, yielding a different set of bidders. This substantially complicates
the problem of identifying the optimal reserve price. In Section 3.2 we address this assumption
further and propose an alternative, and simpler, tool that the seller can use to increase the
revenue.
    In our analysis we also rule out the possibility of a secondary market for the patent.
Allowing for secondary markets would require to add a third stage of the game in which, after
the auction has taken place, the winner can resell the patent to another firm or coalition.
This would make the coalitions' valuations for the patent a function of the ex-post market
outcomes and, in turn, of the whole coalitions' profile. This possibility introduces non-trivial
complications and it is left to further research.23
    An assumption underlying the coalition formation stage is that all firms observe the sizes
of the other coalitions.24 The assumption that valuations are realized after coalitions are
formed is conducive to tractability, as it allows us to abstract away from potential strategic
communication issues at the time of coalition formation.25 In addition, such assumption allows
us to capture applications in which coalitions carry out joint research to acquire information
about the patent. We come back to the possibility of joint research in the next section, and
to alternative timing assumptions in Section 5.2.
  22
     Equilibrium bidding behavior in first-price auction with asymmetric bidders is well-known to be signifi-
cantly more difficult to fully characterize as discussed in Section 1.2 (see Maskin and Riley, 2000a and 2000b,
and Cantillon, 2008).
  23
     See Garratt, Troger, and Zheng (2009) for a related model of an ascending auction with resale in the
presence of collusion.
  24
     This assumption simplifies the analysis of the coalition formation stage, but because we consider a second-
price auction, any assumption on the information structure at the time of the auction (e.g., firms observe some
other coalition's members' valuations, etc.) is irrelevant for the auction's outcome.
  25
     Coalitions' formation with asymmetric information is known to be challenging and require numerous
additional assumptions. See for example Dutta and Vohra (2005), and the related references in Section 1.




                                                      10
Coalitions' Values
In this section we illustrate how coalitions determine their own value for the patent. In general,
we assume that if too many firms in the winning coalition adopt the patent, not all of them
are able to enjoy its full benefits. For tractability, we represent a diminishing marginal value
of the technology with an exogenously given n  N (which is common knowledge among
all firms), such that only up to n firms in the winning coalition can extract a positive value
from the new technology. If more than n firms adopt it, any firm in excess of n obtains zero
value from the adoption. We model the way in which a coalition determines its value in two
alternative ways, which we term limited-value case and optimized-value case, respectively.


Definition 1 (Limited-Values Case) In each coalition, at most n randomly selected firms
         obtain a realization of V and can adopt the patent. For a coalition of size m, this yields
                                          min{m,n}
         the coalition's value W =        i=1        Vi , where, for m > n, i = 1, 2, . . . , denote some
         randomly chosen firms in the coalition.26

Definition 2 (Optimized-values Case) Every firm on the market obtains a realization of
         V, and each coalition of size m selects the highest min{m, n} realizations among its
         members to determine the value of the patent. This yields the coalition's value W =
           min{m,n}
           i=1        V(m,i) .


       Notice that for coalitions (weakly) smaller than n, the coalition's value is equal to the sum
of all members' realizations in both the limited- and the optimized-value cases. Therefore, for
coalitions smaller than n the two cases are equivalent. Also, a fundamental difference between
the limited-values and optimized-value cases is that, under the former, all coalitions of any
size m  n have the same value distribution. On the other hand, under the latter, coalitions
of size m  n can still benefit from additional members as they will allow them to select the
n highest from a larger pool of realizations.
       Our externalities' structure can be also interpreted as follows. Suppose that the patent
has a maximum number n of distinct applications which are unrelated to each other, and
that, within each coalition, a realization of V represents the realized value of one application.
  26
   Therefore, in the limited-value case, the value distribution of any coalition of size m is the convolution of
min{m, n} individual distributions F.


                                                       11
In addition, assume that that if more than n firms adopt the technology within a coalition,
cumulative profits start decreasing because of increased competition in some applications'
markets.27 Along these lines, n could be interpreted as the number of adopting firms that
maximizes the cumulative value of the patent for any coalition of size m > n. In this case,
the coalition would never find it optimal to let more than n firms adopt the technology, and
our assumption (any firm in excess to n obtains zero value from the adoption) would imply
no loss of generality.28
       In our model, after alliances among firms are formed, firms in each coalition research the
applications of the patent in order to obtain a realization of V . The limited-value case applies
when each application can be investigated by at most one member (this could be due, for
example, to substantial research costs). Hence, although larger coalitions have the breadth to
explore more applications than smaller ones, they still cannot obtain more than n realizations
of the patent's value. Therefore, each coalition strictly larger than n randomly selects n firms
that will explore the patent's applications. After the research has been concluded, those firms
learn their private valuations, and they make them public within the coalition. At that point,
the coalition assesses its total value of the patent and participate as a bidder in the auction.
       The optimized-value case corresponds to situations in which conducting research and ob-
taining value realizations is relatively cheap, so that each firm is able to determine their
individual valuation for the new technology. Therefore, each coalition strictly larger than n is
able to observe all the realizations obtained by its members and, upon winning the auction,
to maximize the coalition's profit, it gives access to the patent to the n members associated
with the highest valuations.
       An assumption underlying the coalitions' value formation process is that all firms' indi-
vidual realizations are public information within the coalition. This allows each coalition to
determine its own value without concerns of potential misreporting on the members' side. Be-
cause we are focusing on coalitions that can regulate themselves using legal contracts, we view
misreporting concerns as less severe than in illegal bidding rings, which need to be necessarily
self-enforcing.
  27
      For example, consider a new type of lens, that could be applied to produce glasses, binoculars, and
telescopes. However, if more than, say, one firm in the same product market adopts the new lens, joint profits
in that market decline. Therefore, we have n = 3.
   28
      One could consider more general externalities' structures by allowing the adoption of the technology to
yield strictly decreasing (rather than constant up to n, and then equal to zero) marginal returns. This extension
is discussed in Section 5.


                                                       12
       Finally, we assume that any coalition that does not win the auction gets zero payoff
regardless of the number of firms adopting the new technology (i.e., there are no negative
externalities on non-adopting firms). This assumptions allows us to avoid a coalition's value
to depend on the number and size of other coalitions.

Coalitions and Stability
Before values are realized and the auction takes place, firms can form coalitions. Consider
 = (1 , .., J ) to be a partition of the set N , or a coalition profile.29 Within each coalition
profile , each coalition j   (which could be a set of multiple firms or an individual firm)
is a bidder in the auction. Let nj  |j |­that is, nj is the size of coalition j . Without loss of
generality, let 1 be the largest coalition within  , 2 the second largest, etc., and so on­that
is, n1  n2  ...  nJ .
       For coalition j , the total value of the patent Wj is determined as described in Section
2.2. As two coalition profiles characterized by the same profile {n1 , .., nJ } are ex-ante payoff-
indistinguishable, we treat such coalition profiles as an equivalence class and denote the re-
sulting collection of equivalence classes by . For sake of simplicity, we refer to the elements
of  as coalition profiles rather than equivalence classes of coalitions profiles.
       Given a coalition profile , the payoff of coalition j from winning the auction is the
difference between the realization of Wj and the second highest bid. We denote the coalition's
profit from an ex-ante perspective (i.e., expected at the time of the coalition formation, before
private valuations realize) by  (j ;  ). For any coalition profile  = (1 , 2 , . . . , J ), j 's
expected payoff is
                           (j ;  ) = Pr{j wins} × E [Wj - Pj | j wins] ,

where Pj is the price paid by j conditional on winning. For standard arguments, it is imme-
diate to see that in the second-price auction each coalition has a weakly dominant strategy
in bidding their own value. In the rest of the article, we focus on equilibria of the auction
stage in which bidders bid their own value. Therefore,  (j ;  ) is well-defined for any  and
j   .30
  29                                                                               J
     That is, (i) for each j ,  = j  N , (ii) for each j = k , j  k = , and (iii) j =1 j = N . Note that we
do not allow the same firm to join two coalitions.
  30
     Any tie-breaking rule we specify for the auction is inconsequential in determining the payoffs as such a
rule is applied only in events in which the payoffs of the winning coalitions are zero.



                                                     13
       The following notation will be useful for our analysis. Any given set of bidders  =
(1 , .., J ) is associated with a valuation vector (W1 , ..., WJ ). The winner of the patent is
the coalition associated with the highest realization in (W1 , ..., WJ ), and the revenue raised
corresponds to the second-highest realization. Denoting as W(,m) the m-th highest realization
associated to the vector (W1 , ..., WJ ), and as w(,m) its expected value, the expected revenue
of the seller given a set of bidders  is R( )  w(,2) .31

       Next, we describe the equilibrium notion we adopt. As, in our model, utility is transferable,
we focus on coalition profiles that satisfy the stability notion illustrated in the following two
definitions.


Definition 3 (Profitable Deviation) Consider a coalition profile  = (1 , .., J ). A firm i
         in coalition j   has a profitable deviation if at least one of the following is true:


   1. The coalition profile  = (1 , . . . , J +1 ) with j = j \{i}, J +1 = {i}, and k = k for
         k = j, J + 1 is such that

                                       (j ;  ) <  (j ;  ) +  ({i};  );                                (1)


   2. For some k = j , the coalition profile  = (1 , . . . , J ) with j = j \{i}, k = k  {i},
         and h = h for h = j, k is such that

                                  (j ;  ) +  (k ;  ) <  (j ;  ) +  (k ;  ).                           (2)




Definition 4 (Stable Coalition Profile) A coalition profile  is stable if no firm has a
         profitable deviation.


       In words, the two requirements for a stable coalition profile read as follows: (1) there
exist no coalition j and firm i  j that would receive a strictly higher payoff as a singleton
than the amount that her current coalition j is willing to pay to make her stay, and (2)
there exist no transfer that a coalition k would be willing to pay a firm i belonging to a
  31
    Again, R( ) is well-defined because we focus on equilibria involving weakly dominant strategies in the
auction stage.

                                                   14
different coalition j that is strictly higher than the amount that coalition j is willing to pay
to make firm i stay. Each firm, taking as given how other firms aggregate, and foreseeing the
equilibrium played in the auction stage, unilaterally selects to be in the coalition where her
own marginal value is the highest. Stability is, therefore, a natural equilibrium condition for
the coalition-formation stage.32 In what follows, for any given N and n( N ), we denote the
set of stable coalition profiles by  (N, n).
    The idea of a stable coalition profile is reminiscent of the notion of the core, which also
requires a type of group stability.33 Nonetheless, there are some important distinctions. First,
the setup is different ­ cooperative games normally specify exogenous group values, rather
than group values that are derived endogenously from a strategic interaction (specifically, an
auction). Second, under a transferable utility assumption, the core coincides with the coalition
profile that maximizes the sum of all coalitions' expected payoffs. In our game, however,
each coalition's expected payoff in the auction depends on the entire coalition profile.34 A
deviation which is jointly profitable for the coalitions directly involved in it may impose
negative externalities on other coalitions' profits. Therefore, a coalition profile that maximizes
the sum of all coalitions' expected payoffs may not be stable.35 Third, we take a unilateral-
deviation approach in our stability notion, whereas cooperative solutions such as the core
allow for arbitrary group deviations. As the auction stage of our game is non-cooperative, we
adopt this notion of stability rather than a cooperative one to make the equilibrium notions
in the game internally coherent.36 In Section 5.1, we discuss the implications of considering
joint deviations on our results.
  32
     As we take a unilateral-deviation approach throughout the article, we are agnostic with respect to the
question of whether there is enough surplus within a coalition to compensate multiple members when they
consider deviating simultaneously to other coalitions.
  33
     For a recent survey on group formation and stability concepts, see Ray and Vohra (2015). See also
additional references in Section 1.
  34
     As it becomes apparent below, the entire coalition profile affects the probability of a coalition winning the
auction as well as the expected price paid conditional on winning.
  35
     More formally, for each coalition profile  = (1 , . . . , J ), let the expected total welfare be ( ) 
  J                                      
  j =1  (j ;  ). A coalition profile   arg max  ( ) may not be stable. In fact, a firm's unilateral
deviation could increase the sum of the payoffs of the coalitions involved in (1) or (2), although at the same
time decreasing the total welfare by lowering the payoffs of coalitions not directly involved in the deviation.
  36
     Similar notions of stability with respect to unilateral (or bilateral) deviations are common in the matching
and network literature.




                                                       15
Welfare
In this section we discuss our model from a welfare perspective. The ex-post first best is
achieved if the patent is implemented by the firms with the highest n realizations in the
economy. In general, the presence of multiple coalitions of firms constitutes an impediment
for this to happen: because the auction's mechanism selects the winner according to the
highest sum of realizations within each coalition, some of the n highest realizations in the
market could be wasted from a ex-post welfare perspective because they happen to occur in
a losing coalition.
   Still, from an ex-ante perspective, we can identify the coalition profile that maximizes the
expected social value generated by the patent. Specifically, recall that, for any coalition profile
 = {1 , .., J } associated with a valuation vector (W1 , ..., WJ ), we denote as W(,1) the highest
realization, and as w(,1) its expected value. Because the winner of the auction is the coalition
associated with the highest realization in  , we define as S ( )  w(,1) the expected welfare
generated by coalition profile  . The most efficient among all coalition profiles is the one that
maximizes the expected welfare. The next result illustrates the effect of concentrating firms
into larger coalitions on welfare. All proofs are in Section 6.2.

Proposition 1 (Effect of Concentration on Welfare) Let  = (1 , . . . , J ) be a coali-
      tion profile such that 0 < nj  nk < n. For any firm i  j , let  = (1 , . . . , J ) be
      such that j = j \{i}, k = k  {i}, and h = h for h = j, k . Then, S ( ) > S ( ).


   Proposition 1 guarantees that, if two coalitions are strictly smaller than n, and we move
one firm from the (weakly) smaller to the larger coalition (therefore, increasing the concentra-
tion of firms into larger coalitions), the expected welfare strictly increases. To understand the
intuition of Proposition 1, consider moving a firm i from coalition j to k , when both coali-
tions are strictly smaller than n and, for simplicity, assume that j and k are the only existing
coalitions, so one of them wins the auction for sure. This move implies that the distribution
of the coalition k 's valuation in the auction (the convolution of nk identical distributions F )
`increases' (in likelihood-ratio order sense) by one additional distribution F, whereas the dis-
tribution of coalition j 's valuation in the auction `decreases' (in likelihood-ratio order sense)
by one distribution F. For convenience, denote X         aj \{i}   Va , and Y    ak   Va , and note
that the welfare values before and after the move are max{X + Vi , Y } and max{X, Y + Vi },

                                                16
respectively. Intuitively, adding Vi to the value that is already more likely to be larger must
contribute more to the maximum between the two variables. In fact, max{X, Y +Vi } first-order
stochastically dominates max{X + Vi , Y }, yielding a higher expected welfare. Proposition 1
formalizes this intuition and generalizes it to the presence of other coalitions.
     We make two observations pertaining to Proposition 1. First, because the result addresses
coalitions that are strictly smaller than n, and for such coalitions the limited-values and
optimized-value cases are equivalent, Proposition 1 holds in both cases. Second, Proposition
1 implies that any coalition profile including more than one coalition strictly smaller than n
cannot be optimal from a expected-welfare perspective.

     To understand the implications of Proposition 1 on the social planner's preferred coalition
profile, and the interplay between ex-ante efficiency and first best, we need to distinguish
between the limited-values and the optimized-value cases.

Welfare in the Limited-value Case

Let us start by identifying the coalition profile that maximizes the expected welfare value in
the limited-value case. Note that any coalition profile including at least one coalition strictly
larger n cannot be optimal from a welfare perspective. Indeed, if all firms in excess to n
separate from their coalition to form their own new coalition, the expected highest value of
the new coalition profile strictly increases. On the other hand, Proposition 1 implies that any
profile including more than one coalition strictly smaller than n cannot be optimal from a
welfare perspective. Therefore, the coalition profile  that includes the maximum number of
coalitions of size n, and aggregates all the remaining firms into one smaller coalition must be
optimal from an expected welfare perspective. Formally, let   (1 , .., K ) with K  N/n ,
n1 = ... = nK -1 = n and nK = N - n(K - 1). The next result follows directly from Proposition
1.

Corollary 1 (Welfare Maximization in the Limited-Value Case) ~ uniquely maximizes
       the expected welfare value among all coalition profiles.

     Despite being the most efficient coalition profile ex-ante, profile  still does not guarantee
to achieve the ex-post first best. As noted above, because the winning coalition in  is the
one that realizes the maximum sum of the members' realizations, the first best is not achieved
unless, ex-post, all the n highest realizations happen to belong to the same coalition.

                                                17
Welfare in the Optimized-value Case

In the optimized-value case, all firms in the economy always obtain a realization, and the
winner of the auction is the coalition with the highest sum of the highest n realizations within
the coalition. In the grand coalition  = (N ), the patent's value always corresponds to sum
of the n highest realizations in the economy. Therefore, in the optimized-value case, not only
does the grand coalition maximizes the expected welfare, but it also guarantees that the n
highest realizations in the economy are implemented ex-post. Therefore, the grand coalition
uniquely achieves the first best.


3     Stable Coalition Profiles and Seller's Revenue
In this section we first study the stable coalition profiles and then we derive their implications
on the seller's revenue and the welfare.

Stable Coalition Profiles
We start the analysis by addressing the existence of a stable coalition profile in our setting.
The next result shows that the grand coalition is stable under a mild assumption on the
distribution F in the limited-values model, and it is always stable in the optimized-values
model.

Lemma 1 (Existence of a Stable Coalition Profile)

                                                        n+1
(a) In the limited-value case, if 3v(n+1,2) +           h=3   v(n+1,h)  v(n+1,1) , then the grand coalition
      is stable;

(b) In the optimized-value case, the grand coalition is always stable.

    Part (a) of Lemma 1 provides a sufficient condition on F for the existence of a stable
coalition profile in the limited-value case. This condition is satisfied for a large class of
distributions F .37 Intuitively, consider a firm i that may deviate from the grand coalition and
  37
     For example, if each firm i's private valuation's distribution is Vi  U [0, 1], the condition in Part (a) of
                                     n-1
Lemma 1 becomes n     +1       n                    1
                     n+2  3 n+2 + n+2 + · · · + n+2 , which holds for every n  1. Also, if Vi  exp( ), we
                                                     1 1
have V(n+1,n+1)  exp((n + 1) ) and v(n+1,n+1) =        n+1 . Because the exponential distribution is memoryless,
the difference between V(n+1,n) and V(n+1,n+1) follows an independent exponential with parameter n , which
                      1    1   1                          1    1   1
results in v(n+1,n) =   ( n+1 +n ). Similarly, v(n+1,i) =   ( n+1 +n +···+ 1i ). Therefore, the condition in Part



                                                       18
form a coalition {i} by itself. The singleton coalition can win the auction and realize a positive
profit only in the scenario in which firm i's realization is the highest among n + 1 draws from
the distribution F , and the sum of all other n draws is lower than firm i's realization. In this
scenario, the price paid by coalition {i} is the sum of the other n realizations. Therefore, the
grand coalition tends to be stable if v(n+1,1) is low relative to the sum all other order statistics
v(n+1,h) for h = 2, ..., n + 1. Part (b) of Lemma 1 guarantees that, in the optimized-values
model, the grand coalition is always stable. This follows immediately from the fact that the
grand coalition always achieves the maximum feasible payoff in this market, i.e., the sum of
the n highest realizations across all N firms.

    Next, in Proposition 2, we describe an important and general property of the coalitions'
auction equilibrium payoffs. In the proof (which is in Section 6.2), we exploit some tools drawn
from the literature on stochastic orders. For ease of reference, these tools are summarized in
Section 6.1.

Proposition 2 (Effect of Concentration on Coalitions' Payoffs) In both the limited-values
      and optimized-value cases, let  = (1 , . . . , J ) be a coalition profile such that 0 <
      nj  nk < n. For any firm i  j , let  = (1 , . . . , J ) be such that j = j \{i},
      k = k  {i}, and h = h for h = j, k . Then,

                                   (j ;  ) +  (k ;  ) <  (j ;  ) +  (k ;  ).


    Proposition 2 explores the consequences of moving one firm from a (weakly) smaller to a
larger coalition, when both initial coalitions are strictly smaller than n. Our result guarantees
that this move always strictly increases the two coalitions' joint payoffs.
    Similarly to Proposition 1, because Proposition 2 pertains to coalitions that are strictly
smaller than n, and for such coalitions the limited-values and optimized-value cases coincide,
Proposition 2 holds in both cases. Moreover, note that Proposition 2 holds without the
additional assumption on F imposed in Part (a) of Lemma 1.
    To understand Proposition 2, intuitively, consider a unilateral move of a firm i from coali-
tion j to k , such that nj  nk < n. Such move has several implications on the expected
                                                                                 1      1
(a) of Lemma 1 holds for every n  1 because 2v(n+1,2) + (v(n+1,2) - v(n+1,1) ) =   [2( n+1 + ··· + 1
                                                                                                   2 ) - 1] > 0.
In fact, for any distribution F with a bounded support, the condition is always satisfied for large enough n,
because the difference v(n+1,1) - v(n+1,2) is strictly decreasing in n.


                                                      19
payoffs of coalitions k (now k ) and j (now j ). For convenience, denote X                         aj \{i}   Va ,
and Y          ak   Va .
       First, (i) the move of firm i from coalition j to k increases the two coalitions' total
expected valuation, conditional on the event that either of them wins. This effect is the same
that underlies Proposition 1, so the same intuition we discussed in Section 2.4 applies.
       Second, (ii) the move of firm i from coalition j to k decreases the price paid by the
winning coalition, conditional on the event that either of them wins. Again, for simplicity
assume that j and k are the only two coalitions on the market, so one of them wins for sure,
and the price is the realized valuation of the other coalition. Observe that the prices paid by
the winner before and after the move are min{X + Vi , Y } and min{X, Y + Vi }, respectively.
Along the same lines as before, adding the realization of Vi to the coalition that is less likely to
have the lower realization tends to reduce the minimum between the two values. In particular,
min{X + Vi , Y } first-order stochastically dominates min{X, Y + Vi }.
       Third (iii), in the presence of other coalitions on the market, the move of firm i from
coalition j to k increases the probability of the event that either of the two coalitions wins.
This is because, as we already observed, max{X, Y + Vi } first-order stochastically dominates
max{X + Vi , Y }. Therefore, max{X, Y + Vi } has a better chance to generate the highest
realization on the market when other bidders are present.
       Therefore, the move of firm i from coalition j to coalition k increases the two coalitions'
total expected valuation and decreases the price paid by the winning coalition conditional
on either of them winning the auction (effects (i) and (ii) ). The move also increases the
probability of the event that either of the two firms wins (effect (iii) ). Hence, it must be the
case that the move increases the joint expected payoffs of the two coalitions in the auction,
as Proposition 2 indeed guarantees.38 , 39
       It is interesting to compare Proposition 1 and Proposition 2. In particular, Proposition 1
addresses coalition profiles' efficiency and it guarantees that by moving firm i from coalition
j to k the winner's expected valuation for the patent (i.e., the expected welfare) always
increases. This force corresponds solely to effect (i) listed above. When all coalitions (except
  38
      Moreover, even if it is not relevant to our argument, the move for firm i from j to k changes the
probabilities of winning the auction of all other coalitions h = j , k , as well as the expected price paid
conditional on any of them winning.
   39
      The assumption 0  supp(F ) ensures that small coalitions can still win the auction with positive probabil-
ity. Otherwise, the strict inequality in Proposition 2 may not hold as small coalitions may get zero expected
payoffs regardless of how a firm may deviate from one coalition to another.


                                                      20
at most one) reach size n, further aggregation of firms into larger coalition starts being socially
wasteful. This observation allows Corollary 1 to identify ~ as the most efficient coalition profile.
On the other hand, although Proposition 2 guarantees that stable coalition profiles cannot
include multiple coalitions smaller than n, it stops short of guaranteeing that the most efficient
profile ~ is stable. This is because stability involves additional effects besides (i) : specifically,
once a coalition reaches size n, it could still have an incentive to add additional members in a
socially wasteful way to decrease the price paid in case it wins the auction, or to increase the
probability of winning. In other words, effects (ii) and (iii) can still be present if coalition k
is (weakly) larger than n.

   Corollaries 2 and 3 explore the implications of Proposition 2 on the set of stable coalition
profiles. They illustrate some necessary conditions for any coalition profile to be stable, which
we use in the next sections to study the seller's revenue.


Corollary 2 (Small Coalitions) In both the limited-values and optimized-value cases, any
      stable coalition profile can include at most one coalition strictly smaller than n.

Corollary 3 (Stable Coalition Profiles) In both the limited-values and optimized-value
      cases, for any stable coalition profile  = (1 , . . . , J ),

(a) if n = N , then  is the grand coalition;

         N
(b) if   2
              n < N , then either (i) n  n1 < N, and n2 = N - n1 ; or (ii)  is the grand
      coalition;

              N
(c) if n <    2
                ,   then either (i) n1 ,.. nJ  n; or (ii) n1 ,.. nJ -1  n and nJ < n.


   By Corollary 2, a stable coalition profile cannot have more than one coalition strictly
smaller than n. Thus, if n = N , only the grand coalition can be a stable coalition profile
                                                                        N
(Lemma 1 identifies sufficient conditions for it to be stable). If      2
                                                                               n < N, there are not
enough firms to form three coalitions and still satisfy Corollary 2. Therefore, a stable coalition
profile can contain at most two coalitions, the (weakly) larger one must contain at least n
                                                                        N
firms, and the smaller one the remaining ones. Finally, if n <          2
                                                                          ,   stable coalition profiles
can contain three coalitions or more, as long as all coalitions but one are weakly larger than
n­that is, nJ -1  n.

                                                  21
       To conclude, given the necessary conditions for stability illustrated in Corollary 3, a natural
question to ask is whether coalition profiles other than the grand coalition can be stable or
uniquely stable. The following example addresses this question in the limited-value case by
showing that a coalition profile with multiple coalitions can be in fact stable (the proofs of
claims (a) and (b) in Example 1 are in Section 6.3). Further examples of stable coalitions

profiles are presented in Section 6.1.

Example 1 (Stable Coalition Profiles) In the limited-value case, let N = 4, n = 2, and
          = (1 , 2 ) be such that n1 = n2 = 2.

(a) If V has an exponential distribution with parameter  > 0, then both  and the grand
         coalition are stable for any  > 0.

(b) If V has a Gamma distribution (, 1) with  = 1/4, then  is uniquely stable.40


Seller's Revenue in the Limited-value Case
Next, we focus on the limited-value case, and we address the implications of Proposition 2 on
the seller's expected revenue. First, consider the effect of moving one firm from a smaller to a
larger coalition on the seller's expected revenue, when both coalitions are strictly smaller than
n. Despite the fact that such a move increases the two coalitions' joint payoffs (as guaranteed
by Proposition 2), it is easy to build examples in which the move also benefits the seller.41
Nonetheless, the next result guarantees that moving a firm from a smaller coalition toward a
sizable one (i.e., larger than n) always reduces the seller's expected revenue.


Lemma 2 (Effect of Concentration on Seller's Revenue) In the limited-value case, let
          be a coalition profile with j , k   such that 0 < nj  n  nk . For any firm i  j ,
         let  = (1 , . . . , J ) be such that j = j \{i}, k = k  {i}, and h = h for h = j, k .
         Then, R( ) > R( ).
  40
     As discussed in Section 4, the gamma distribution is convenient to study because the sum of k random
variables with a gamma distribution (, 1) follows itself a gamma distribution (k, 1). In fact, numerical
simulations suggest that the coalition profile  is uniquely stable for any sufficiently small .
  41
     To see this, consider a scenario in which N and n are both very large, and  = (1 , 2 , 3 ), with 2 = {i},
3 = {i }, and 1 = N \{i, i }. For N and n large enough, 1 wins the auction almost for sure and the seller's
revenue is likely to be max{Vi , Vi }. Upon a deviation of i from 3 to 2 we have 1 = 1 , 2 = {i, i }, and
the seller's revenue is likely to increase to Vi + Vi .

                                                     22
   If a firm i is moved from a coalition j (weakly) smaller than n to a coalition k larger
than n, the value distribution of coalition j decreases (in a likelihood-ratio sense), but, as
coalition k already includes n members, the value distribution of coalition k is not affected
by the move. Therefore, firm i's contribution effectively disappears from the auction, and
the seller's expected revenue strictly decreases. Hence, from the seller's perspective, profiles
involving one or more coalitions strictly larger than n are dominated by coalition profiles in
which any firm in excess of n is moved toward smaller coalitions, making the coalition profile
more even in sizes.

   Recall that for any given N and n( N ), we denote the set of stable coalition profiles
by  (N, n). Also, because W(,m) is the m-th highest realization associated to the vector
(W1 , ..., WJ ), and w(,m) is its expected value, the expected revenue of the seller given  is
R( )  w(,2) . Hence, the seller's maximum expected revenue from a patent auction as a
function of N and n is defined by

                                  R (N, n)      max     R( ),
                                                (N,n)


and R (N, n)  0 if  (N, n) = . Next, we exploit the necessary condition of stable coalition
profiles characterized in Corollary 3, together with Lemma 2, to find the maximum revenue a
seller can raise through a second-price (or ascending) patent auction.


Proposition 3 (Seller's Revenue in the Limited-Values Case) In the limited-value case,
     (i) if n = N, R (N, n) = 0; (ii) if n < N, let K  N/n , and consider the coalition
     profile   {1 , .., K } with n1 = ... = nK -1 = n and nK = N - n(K - 1). Then,
                      
     R (N, n)  R (N, n)  w(,2) .


   If n = N, point (i) of Proposition 3 is an immediate consequence of part (a) of Corollary
3: if the grand coalition is the only coalition profile that can be stable, R (N, n) = 0. If
n < N  2n, by construction we have K = 2, and Proposition 3 is obtained observing that
Lemma 2 guarantees that among all the coalition profiles described in part (b) of Corollary
3, the profile  = (1 , 2 ) in which n1 = n and n2 = N - n1 is the one maximizing the seller's
revenue. If N  2n +1, Lemma 2 guarantees that, among all coalition profiles described in part
(c) of Corollary 3, the one yielding the maximum potential revenue for the seller is formed by
the maximum possible number of coalitions of size n, and the remaining firms allocated in one

                                              23
smaller coalition. This profile corresponds to  in Proposition 3, and the revenue generated
                                
by it is w(,2) . Therefore, R (N, n)  w(,2) represents an upper bound for the revenue that
the seller can generate across all stable coalition profiles. Finally, observe that  corresponds
to the coalition profile that maximizes the expected welfare value in Corollary 1.

       In the context of second-price auctions, typically sellers are able to improve their expected
revenue by introducing a reserve price. In our setting, the introduction of a reserve price affects
the coalition-formation stage, and therefore it is substantially more difficult to evaluate from
the seller's perspective. On one hand, coalition profiles including multiple small coalitions are
still not stable (it is easy to show that Proposition 2 is robust to the introduction of a reserve
price).42 On the other hand, firms aggregating into larger coalitions becomes more likely to
occur in stable coalition profiles. This is because unilateral deviations of firms considering
participating in the auction as single bidders are less likely to be profitable (because an
individual firm may face a very small probability to obtain a value realization above the
reserve price). This effect tends to hurt the seller's revenue.
       Although studying the implications of a reserve price as well as identifying the optimal
one is beyond the scope of this article, in our setting the seller has an alternative design tool
to influence the coalition-formation stage and the auction outcome, which is much simpler to
evaluate. Specifically, the seller can impose bounds on coalitions' sizes that potential bidders
must satisfy to be allowed to participate in the auction. In fact, Propositions 1, 2, and 3 allow
us to derive a precise auction design recommendation that allows both the social planner to
achieve the maximum expected welfare value, and the seller to obtain the upper bound w(,2)
identified in Proposition 3. In Corollary 4, we show that, when n < N, if, before coalitions
form, the seller imposes a ceiling (i.e., a maximum) equal to n to the bidding coalitions'
size, coalition profile  becomes uniquely stable, allowing both the upper bound identified in
Proposition 3 to be obtained by the seller as auction's revenue, and the expected welfare to
be maximized.43

Corollary 4 (Ceiling on Coalitions' Size) In the limited-value case, let n < N. If the
  42
     To see this, observe that the proof of Proposition 2 remains unchanged if we redefine Z 
max maxh=j,k ah Va , r , where r is a reserve price.
  43
     Although Lemma 2 guarantees that in the limited-values case setting the ceiling at n clearly dominates
setting it at any higher level, setting a ceiling below n could generate even higher expected revenues for the
seller. Indeed, a ceiling below n generates a larger number of smaller bidding coalitions, each with a lower
value distribution (in a first-order stochastic sense). Whether this turns out to be beneficial for the seller
depends on the specific distribution F.

                                                     24
      seller allows only coalitions of size up to n to participate in the auction,  is uniquely
                                                
      stable, and it generates the revenue R (N, n).

Seller's Revenue in the Optimized-value Case
We now turn to the implications of the results in Section 3.1 on the seller's expected revenue
in the optimized-value case.
   The consequences of optimized values on the set of stable coalition profiles are two-fold.
First, consider a firm deviating from coalition j to a larger coalition k such that nj  n  nk .
In the limited-value case, such a deviation does not change k 's valuation, although it decreases
j 's valuation as well as its probability of winning the auction. As j is less likely to win, all
other coalitions, including k , are more likely to win (and they pay a lower price conditional
on winning). On the other hand, in the optimized-value case, such a deviation does increases
k 's valuation. In fact, if coalitions have the ability to select the highest ones among all their
members' realizations, even a coalition already larger than n can still improve its own value
distribution by adding more members (this is because by adding more members the coalition
will be able to select the n highest realizations among a larger number of draws). Also, as
k 's valuation increases, the chances of k winning the auction increase more than in the
limited-value case. This implies that deviations from a coalition to another that is larger than
n are more likely to be profitable than in the limited-value case. Therefore, firms have an
even stronger incentive to concentrate in larger coalitions than in the limited-value case.
   Second, a firm's deviation from a coalition j such that nj  n to a singleton is less likely
to be profitable than in the limited-value case, as the original coalition j 's value distribution
is higher in this case. Both of these forces tend to make coalition profiles that include a small
number of large coalitions relatively stable.
   Similarly to the limited-value case, the incentives for firms to concentrate into large coali-
tions are stronger for larger n. In fact, if n is small, coalitions tend to benefit less from the
acquisition of additional members. The following result shows that even if n = 1, and there-
fore the incentives to aggregate in larger coalitions are minimal, in the optimized-value case,
the grand coalition is uniquely stable, guaranteeing zero revenue for the seller.

Proposition 4 (Stability in the Optimized-Value Case) In the optimized-value case, as-
      sume n = 1. Then, the grand coalition is uniquely stable.


                                                   25
       To summarize the implications of the optimized-value case on the seller's revenue, observe
that, because any coalition (weakly) larger than n can still improve their value distribution by
adding more members, for any given coalition profile  the expected bids of large coalitions are
going to be higher than in the limited-value case. Therefore, if several coalitions larger than
n coexist in a stable coalition profile, the seller may obtain a higher revenue. However, as the
firms' incentives to consolidate in large coalitions are even stronger than in the limited-value
case, it is likely the case that the grand coalition becomes uniquely stable (as Proposition 4
suggests), yielding zero revenue to the seller, but, on the other hand, achieving the first-best
in terms of welfare value of the patent.
       As in the limited-value case, setting a ceiling on the coalitions' size at n can surely avoid the
grand coalition and guarantee a positive revenue for the seller. In fact, similarly to Corollary 4,
such ceiling would make the profile  uniquely stable, guaranteeing w(,2) as expected revenue
for the seller.44


4        Multi-License Auctions
In this section we study the implications of the IP's owner auctioning off multiple licenses
rather than one patent. We compare the revenue generated by a multi-license auction to
the one generated by a second-price patent auction. We focus on the limited-value case
as the analysis in Section 3.3 suggests that the seller's revenue tends to be lower in the
optimized-value case. Therefore, multi-license auction will tend to be optimal in a greater set
of environments in the optimized-value case.
       If the seller opts for an auction of multiple licenses, he is able to choose the number of
licenses to sell. We assume that each firm can only participate in the auction individually,
because each license is going to be issued to one specific winning firm.45 Each firm i's payoff
in the auction is:
  44
     Still, in the optimized-value case this ceiling could be dominated by both lower and higher ones. To see
this, consider N = 102 and n = 50. Setting a ceiling at 50 results in the coalition profile  = (1 , 2 , 3 )
with n1 = n2 = 50 and n3 = 2 being uniquely stable. Still, setting a ceiling at 51 may result in a coalition
profile  = (1 , 2 ) with n1 = n2 = 51 being stable as well. Because in the optimized-values case the value
distributions of 1 and 2 are higher (in a first-order stochastic sense) than the ones of 1 and 2 , depending
on the underlying distribution F ,  could increase the expected revenue of the seller.
  45
     Firms may still decide to collude illegally to manipulate the auction's price. We rule out this possibility
because this article focuses on transparent agreements to share patents legally. Naturally, considering the
possibility of such illicit agreements would lead the revenue generated by multiple licenses to decrease. We
also assume that licenses are non-transferable.


                                                      26
                                 i = Pr{i wins} × E [Vi - Pi | i wins] ,

where Pi is the price paid by i conditional on winning. The seller auctions off at most n
licenses, as any additional license would be valued zero by all firms. For each choice of
selling k  n licenses, we assume that the seller holds a (k + 1)-th price auction, which
is well-known to be revenue-equivalent to a large class of standard multi-unit auctions (see
Harris and Raviv, 1981, Weber, 1983, and Maskin and Riley, 1989).46 The expected revenue
from selling k ( n) licenses is kv(N,k+1) . Therefore, the seller's revenue from a multi-license
auction is Rlic  maxkn kv(N,k+1) , and we have Rlic  nv(N,n+1) ­that is, the expected revenue
generated by selling exactly n licenses at the uniform price of the (n + 1)-th order statistic
among N draws from the distribution F represents a lower bound for the revenue generated
by a multi-license auction.

       The comparison between the revenue raised by a patent auction and the one raised by
a multi-license auction in general depends on the distribution F . To get some intuition,
suppose that N = Kn for some K  Z+ . As seen above, a lower bound for the revenue
raised by a multi-license auction is identified by nv(N,n+1) . The upper bound of the patent
auction revenue identified in point (ii) of Proposition 3 is the seller's expected revenue when
firms form K coalitions of size n. If the n firms with the highest ex-post realizations happen
                                                                                         n
to be consolidated in one group, the seller's revenue can be at most                     i=1   V(N,n+i) , which is
clearly below the lower bound of the multi-license auction revenue. When the firms with the
ex-post highest realizations happen to be separated into different coalitions, the revenue's
comparison depends on the distribution F . Consider for example the case N = 4 and n = 2.
If the seller decides to opt for a multi-license auction, the revenue is at least 2V(4,3) . In the
patent-auction case, consider two coalitions of size n = 2. Ex-post, the two firms with highest
realizations are equally likely to be in either one coalition or separate coalitions. In the first
case, the seller's revenue will be V(4,3) + V(4,4) , which is strictly lower than 2V(4,3) . In the
second case, the seller's revenue is equally likely to be either min{V(4,1) + V(4,4) , V(4,2) + V(4,3) }
or min{V(4,1) + V(4,3) , V(4,2) + V(4,4) } = V(4,2) + V(4,4) . The seller's revenue from the patent
  46
    Conditional on bidders' i.i.d. private valuations and single-unit demands, revenue equivalence holds for
any standard multi-unit auction, either sequential or sealed-bid, uniform-price or discriminatory (in the case of
uniform-price either k -th price or (k +1)-th price). Note that our externalities' structure (there are no negative
externalities to non-adopters) guarantees that firms have a single-unit demand for licences. Otherwise, firms
may have an incentive to bid for multiple licenses to preemptively limit the adoption of the IP.


                                                        27
auction would dominate 2V(4,3) when the distribution F is right-skewed, so that V(4,1) and
V(4,2) tend to be significantly larger than V(4,3) .47 In addition, the patent auction is less likely
to be optimal for large K (= N/n), because firms with relatively high ex-post realizations
tend to be more spread out in coalitions with mid- to low- valuation firms, decreasing the
second-order statistics among the coalitions' total value realizations, and therefore the seller's
revenue.
       These considerations suggest that (i) for a large set of parameters and distributions F,
the seller is better off selecting a multi-license auction over a patent auction; (ii) a patent
auction has the best chance to be optimal if the value distribution is relatively right-skewed,
and if K (= N/n) is relatively small ( n is large relative to N ).
       To illustrate these intuitions numerically, we consider the case of valuations distributed
according to a Gamma distribution­that is, Vi  Gamma(,  ) for each i  N . In the case of a
Gamma distribution, the convolution of n random variables Vi is another gamma distribution
  n
  i=1    Vi  Gamma(n,  ).48 Therefore, the expected revenue from a patent auction in which
                                                                          n
bidders form K coalitions of size n, each with valuation                  i=1   Vi , can be expressed as an
expectation of the second order statistics of K draws from the distribution Gamma(n,  ).
To allow for comparative statics with respect to the skewness of the distribution, we choose
                                                                            2 49
 = , hold V ar[Vi ] =    2 fixed, and increase  to decrease the skewness
                                                                           
                                                                             
                                                                              .
       Figure 1 summarizes the revenue comparison for a range of different parameter values.
The dots in the figure identify markets (each defined by (n, N = Kn)) in which nv(N,n+1)
(the revenue generated by an auction to sell n licenses) is (weakly) larger than the expected
second order statistic of K draws from the distribution Gamma(n,  ) (the revenue generated
by a patent auction with K coalitions of size n). The results support the intuitions (i) and
  47
      Recall however that we are comparing a lower bound of the multi-license auction revenue and an upper
bound of a patent auction: if F is severely right-skewed, the seller can decide to sell fewer than n licenses
in a multi-license auction, therefore increasing revenue of the multi-license auction with respect to the lower
bound.
   48
      This property makes a Gamma distribution a particularly tractable one to work with in our setting. Note
that for Gamma's distributions Myerson's regularity condition holds for   1. Therefore, for  < 1 the
multi-licences auctions we are discussing are not guaranteed to be the optimal mechanism to sell multiple
objects. However, they are still revenue-equivalent to any other format of multi-object auction with the same
virtual surplus and empirically relevant for the purpose of our application. Maskin and Riley (1989) discuss
the generality of revenue equivalence for multi-object auctions and characterize the optimal mechanism when
Myerson's regularity condition is not satisfied.    
   49
      Although the expectation E [Vi ] =  =
                                               
                                               
                                                  =  is also increasing, the scale of the private valuations is
irrelevant in the revenue comparison across different auction schemes.



                                                      28
(ii) above. Observe that the revenue generated by a multi-license auction often dominates the
one generated by a patent auction. When the distribution of private valuations is relatively
right-skewed (i.e.,  is smaller) the difference between the highest realizations and the other
realizations is relatively large. In this scenario, a patent auction has the best chance to
generate larger revenues than the multi-license auction, particularly when K (= N/n) is small.


5      Conclusion and Discussion
In this article we study and compare alternative ways to sell IP rights or other goods that are
non-rivalrous but excludable ("club goods"). If a patent is sold in a second-price (equivalently,
ascending-price) auction, we analyze the potential emergence of coalitions of firms intended
to participate in the auction as individual bidders. We illustrate the impact of such coalitions
on the seller's revenue as well as on social welfare, we illustrate the social and private benefits
of imposing a ceiling on the coalitions' sizes, and we compare the auction outcomes to the
revenue generated by selling multiple licenses instead.

Joint Deviations
In our analysis we have adopted a relatively weak stability notion, which restricts the potential
deviations to unilateral ones only. This stability concept is well-suited for our application:
because the auction unfolds in a non-cooperative way, modeling the group-formation stage
in the same way guarantees internal consistency in our game. Nonetheless, it is interesting
to explore the consequences of allowing for joint deviations on our results. In the optimized-
value case, it is possible to show that allowing for any kind of joint deviations would always
yield the (efficient) grand coalition as a unique stable partition.50 In the limited-value case,
allowing joint deviation would in general require conditions stronger than the ones described
in part (a) of Lemma 1 for the grand coalition to be stable. That would sometimes yield
environments in which the grand coalition is uniquely stable (as in the scenarios illustrated
in part (a) of Example 1). On the other hand, it would still be possible to find environments
in which coalition profiles other than the grand coalition are stable, and sometimes uniquely
  50
   In particular, we allow for joint deviations in which any set of firms belonging to a coalition can form a
new coalition by themselves, or migrate together to another coalition. This result is available in the Online
Appendix.




                                                     29
stable. To see it, consider the examples illustrated in part (b) of Example 1. It is easy to
verify that the result is robust to the possibility of joint deviations.

Further Research
Several extensions are left to further research. It would be interesting to explore the im-
plementation of a first-price auction, and compare both the stable coalition profiles and the
seller's revenue of the two auction formats.
   Next, one can consider an alternative timing in which coalitions form first, and then the
seller chooses the auction mechanism based on the observed coalition profile. An exploration
in this direction requires firms to forecast the optimal auction mechanism selected by the
seller in the coalition-formation stage. A small literature has explored the optimal auction
mechanism based on particular profiles of (asymmetric) bidders (see Bulow and Roberts, 1989,
and Maskin and Riley, 2000a). In particular, Kirkegaard (2012) ranks auction formats based
on the value distributions in the case of two asymmetric bidders. However, any attempt at a
general characterization of the optimal mechanism runs into non-trivial complexities.
   A second alternative timing option entails a setting in which all firms' valuations realize
first, and then coalition formation takes place. In this model it would be possible to address
questions such as whether firms with relatively high valuations tend to aggregate into the
same coalition, or they tend to divide into separate coalitions. Naturally, solving this model
would require to address potential strategic signaling occurring during the negotiation stage,
which causes significant changes to our environment.
   Finally, the range of externalities among the users of the new technology could be ex-
panded. In our analysis, we considered the simple case in which no externalities are present
if the new technology is adopted by up to n firms, and no additional value is generated if the
adopters are more than n. In other words, the marginal returns of the new technology are
constant in the number of adopters up to n, and zero afterwards. One could instead consider
decreasing marginal returns in the number of adopters. In this case, the tendency of firms to
form large coalitions would depend on the rate at which the marginal returns decrease. As
in Proposition 2, if the rate of decrease of marginal returns is not too high, it would still be
beneficial for a firm to move from a smaller coalition to a larger one. If the marginal returns
decrease rapidly, that could not be the case and we should observe a larger number of small
coalitions coexisting in stable coalition profiles.

                                                30
Appendix
Additional Examples of Stable Coalition Profiles
In this section we present two additional examples of coalition profiles that, similarly to
Example 1 in Section 3.1, are stable and different from the grand coalition.51
       Example 2 This example illustrates that in the limited-value case, if the condition in
part (a) of Lemma 1 does not hold, then a coalition profile different from the grand coalition
can be uniquely stable. Consider N = 2, n = 1, and each firm's valuation is either 3 with
probability 1/3, or 0 otherwise. Because the grand coalition always wins the auction and
makes no payment to the seller, the expected payoff from the grand coalition is E[V ] = 1,
i.e., the expected value of either firm's valuation. If the two firms separate into individual
coalitions, we have  = (1 , 2 ) with n1 = n2 = 1, and using the notation in the article, the
sum their expected payoffs is

                             E[max{V1 , V2 } - min{V1 , V2 }] = E[V(2,1) - V(2,2) ].

       It is easy to show that E[V(2,1) ] = 3 · (1 - (2/3)2 ) = 5/3 and E[V(2,2) ] = 3 · (1/3)2 = 1/3.
The total expected payoff from  dominates the grand coalition's because 4/3 > 1. Thus, 
is uniquely stable.

       Example 3 This example illustrates that in the limited-value case, coalitions profiles other
than the grand coalition may be stable along with the grand coalition, or uniquely stable.
Suppose N = 4, n = 2, and each firm's valuation V has a Bernoulli distribution­that is,
its values are 1 or 0 with probability p  (0, 1) and 1 - p, respectively. Then, the following
result holds:

Claim 1 Let  = (1 , 2 ) be such that n1 = n2 = 2. The stable coalitions profiles are as
         follows:

                            1
   1. (i) If p < 1 -        
                             2
                               ,   only  is stable;
                       1
         (ii) If 1 -   
                        2
                             p  1/2, only  and the grand coalition are stable;

         (iii) If p > 1/2, only the grand coalition is stable.
  51
     Note that, in a slight deviation from the article's main setup, these examples use distributions of V that
are not log-concave. The log-concavity assumption is used to show Proposition 2, although it is not necessary
for it to hold, as Examples 2 and 3 below illustrate.

                                                       31
   Proof of Claim 1: Consider  = (1 , 2 ) such that n1 = n2 = 2. We have,

                   (2 ;  ) = p2 2(1 - p)2 + 2p(1 - p) + 2p(1 - p)(1 - p)2                       (3)
                            = 2p[p(1 - p)2 + p2 (1 - p) + (1 - p)3 ].

which is obtained considering the scenarios in which 2 's payoffs are strictly positive with their
corresponding probabilities. For example, if 2 's valuation is 2, which occurs with probability
p2 , then 2 's profit (when strictly positive) can be either 2 or 1 because the valuation for 1
can be 0 or 1 with probability (1 - p)2 and 2p(1 - p), respectively. Therefore, we have

             (1 ;  ) +  (2 ;  ) = 2 (2 ;  ) = 4p[p(1 - p)2 + p2 (1 - p) + (1 - p)3 ].           (4)

   Observe that only two coalition profiles can arise from a unilateral deviation with respect
to  , and they are  = (1 , 2 , 3 ) and  = {1 , 2 } such that (n1 , n2 , n3 ) = (2, 1, 1) and
(n1 , n2 ) = (3, 1), respectively. First, consider  , obtained by a firm i in 2 deviating to form
3 = {i}, and observe that

                                 (2 ;  ) +  (3 ;  ) = 2p(1 - p)3 .

This is because the only way for either 2 or 3 to obtain a strictly positive profit of 1 is for
1 's valuation to be 0, which occurs with probability (1 - p)2 , and for either 2 or 3 (but
not both) to have valuation 1, which occurs with probability 2p(1 - p). From (3) and (4), it
is easy to verify that  (2 ;  ) >  (2 ;  ) +  (3 ;  ), implying that firm i's deviation to  is
not profitable.
   Second, consider  , obtained by a firm i in 2 deviating to join 1 . We have

              (1 ;  ) +  (2 ;  ) = p2 (2(1 - p) + p) + 2p(1 - p)2 + p(1 - p)2                   (5)
                                      = p2 (2 - p) + 3p(1 - p)2 .

Because n = 2, coalition 1 's valuation is 2 with probability p2 . In this scenario, 1 can get
strictly positive profits, either 2 or 1 with probabilities 1 - p and p, respectively. If 1 's value
is 1, which occurs with probability 2p(1 - p), then 1 's profit can be at most 1,which occurs
with probability 1 - p. Finally, with probability (1 - p)2 , 1 's value is 0, in which case, 2




                                                32
obtains a strictly positive payoff of 1 with probability p. From (4) and (5), we have

                 (1 ;  ) +  (2 ;  )   (1 ;  ) +  (2 ;  )                                   (6)
                    4p(1 - p)2 + 4p2 (1 - p)  2p2 (1 - p) + p3 + 3p(1 - p)2
                    (1 - p)2 + 4p2 (1 - p)  2p(1 - p) + p2
                    (1 - 2p)  2p(1 - p) - 4p2 (1 - p) = 2p(1 - p)(1 - 2p)
                    1 - 2p  0 (because 2p(1 - p) < 1).

Hence,  is stable if and only if p  1/2.
   Next, the expected profit of the grand coalition is

                                         (N ) = 2p2 + 2p(1 - p) = 2p.

A firm i's unilaterally deviation results in the coalition profile  = (1 , 2 ) with n1 = 3 and
n2 = 1. Therefore, (5) implies

                                         (N )   (1 ;  ) +  (2 ;  )                         (7)
                                               2  2p2 - 4p + 3
                                               2(1 - p)2  1
                                                    1
                                               1 -   p.
                                                     2
                                                                   1
Hence, the grand coalition is stable if and only if p  1 -         
                                                                    2
                                                                      .
   Consider now  = (1 , 2 ) such that (n1 , n2 ) = (3, 1). From (6), a necessary condition
for  to be stable is p  1/2. At the same time, from (7), a necessary condition for  to be
                   1               1
stable is p  1 -   
                    2
                      .   As 1 -   
                                    2
                                        < 1/2,  is never stable.
   Finally, as suggested by Proposition 2, it is easy to see that any profile involving two or
more singleton coalitions is not stable, which concludes the proof of Claim 1.


References from Shaked and Shanthikunar (2007)
Some of the proofs presented in Section 6.2 below require some tools from the statistical
literature on stochastic orders. For ease of reference, here we provide a summary of these
results (see Shaked and Shanthikunar, 2007, for more detail).


                                                     33
   Let X and Y be two continuous random variables such that P (X  x)  P (Y  x) for
all x. Then X is smaller than Y in the usual stochastic order (denoted X st Y ). Similarly,
if X and Y have densities g and h, respectively, X is smaller than Y in likelihood-ratio
order (denoted by X lr Y ) if g (x)h(y )  g (y )h(x) for all x  y . It is well known that
likelihood-ratio dominance implies stochastic dominance. With these definitions, we can state
the following theorems:


Theorem A1 (Shaked and Shanthikunar, 2007, Theorem 1.C.11) Let Xi , i = 1, 2, ...
     be a sequence of non-negative independent random variables with log-concave densities.
     Let M and N be two discrete positive integer-valued random variables such that M lr
     N , and assume that M and N are independent of Xi , i = 1, 2, ... Then,
                                            M              N
                                                  Xi lr         Xi .
                                            i=1           i=1




   Next, define Glr = { : R2  R2 : (x, y )  (y, x) whenever x  y }. Then,

Theorem A2 (Shaked and Shanthikunar, 2007, Theorem 1.C.20) Let X and Y be
     independent random variables. Then, X lr Y if and only if

                                (X, Y ) st (Y, X ) for all   Glr .




Theorem A3 (Shaked and Shanthikunar, 2007, Theorem 1.A.3) Let X1 , X2 , . . . , Xm
     be a set of independent random variables, and let Y1 , Y2 , . . . , Ym be another set of in-
     dependent random variables. If Xi st Yi for i = 1, 2, . . . , m, then, for any increasing
     function  : Rm  R, one has

                              (X1 , X2 , . . . , Xm ) st  (Y1 , Y2 , . . . , Ym ).




                                                  34
Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1: Let  = (1 , . . . , J ) be a coalition profile such that 0 < nj 
nk < n. For any firm i  j , let  = (1 , . . . , J ) be such that j = j \{i}, k = k  {i},
and h = h for h = j, k . In the next steps, we show that S ( ) > S ( ), or w( ,1) > w(,1) .
      Step 1 : We define

                       X               Va ,   Y         Va ,   and Z  max            Va ,
                                                                        h=j,k
                             aj \{i}               ak                           ah


The expected welfare values of coalitions  and  are

             w(,1) = E [max{X + Vi , Y, Z }] ,      and w( ,1) = E [max{X, Y + Vi , Z }] .

      We use Theorems A1 and A2 in Section 6.1. As nk > nj - 1, by Theorem A1, we
have X lr Y . To use Theorem A2, observe that, whenever x  y , max{x + vi , y, z } 
max{y + vi , z } = max{x, y + vi , z }. Hence, for every realization of Vi = vi and Z = z ,

                            E [max{X + vi , Y, z }]  E [max{X, Y + vi , z }] ,

which implies
                           E [max{X + Vi , Y, Z }]  E [max{X, Y + Vi , Z }] .                           (8)

      Step 2 : We now find some realizations Vi = v  and Z = 0 such that

                           E [max{X + v  , Y, 0}] < E [max{X, Y + v  , 0}] .

      Take any v  such that v  > 0, f (v  ) > 0, and P r(Y  X + v  )  1/2.52 Observe that
                                                   
                                                   v                if y - x  v  ,
       max{x, y + v  , 0} - max{x + v  , y, 0} =    -v              if y - x  -v  ,
                                                    y - x (> -v ) if -v  < y - x < v  .
                                                               
                                                  

Last, P r(-v  < Y - X < v  ) > 0 because 0  supp(F ), so that the support of the distribution
of Y - X contains 0. Therefore,

E [max{X, Y + v  , 0}]-E [max{X + v  , Y, 0}] > v  (P r(Y - X  v  ) - P r(Y - X < v  ))  0.

Because the function max{x, y + vi , z } - max{x + vi , y, z } is continuous in vi and z , the above
strict inequality holds for every realization of Vi and Z near v  and 0, respectively. Inequality
 52
      Such v  exists because Y lr X + Vi which implies that P r(Y  X + Vi ) =   P r(Y  X + v )f (v )dv  1/2.

                                                     35
(8) holds strictly because the log-concavity of f guarantees that distribution functions of Vi
and Z are continuous.

   Proof of Lemma 1: (a) In the limited values model, consider a firm i, let   (N ) be the
grand coalition and   (N \{i}, {i}). First, consider the case in which n = N . The payoff
of the winning coalition of the patent auction under the profile  is max                                  aN \{i}   Va , Vi -
V( ,2) . Because
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                max                Va , Vi      - V( ,2)  max                      Va , Vi              Va ,
                                                                                             
                         aN \{i}                                         aN \{i}                   aN


firm i would not unilaterally deviate from the grand coalition.
   Suppose now that n < N . The payoff of the grand coalition  is the sum of n value-
contributing firms' private valuations. We generate the grand coalition's payoff in two steps:
adding n + 1 draws from the distribution F and excluding one of the draws with the same
probability among all of them. Recall that we denote by V(n,m) the m-th highest value among
n draws from the distribution F, and that we denote by v(n,m) the expected value of V(n,m) .
We have
                                      n+1
                           1
                (N ;  ) =                       v(n+1,1) + v(n+1,2) + . . . v(n+1,n+1) - v(n+1,i) .
                          n+1          i=1

Consider now the coalition profile  . To obtain the coalitions' payoffs associated with  , let us
consider n +1 draws from the distribution F and select among them, with the same probability,
one to be the valuation of firm i. Consider the case in which coalition {i}'s realization is the
                                                                                1
highest among all draws (which happens with probability                        n+1
                                                                                   ).    Conditional on this case, if
coalition {i} wins the patent auction, its payoff is V(n+1,1) - [V(n+1,2) + ... + V(n+1,n) ], whereas if
coalition N \{i} wins the auction its payoff is [V(n+1,2) + ... + V(n+1,n) ] - V(n+1,1) . Therefore, the
winning coalition's expected payoff is bounded above by                         j =2   V(n+1,j ) - V(n+1,2) . If coalition
{i} realizes the h-th highest valuation among all draws, with h = 1, coalition N \{i} wins the
auction and the winner's expected payoff is                  j =h   v(n+1,j ) - v(n+1,h) . Coalition {i} realizes each
                                                                                                          1
of the h-th highest valuation among all draws, with h = 1 with probability                               n+1
                                                                                                             .   Thus,

                                                                                        n+1
                            1                                                  1
 (N \{i};  ) +  ({i};  ) <                          v(n+1,j ) - v(n+1,2)    +                          v(n+1,j ) - v(n+1,h) .
                           n+1               j =2
                                                                              n+1       h=2     j =h




                                                            36
Therefore, exploiting the condition in Lemma 1's claim, we have
                                                            n+1
                                                  1
    (N ;  ) - [ (N \{i};  ) +  ({i};  )] >                        v(n+1,h) - v(n+1,1) + 3v(n+1,2)    > 0,
                                                 n+1        h=3

which guarantees that the grand coalition is stable. (b) In the optimized values model the
grand coalition always achieves the maximum feasible payoff in this market, i.e., the sum of
                                                                             n
the n highest valuations across all N firms on the market (i.e.,             i=1   V(N,i) ). Therefore, it has
to be stable.

   Proof of Proposition 2: Step 1 : We define

                    X               Va ,   Y         Va ,   and Z  max                 Va ,
                                                                          h=j,k
                          aj \{i}               ak                                ah


and observe that

        (j ;  ) +  (k ;  ) = E [max{X + Vi , Y, Z } - max{min{X + Vi , Y }, Z }] ,                and
        (j ;  ) +  (k ;  ) = E [max{X, Y + Vi , Z } - max{min{X, Y + Vi }, Z }] .

   Additionally, for any x, y, vi , z  0, we define


                   (x, y ; vi , z )  max{x + vi , y, z } - max{min{x + vi , y }, z }.

   In the following Steps 2-3, we show that

                               E[(X, Y ; Vi , Z )] < E[(Y, X ; Vi , Z )],                                   (9)

which guarantees the claim of Proposition 2.
   Step 2 : First, we use Theorems A1 and A2 (see Section 6.1) to obtain a weak version of
inequality (9). As nk > nj - 1, by Theorem A1, we have X lr Y . To use Theorem A2,
observe that, whenever x  y ,

                (x, y ; vi , z ) = max{x + vi , y, z } - max{min{x + vi , y }, z } and
                (y, x; vi , z ) = max{y + vi , z } - max{x, z }.

Hence, we have (x, y ; vi , z )  (y, x; vi , z ). Then, for every realization of Vi = vi and Z = z ,

                            EX,Y [(X, Y ; vi , z )]  EX,Y [(Y, X ; vi , z )],

                                                   37
which implies that
                                E[(X, Y ; Vi , Z )]  E[(Y, X ; Vi , Z )].
       Step 3 : We now find some realizations Vi = v  and Z = 0 such that

                             EX,Y [(X, Y ; v  , 0)] < EX,Y [(Y, X ; v  , 0)].

       Take any v  such that v  > 0, f (v  ) > 0, and P r(Y  X + v  )  1/2.53 Then,

               (x, y ; v  , 0) = max{x + v  , y } - min{x + v  , y } = |y - x - v  | and
               (y, x; v  , 0) = max{y + v  , x} - min{y + v  , x} = |y - x + v  |.

Therefore,
                                             
                                             2v                if y - x  v  ,
                                    
           (y, x; v , 0) - (x, y ; v , 0) =  -2v               if y - x  -v  ,
                                             2(y - x) (> -2v ) if -v  < y - x < v  .
                                                            
                                            

Last, P r(-v  < Y - X < v  ) > 0 because 0  supp(F ), so that the support of the distribution
of Y - X contains 0. Therefore,

         E[(Y, X ; v  , 0) - (X, Y ; v  , 0)] > 2v  (P r(Y - X  v  ) - P r(Y - X < v  ))  0.

As  is a continuous function of vi and z , the above strict inequality holds for every realization
of Vi and Z near v  and 0, respectively. Inequality (9) follows from the log-concavity of f ,
which guarantees that distribution functions of Vi and Z are continuous.

       Proof of Example 1 Consider a coalition profile  = (1 , 2 ) with n1 = n2 = 2. Observe
that only two coalition profiles can arise from a unilateral deviation with respect to  , and
they are  = (1 , 2 , 3 ) with (n1 , n2 , n3 ) = (2, 1, 1),and  = {1 , 2 } with (n1 , n2 ) = (3, 1).

       (a) Suppose that V  exp(),  > 0. Recall that the condition in part (a) of Lemma
1is always satisfied for V  exp() for any   0 and n  1. Therefore, the grand coalition
is always stable. Consider now , and observe that Proposition 2 guarantees that, given ,
deviating to form a new coalition {i} is never a profitable deviation for any firm. Second,
consider a firm i in 2 unilaterally deviating to join 1 , to obtain the new coalition profile  .
Without the deviation, we have54
                                                  
                                                                                           3
                (1 ;  ) +  (2 ;  ) =                 |x - y | 2 xe-x   2 ye-y dydx =         ,
                                       0      0                                           2
  53        
    Such v exists as Y lr X + Vi which implies that P r(Y  X + Vi ) = P r(Y  X + v )f (v )dv  1/2.
  54
    Recall that the sum of two exponentially distributed random variables with parameter  has a distribution
with density f (x) = 2 xe-x .

                                                        38
whereas if firm i deviates we have
                                                      
                                                                                                  3
                (1 ;  ) +  (2 ;  ) =                     |x - y | 2 xe-x      e-y dydx =            .
                                           0      0                                              2
Therefore, the unilateral deviation to join 1 is not strictly profitable, which guarantees the
stability of  .55

       (b) Suppose that V   (, 1) with  = 1/4. As before, Proposition 2 implies that, given
the coalition profile  , forming an individual coalition {i} does not represent a profitable
deviation for any firm i. Moreover, we have
                                            
                                                       e-x x2a-1 e-y y 2a-1
             (1 ;  ) +  (2 ;  ) =              |x - y |                     dxdy = 0.63662,
                                    0      0            (2a) (2a)
                                             
                                                       e-x x2a-1 e-y y a-1
          (1 ;  ) +  (2 ;  ) =                |x - y |                     dxdy = 0.545096,             and
                                    0      0            (2a)      (a)
                          (N ) = 0.5.

Hence, the coalition profile  is uniquely stable, which concludes the proof of Corollary 3.

       Proof of Lemma 2: In the limited-value case, consider a coalition profile  = (1 , .., J )
with nj  n  nk . Let (W1 , W2 , . . . , WJ ) denote the associated coalitions' valuations. Firm
i's move from coalition j to k results in another coalition profile  = (1 , 2 , . . . , J ) with
j = j \{i}, k = k  {i}, and h = h for h = j, k .
       It is without loss to assume that coalition k selects n existing members, but not firm i,
to form the coalition valuation Wk . Then, coalition k 's valuation Wk is identical to Wk . It
follows that, for the coalition profile  , the coalitions' valuations (W1 , W2 , . . . , WJ ) are such
that Wj = Wj - Vi , and Wh = Wh for every h = j . Because every coalition bids their own
valuation, the second highest bid under  is (weakly) lower than the second highest bid under
 for every realization valuations, and strictly lower for some realizations in which Wj is the
second highest bid under  and Vi > 0.

       Proof of Proposition 3: (i) If n = N , only the grand coalition can be stable; (ii) if
n < N  2n, from Corollary 2, it is immediate to see that  = {1 , 2 } with n1 = n, and
n2 = N - n yields the maximum potential revenue for the seller. Therefore, R (N, n)  w(,2) ,
and the bound is attained if  is stable; (iii) if N  2n + 1, for any stable coalition profile
  55                                                                 2        3
    Note tha the expected profit of the grand coalition is  (N ) =       >   2 ,which   immediately guarantees the
stability of the grand coalition without invoking Lemma 1.

                                                          39
 = (1 , . . . , J ), Corollary 2 implies that n1  · · ·  nJ -1  n. The total value of each
                         min{nj n}
coalition j is Wj        i=1         Vi . Let Wj  0 for j = J + 1, J + 2, . . . , K . Similarly, let Wk
denote the value of each coalition of k in the coalition profile  defined in the claim. Then,
for every k = 1, 2, . . . , K , we have Wk lr Wk , which implies Wk st Wk . Observe that a
function that finds the second highest number from a vector of integers is increasing in each
argument. It follows from Theorem A3 that W( ,2) st W(,2) . Therefore, R (N, n)  w(,2) ,
and the bound is attained if  is stable

   Proof of Corollary 4: Points (b) and (c) of Corollary 2 imply that in the presence of
a ceiling the coalition profile  is the only remaining candidate to be stable. For it to be
stable, we need to guarantee that (i) if nK < n, no firm belonging to a coalition of size n has
a profitable deviation in joining K ; (ii) if nK < n, no firm belonging to K has a profitable
deviation in participating in the auction as individual bidder, and (iii) no firm belonging to
a coalition of size n has a profitable deviation in participating in the auction as individual
bidder. However, in the proof of Proposition 2, we defined

                       X                 Va ,   Y         Va ,   Z  max          Va ,
                                                                    h=j,k
                               aj \{i}               ak                     ah

and for any x, y, vi , z  0,

                  (x, y ; vi , z )  max{x + vi , y, z } - max{min{x + vi , y }, z }.

We showed that


                                 E[(X, Y ; Vi , Z )] < E[(Y, X ; Vi , Z )].

   This result holds for any nj > 0,and in particular for nj = 1 (in this case, note that
X = 0).The result guarantees that (i), (ii), and (iii) do not represent profitable deviations in
the coalition profile . Therefore, in the presence of a coalitions' size ceiling equal to n, the
coalition profile  is uniquely stable and the upper bound for the seller's expected revenue
w(,2) is uniquely obtained.

   Proof of Proposition 4: Let  = (1 , 2 , . . . ) be a coalition profile such that n1  n2  1.
For any i  2 , let  = (1 , 2 , . . . ) be such that 1 = 1  {i}, 2 = 2 \{i}, and k = k for
k = 1, 2. Then,
                                (1 ;  ) +  (2 ;  ) <  (1 ;  ) +  (2 ;  )                          (10)

                                                     40
is sufficient to show that  = {N } is the only stable coalition profile. To show (10), we apply
a modified proof of Theorem A1 (see Section 6.1). Define

  X  max{Vj | j  2 \{i}},                Y  max{Vk | k  1 },               and Z  max{Vk | k / 1  2 }.

Let X  max{X, Vi } and Y  max{Y, Vi }. Also, for any x, y, vi , z  0, define x  max{x, vi }
and
                         (x, y ; vi , z )  max{x , y, z } - max{min{x , y }, z }.

Then,

                              (1 ;  ) +  (2 ;  ) = E[(X, Y ; Vi , Z )], and
                              (1 ;  ) +  (2 ;  ) = E[(Y, X ; Vi , Z )].

      Note that, for any Vi = vi and Z = z , we have

                         (x, y ; vi , z ) = max{x , y, z } - max{min{x , y }, z },
                         (y, x; vi , z ) = max{y , x, z } - max{min{y , x}, z },

and whenever x  y, we have

                (y, x; vi , z ) - (x, y ; vi , z ) = max{min{x , y }, z } - max{x, z }  0.                   (11)

      If X = 0 (i.e., n2 = 1), then

                     (y, 0; vi , z ) - (0, y ; vi , z ) = max{min{vi , y }, z } - z  0,

with a strict inequality for some y, vi , z . In this case, (10) follows from the continuity of .
      Suppose instead that X = 0 (i.e., n2 > 1). Note that the density functions of X and Y
are

          FX (x)  P r(V(n2 -1,1)  x) = F n2 -1 (x)                 = fX (x) = (n2 - 1)F n2 -2 (x)f (x),
          FY (y )  P r(V(n1 ,1)  y ) = F n1 (y )          = fY (y ) = n1 F n1 -1 (y )f (y ).

                         fY (x)        n1
The likelihood ratio     fX (x)
                                  =   n2 -1
                                            F n1 -n2 +1 (x)   is strictly increasing in x  supp(F ), i.e.,

                                  fX (x)fY (y ) > fX (y )fY (x),        for all x < y.


                                                              41
   Note that, for any Vi = vi and Z = z ,

                          EX,Y [(Y, X ; vi , z )] - EX,Y [(X, Y ; vi , z )]

                     =                       ((y, x; vi , z ) - (x, y ; vi , z ))fX (x)fY (y )dxdy
                               y       y x

                           +                   ((y, x; vi , z ) - (x, y ; vi , z ))fX (x)fY (y )dxdy.
                                   y     y x

We can rewrite the last term as

                                         ((y, x; vi , z ) - (x, y ; vi , z ))fX (x)fY (y )dxdy
                           y       y x

                          =                    ((y, x; vi , z ) - (x, y ; vi , z ))fX (x)fY (y )dydx
                                   x    y x

                          =                    ((x, y ; vi , z ) - (y, x; vi , z ))fX (y )fY (x)dxdy.
                                   y    xy

Then,

             EX,Y [(Y, X ; vi , z )] - EX,Y [(X, Y ; vi , z )]

         =               ((y, x; vi , z ) - (x, y ; vi , z ))(fX (x)fY (y ) - fX (y )fY (x))dxdy  0.    (12)
               y   y x

   For some x, y, vi , and z , the inequality (11) holds strictly. Because  is continuous, (12)
holds strictly in a neighborhood of (vi , z ), which guarantees (10) to hold.




                                                                  42
6    References

Albano G. "Competition in Public Procurement Markets." OECD Working Party No. 2 on
Competition and Regulation, Background Paper, 19 June 2017.

Albano G., Spagnolo, G. and Zanza, M. "Regulating Joint Bidding in Public Procurement."
Journal of Competition Law & Economics, Vol. 5 (2008), pp. 335­360.

Agranov, M. and Yariv, L. "Collusion through Communication in Auctions." Games and
Economic Behavior, Vol. 107 (2018), pp. 93-108.

Asker, J. "A Study of the Internal Organization of a Bidding Cartel." American Economic
Review, Vol. 100 (2010), pp. 724-762.

Avery C., and Hendershott, T. "Bundling and Optimal Auctions of Multiple Products." The
Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 67 (2000), pp. 483-497.

Baccara M., and Yariv, L. "Homophily in Peer Groups", American Economic Journal: Mi-
croeconomics, Vol. 5 (2013), pp. 69-96.

Baccara, M., and Yariv, L. "Choosing Peers: Homophily and Polarization in Groups." Journal
of Economic Theory, Vol. 165 (2016), pp. 152-178.

Baik, K.H., Kim, I., and Na, S. "Bidding for a Group-Specific Public-Good Prize." Journal
of Public Economics, Vol. 82 (2001), pp. 415-429.

Bernheim, D., and Whinston, M. "Multimarket Contact and Collusive Behavior." RAND
Journal of Economics, Vol. 21 (1990), pp. 1-26.

Brickley, P. (2011), "Nortel $4.5-Billion Patent Sale to Apple, Microsoft, Others Approved."
Wall Street Journal, 7/11/2011.

Brusco, S., and Lopomo, G. "Collusion via Signalling in Simultaneous Ascending Bid Auctions
with Heterogeneous Objects with and without Complementarities." Review of Economic
Studies, Vol. 69 (2002), pp. 407-436.

Buchanan, J.M. "An Economic Theory of Clubs." Economica, Vol. 32 (1965), pp. 1-14.

Bulow, J., and Roberts, J. "The Simple Economics of Optimal Auctions." The Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 97 (1989), pp. 1060-1090.


                                            43
Cantillon, E. "The Effect of Bidders' Asymmetries on Expected Revenue in Auctions." Games
and Economic Behavior, Vol. 62 (2008), pp. 1-25.

Chassang, S., and Ortner, J. "Collusion in Auctions with Constrained Bids: Theory and
Evidence from Public Procurement." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 127 (2019), pp.
2269-2300.

Chatterjee, K., Mitra, M., and Mukherjee, C. "Bidding Rings: A Bargaining Approach."
Games and Economics Behavior, Vol. 103 (2017), pp. 67-82.

Che, Y.-K., and Kim, J. "Robustly Collusion-Proof Implementation." Econometrica, Vol. 74
(2006), pp. 1063-1107.

Che, Y.-K., and Kim, J. "Optimal Collusion-Proof Auctions." Journal of Economic Theory,
Vol. 144 (2009), pp. 565-603.

Che, Y.-K., Condorelli, D., and Kim, J. "Weak Cartels and Collusion-Proof Auctions." Jour-
nal of Economic Theory, Vol. 178 (2018), pp. 398-435.

Chen, C.-L., and Tauman, Y. "Collusion in one-shot second-price auctions." Economic The-
ory, Vol. 28 (2006), pp. 145-172.

Cho, I.-K., Jewell, K., and Vohra, R. "A Simple Model of Coalitional Bidding." Economic
Theory, Vol. 19 (2002), pp. 435-457.

Deb, R., and Razzolini, L. "Auction-Like Mechanisms for Pricing Excludable Public Goods."
Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 88 (2001), pp. 340-368.

Decarolis, F., Goldmanis, M. and Penta, A. "Marketing Agencies and Collusive Bidding in
Online Ad Auctions." Management Science. Vol. 66 (2020), pp. 4359-4919.

Decarolis, F., and Rovigatti, G. "From Mad Men to Maths Men: Concentration and Buyer
Power in Online Advertising." CEPR Discussion Paper 13897, 2020.

Demange, G. "Intermediate Preferences and Stable Coalition Structures." Journal of Mathe-
matical Economics, Vol. 23 (1994), pp. 45-58.

Dutta, B., and Vohra, R. "Incomplete Information, Credibility and the Core." Mathematical
Social Sciences, Vol. 50 (2005), pp.148 ­ 165.

Ellickson, B., Grodal, B., Scotchmer, S., and Zame, W. R. "Clubs and the Market." Econo-
metrica, Vol. 67 (1999), pp. 1185-1218.

                                             44
Ernst & Young Inc. (2011), Seventy-First Report of the Monitor In the Matter of the Compa-
nies' Creditors Arrangement Action, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-36, As Amended and the Matter of a
Plan of Compromise or Arrangement of Nortel Networks Corporation, et al, Ontario Superior
Court of Justice (Commercial List), 7/6/2011, Court File No. 09-CL-7950.

Eso, P., and Schummer, J. "Bribing and Signaling in Second Price Auctions." Games and
Economic Behavior, Vol. 47 (2004), pp. 299-324.

Fang H., and Norman, P. "Optimal Provision of Multiple Excludable Public Goods." Ameri-
can Economic Journals: Microeconomics, Vol. 2 (2010), pp. 1-37.

Garratt, R., Tr¨
               oger, T., and Zheng, C. "Collusion via Resale." Econometrica, Vol. 77 (2009),
pp. 1095-1136.

Graham, D. and Marshall, R. "Collusive Bidder Behavior at Single-Object Second-Price and
English Auctions." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 95 (1987), pp. 1217-1239.

Harris, M., and Raviv, A. "Allocation Mechanisms and the Design of Auctions." Economet-
rica, Vol. 49 (1981), pp. 1477-1499.

Hoppe, H.C., Jehiel, P., and Moldovanu, B. "Licence Auctions and Market Structure." Journal
of Economics and Management Strategy, Vol. 15 (2006), pp. 371-396.

Jehiel, P., and Moldovanu, B. "Strategic Non-Participation." The RAND Journal of Eco-
nomics, Vol. 27 (1996), pp. 84-98.

Jehiel, P., Moldovanu, B., and Stacchetti, E. "How (not) to Sell a Nuclear Weapon." The
American Economic Review, Vol. 86 (1996), pp. 814-829.

Katz, M. L., and Shapiro, C. "On the Licensing of Innovation." The RAND Journal of
Economics, Vol. 16 (1985), pp. 504-520.

Kemperer, P. Auctions: Theory and Practice. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2004.

Kirkegaard, R."Asymmetric First Price Auctions." Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 144
(2009), pp.1617-1635.

Kirkegaard, R. "A Mechanism Design Approach to Ranking Asymmetric Auctions." Econo-
metrica, Vol. 80 (2012), pp. 2349-2364.

Kivetz, G. and Tauman Y. "Simple collusive agreements in one-shot first-price auctions."
Games and Economic Behavior, Vol. 69 (2010), pp. 138-149.

                                            45
Laffont, J.-J., and Martimort, D. "Collusion Under Asymmetric Information." Econometrica,
Vol. 65 (1997), pp. 875-911.

Laffont, J.-J., and Martimort, D. "Mechanism Design with Collusion and Correlation." Econo-
metrica, Vol. 68 (2000), pp. 309-342.

Loertscher, S., and Marx, L. "Club Good Intermediaries." International Journal of Industrial
Organization, Vol. 50 (2017), pp. 430-459.

Lopomo, G., Marshall, R., and Marx, L. "Inefficiency of Collusion at English Auctions."
Contributions to Theoretical Economics, Vol 5 (2005), Article 1.

Marshall, R., and Marx, L. The Economics of Collusion: Cartels and Bidding Rings. Cam-
bridge: MIT Press, 2012.

Maskin, E., and Riley, J. "Optimal Multi-Unit Auctions." In F. Hahn, ed., The Economics
of Missing Markets, Information, and Games. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989.

Maskin E., and Riley, J. G. "Asymmetric Auctions." Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 67
(2000a), pp. 413-438.

Maskin, E., and Riley, J.G. "Equilibrium in Sealed High Bid Auctions." Review of Economic
Studies, Vol. 67 (2000b), pp. 439-454.

McAfee, R. P., and McMillan, J. "Bidding Rings." The American Economic Review, Vol. 82
(1992), pp. 579-599.

Milgrom, P. Putting Auction Theory to Work. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Norman, P. "Efficient Mechanism for Public Goods with Use Exclusions." Review of Economic
Studies, Vol. 71 (2004), pp. 1163-1188.

Pavlov, G. "Auction design in the presence of collusion." Theoretical Economics, Vol. 3
(2008), pp. 383-429.

Porter, R. "Book Review: Anatomy of an Auction: Rare Books at Ruxley Lodge, 1919."
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 100 (1992), pp. 433-436.

Shaked, M., and Shanthikunar, J.G. Stochastic Orders, New York: Springer-Verlag, 2007.

Rachmilevitch, S. "Bribing in First-Price Auctions." Games and Economic Behavior, Vol. 77
(2013), pp. 214-228.

                                             46
Ray, D. and Vohra, R. "A theory of endogenous coalition structures." Games and Economic
Behavior, Vol. 26 (1999), pp. 286-336.

Ray D., and Vohra, R. "Coalition Formation." In H. P.Young and S. Zamir, eds., Handbook
of Game Theory Vol. 4. Amsterdam: North Holland Elsevier, 2015.

Richardson K., Oliver, , E., and Costa, M. "The 2017 brokered patent market - the fightback
begins." IAM Magazine Vol. 87 (2018), pp. 8-22.

Troyan, P. "Collusion and signaling in auctions with interdependent values." Journal of
Economic Theory, Vol. 170 (2017), pp. 319-345.

Weber R. "Multi-Object Auctions." In R. Engelbrecht-Wiggans, R.M. Stark, and M. Shu-
bik, eds., Competitive Bidding, Auctions, and Procurement. New York: New York University
Press, 1983. Reprinted in P. Klemperer, ed., The Economic Theory of Auctions II. Chel-
tenham: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., 2000.

Wooders, M., Cartwright, E. and Selten, R. "Behavioral Conformity in Games with Many
Players." Games and Economic Behavior, Vol. 57 (2006), pp. 347-360.

Zheng, C. "Bidding Collusion without Passive Updating." Journal of Mathematical Eco-
nomics, Vol. 85 (2019a), pp. 70-77.

Zheng, C. "Necessary and Sufficient Conditions for Peace: Implementability versus Security."
Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 180 (2019b), pp. 135-166.




                                            47
Figure 1: Relative Performance of Patent and Multi-License Auctions for Vi  Gamma(,  ).




                                          48
