                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              MISDEMEANOR PROSECUTION

                                      Amanda Y. Agan
                                      Jennifer L. Doleac
                                        Anna Harvey

                                      Working Paper 28600
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28600


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021

We thank Suffolk County District Attorney Rachael Rollins and the Suffolk County District
Attorney's Office for their cooperation, and especially thank Bobby Constantino for his tireless
efforts in helping us access and understand the data. Thanks to Rebecca Regan for excellent
research assistance, to Manudeep Bhuller for code and discussions about calculating the complier
means, and to Martin Andresen for extensive help with the estimation of marginal treatment
effects via mtefe. We thank Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Peter Hull, Michal Kolesár, Emily Leslie,
Justin McCrary, and Sam Norris for conversations that improved the paper. We appreciate
feedback from Jim Greiner, Steve Lehrer, James MacKinnon, Steven Raphael, and Megan
Stevenson; seminar participants at American University, Bentley University, Boston University,
the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Georgia State University, LSE-Centre for Economic
Performance, Michigan State University, Queen's University, Rutgers University, University of
Pittsburgh, University of Toronto, University of Virginia School of Law, and West Virginia
University; and conference participants at the 2020 Emory University Conference on Institutions
and Law Making, the 2020 APPAM Fall Research Conference, and the 2020 Duke University
Empirical Criminal Law Roundtable. We gratefully acknowledge funding from the W.T. Grant
Foundation and the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Amanda Y. Agan, Jennifer L. Doleac, and Anna Harvey. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Misdemeanor Prosecution
Amanda Y. Agan, Jennifer L. Doleac, and Anna Harvey
NBER Working Paper No. 28600
March 2021
JEL No. K14,K4

                                           ABSTRACT

Communities across the United States are reconsidering the public safety benefits of prosecuting
nonviolent misdemeanor offenses. So far there has been little empirical evidence to inform policy
in this area. In this paper we report the first estimates of the causal effects of misdemeanor
prosecution on defendants' subsequent criminal justice involvement. We leverage the as-if
random assignment of nonviolent misdemeanor cases to Assistant District Attorneys (ADAs) who
decide whether a case should move forward with prosecution in the Suffolk County District
Attorney's Office in Massachusetts. These ADAs vary in the average leniency of their
prosecution decisions. We find that, for the marginal defendant, nonprosecution of a nonviolent
misdemeanor offense leads to large reductions in the likelihood of a new criminal complaint over
the next two years. These local average treatment effects are largest for first-time defendants,
suggesting that averting initial entry into the criminal justice system has the greatest benefits. We
also present evidence that a recent policy change in Suffolk County imposing a presumption of
nonprosecution for a set of nonviolent misdemeanor offenses had similar beneficial effects: the
likelihood of future criminal justice involvement fell, with no apparent increase in local crime
rates.

Amanda Y. Agan                                    Anna Harvey
Department of Economics                           New York University
Rutgers University                                19 W. 4th Street
75 Hamilton Street                                New York, NY 10012
New Brunswick, NJ 08901                           anna.harvey@nyu.edu
and NBER
amanda.agan@rutgers.edu

Jennifer L. Doleac
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
jdoleac@tamu.edu
1      Introduction
Every year approximately 13 million Americans are charged with misdemeanor offenses, and
misdemeanor cases make up over 80 percent of the cases processed by the U.S. criminal
justice system (Stevenson and Mayson, 2018). Many have expressed concern that prose-
cuting this volume of low-level offenses may do more harm than good (Natapoff, 2018).
Some district attorneys across the country have begun to implement alternatives to misde-
meanor prosecution, particularly for nonviolent defendants.1 By allowing those charged with
nonviolent misdemeanor offenses to avoid the potential negative consequences of a criminal
prosecution (including time away from work and family, a criminal record of an arrest, and
a possible criminal record of a conviction), alternatives to misdemeanor prosecution may
decrease defendants' subsequent criminal justice contact. On the other hand, alternatives to
misdemeanor prosecution may reduce specific deterrence, causing increases in future criminal
behavior. The net causal effect of prosecution in marginal misdemeanor cases is, thus, an
empirical question, but there is little evidence to guide prosecutors' policy choices. Simply
comparing defendants who are prosecuted on misdemeanor charges with those who are not
would be misleading, as these groups are likely different in ways that are both observable
and unobservable to the researcher.
    In this paper we use new data on the prosecution of nonviolent misdemeanor criminal
complaints from the Suffolk County District Attorney's Office (SCDAO) in Massachusetts
between 2004 and 2018 to estimate the impact of nonprosecution of nonviolent misdemeanors
on future criminal justice system contact. In Suffolk County, an individual against whom
a criminal complaint has been issued must appear at an initial arraignment hearing. Assis-
tant District Attorneys (ADAs) assigned to arraignment courtrooms have the discretion to
dispose of a complaint prior to or at the arraignment hearing, or to proceed with prosecu-
tion. We use the term "nonprosecution" to refer to cases that both a) do not proceed past
the day of arraignment and b) do not result in a conviction or an "admission to sufficient
facts."2 "Prosecution" refers to all other cases.3 Our empirical strategy exploits the as-if
random assignment of cases to arraigning ADAs who vary in the leniency of their prosecu-
tion decisions.4 This empirical design recovers the local average treatment effect (LATE),
   1
     These alternatives can include, depending on the jurisdiction, declining to prosecute, diversion, dismissal,
pretrial probation, and deferred adjudication.
   2
     Under Massachusetts law, a defendant may "admit to sufficient facts to warrant a finding of guilty"
(https://www.mass.gov/rules-of-criminal-procedure/criminal-procedure-rule-12-pleas-and-plea-agreements).
   3
     The term `nonprosecution" could also be defined to include cases that prosecutors eventually decline to
prosecute well after the day of arraignment. Our empirical design only allows us to recover causal effects from
nonprosecution that occurs no later than the day of arraignment. We thus use the term "nonprosecution"
throughout to refer to nonprosecution that occurs no later than the day of arraignment.
   4
     Arraigning ADAs and criminal complaints are assigned to arraignment courtrooms through separate


                                                       2
or the causal effect of nonviolent misdemeanor nonprosecution for individuals at the margin
of nonprosecution, i.e., individuals for whom different arraigning ADAs might have made
different prosecution decisions (Imbens and Angrist, 1994).5
    We measure ADA leniency using the leave-out, residualized mean of an ADA's nonprose-
cution choices based on all other nonviolent misdemeanor cases that the ADA has arraigned
not involving the current defendant.6 The leave-out leniency measure is highly predictive
of prosecution decisions, but uncorrelated with case and defendant characteristics. We find
that going from the least lenient to the most lenient ADA increases a defendant's probability
of nonprosecution by about ten percentage points (the mean rate of nonprosecution in our
sample is 21%). Importantly, in Suffolk County cases that move forward with prosecution
after the arraignment are assigned to a different ADA, not the ADA at arraignment, allowing
us to separately identify the effects of being assigned to a lenient arraigning ADA as opposed
to a lenient ADA in other phases of the case.
    We first estimate the impacts of misdemeanor nonprosecution on subsequent criminal
complaints (arrests). We find that the marginal nonprosecuted misdemeanor defendant is
33 percentage points less likely to be issued a new criminal complaint within two years
post-arraignment (58% less than the mean for "complier" defendants who are prosecuted;
p < 0.01).7 We find that nonprosecution reduces the likelihood of a new misdemeanor
processes that we describe in detail in the text. Throughout we use the term "assignment" as a shorthand
reference to the processes by which arraigning ADAs come to represent SCDAO at arraignment for a set of
criminal complaints.
    5
      Other papers using similar research designs based on as-if random assignment of cases to decision makers
(generally judges) include Kling (2006), Loeffler (2013), Aizer and Doyle (2015), Mueller-Smith (2015), Aneja
and Avenancio-Le´   on (2019), Eren and Mocan (2019), and Bhuller et al. (2020) to estimate the impacts of
incarceration; Bhuller et al. (2018), Dobbie et al. (2018), Arteaga (2020) and Norris, Pecenco and Weaver
(2020) to estimate the impact of parental incarceration on children; Collinson and Reed (2019) and Humphries
et al. (2019) to estimate impacts of eviction; Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2013) to estimate the impacts
of electronic monitoring; Dahl, Kostøl and Mogstad (2014) to estimate the impact of parental disability
insurance receipt on children's usage of the program; Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2013) and French and Song
(2014) to estimate impacts of disability insurance receipt on labor supply; Doyle Jr (2007) to estimate the
impact of foster care on child outcomes; Diamond, Guren and Tan (2020) to estimate impacts of foreclosures;
and Dobbie, Goldin and Yang (2018), Stevenson (2018), and Leslie and Pope (2017) to estimate the impacts
of pretrial detention; and Dobbie, Goldsmith-Pinkham and Yang (2017) to estimate the impacts of consumer
bankruptcy. The only other papers we know of exploiting as-if random assignment of cases to prosecutors are
Sloan (2020b) and Sloan (2020a), describing the variation in prosecutor leniency and estimating the impact
of other-race prosecutor bias on charging decisions in the office of the District Attorney of New York County.
    6
      We also explore robustness to other estimation strategies for the first stage, including using all the
ADA dummies directly in 2SLS or LIML, UJIVE estimation, and using lasso to choose among the many
instruments. See Appendix C.1 for more discussion.
    7
      See Appendix C.3 for details on the calculation of average outcomes among prosecuted compliers. For all
two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates reported in the paper, we also compute Anderson-Rubin confidence
intervals by inverting the weak-instrument test of Anderson and Rubin (1949), as suggested by Andrews,
Stock and Sun (2019) and Lee et al. (2020). The Anderson-Rubin confidence intervals have correct size
and optimal power even with weak instruments when models are just-identified; our main estimates remain



                                                      3
complaint by 24 percentage points (60%; p < 0.01), and reduces the likelihood of a new
felony complaint by 8 percentage points (47%; not significant). Nonprosecution reduces the
number of subsequent criminal complaints by 2.1 complaints (69%; p < .01); the number of
subsequent misdemeanor complaints by 1.2 complaints (67%; p < .01), and the number of
subsequent felony complaints by 0.7 complaints (75%; p < .05). We see significant reductions
in subsequent criminal complaints for violent, disorderly conduct/theft, and motor vehicle
offenses. Our primary estimates follow defendants for two years post-arraignment, but we
show that our results are robust to one-year and three-year post-arraignment windows (effects
appear to grow over time). We also see similar declines in the probabilities of subsequent
criminal prosecution and subsequent criminal record acquisition.
    Misdemeanor prosecution may have negative effects for marginal nonviolent defendants
because it may pull some defendants into the criminal justice system who otherwise would
remain outside that system. If this is the case, then we would expect to see larger effects for
first-time defendants, relative to defendants who appear in our data at least once before. In
line with this hypothesis, we find that our estimates are larger (particularly in percentage
terms) and more precisely estimated for first-time defendants.8
    We run a battery of additional checks to support the validity of our instrumental vari-
able design. We demonstrate that our first stage is positive and significant at conventional
thresholds across all covariate subgroups, supporting the assumption of average monotonic-
ity required to interpret our estimates as LATEs (Frandsen, Lefgren and Leslie, 2019). Our
results are also robust to interacting our ADA leniency instrument with offense types, vic-
tim/victimless offenses, and ADA experience; these interacted instruments allow the effect
of leniency to vary across groups. While we are unable to test the exclusion restriction
directly, we consider whether the leniency of the ADA at arraignment affects other case
outcomes among defendants who are prosecuted. If arraigning ADAs only affect the decision
to prosecute, then ADA leniency should not affect these other outcomes when we restrict
attention to the prosecuted group. As expected, we find that our ADA leniency measure
is uncorrelated with case outcomes for the set of prosecuted defendants. We interpret this
as support that the exclusion restriction holds.9 Estimates from reduced form models are
statistically significant when these confidence intervals are used. For more on the just-identified assumption
see Appendix C.1. To calculate the effect of going from the least lenient to the most lenient ADA, readers
should multiply these estimates by 0.1, the estimated change in the likelihood of nonprosecution.
    8
      We use three different definitions of "first-time defendants": those without a prior criminal complaint
in Suffolk County, those without a prior DCJIS criminal record of a Suffolk County complaint, and those
without a prior Suffolk County conviction. Results are very similar across all three definitions.
    9
      Arraigning ADAs can also request bail in cases that they choose to prosecute. In practice this happens
infrequently in this sample of cases, and we show that accounting for the bail decision does not affect our
results.



                                                      4
consistent with our 2SLS estimates.
    We also confirm the robustness of our results to several approaches to imputing missing
data. One drawback of our administrative data is that demographic characteristics (gen-
der, age, and race/ethnicity) are missing for some defendants, and are missing more often
for nonprosecuted defendants. Because the availability of these variables is correlated with
treatment, we do not include them in our main analyses. However, we show that our results
are nearly identical when we include age and gender (which are only slightly missing) and
predicted race/ethnicity. The identity of the ADA at arraignment is also missing for many
of our cases. Our main analysis is done within the sample of cases not missing this ADA
information. However, we also construct several progressively larger samples for which miss-
ing arraigning ADA information is imputed based on patterns of observed arraigning ADAs
by court/day and court/week. Our results are again nearly identical even in our largest
imputed sample, which increases the percentage of cases with arraigning ADA information
to 76% of all cases.
    We consider possible causal mechanisms that could be generating our findings. Cases
that are not prosecuted by definition are closed on the day of arraignment. By contrast, the
average time to disposition for prosecuted nonviolent misdemeanor cases in our sample is 185
days. This time spent in the criminal justice system may disrupt defendants' work and family
lives. Cases that are not prosecuted also by definition do not result in convictions, but 26%
of prosecuted nonviolent misdemeanor cases in our sample result in a conviction. Criminal
records of misdemeanor convictions may decrease defendants' labor market prospects and
increase their likelihoods of future prosecution and criminal record acquisition, conditional
on future arrest. Finally, cases that are not prosecuted are at much lower risk of resulting
in a criminal record of the complaint in the statewide criminal records system.10 We find
that nonprosecution reduces the probability that a defendant will receive a criminal record
of that nonviolent misdemeanor complaint by 55 percentage points (56%, p < .01). Criminal
  10
     Formal criminal records, called criminal record information (CORI) in Massachusetts, are main-
tained by the Massachusetts Department of Criminal Justice Information Services (DCJIS) and are
available to criminal justice agencies in future cases, as well as to employers under certain con-
ditions. Criminal records of convictions are generally available with defined exceptions. Daycare
and preschool employers in Massachusetts may access criminal records of complaints that did not
result in convictions, even if defendants take action to have those records sealed. Schools, nurs-
ing homes, assisted living facilities, and other employers working with certain vulnerable popula-
tions may access criminal records of complaints that did not result in convictions unless defendants
take action to have those records sealed (https://www.gbls.org/sites/default/files/2019-11/
booklet-10-applying-for-jobs-housing-or-other-opportunities-after-sealing-criminal-records.
pdf). Cases dismissed prior to formal arraignment do not receive DCJIS records in Massachusetts. Cases
that proceed to and past formal arraignment do receive DCJIS records. In our data we can only identify
day of disposition, not whether a disposition that occurs on the day of arraignment occurs before or after
formal arraignment.



                                                  5
records of misdemeanor arrests may also damage defendants' labor market prospects and
increase their likelihoods of future prosecution and criminal record acquisition, conditional
on future arrest. All three of these mechanisms may be contributing to the large reductions
in subsequent criminal justice involvement following nonprosecution.
    We consider the characteristics of the marginal defendants for whom ADA assignment
matters (the "compliers"); this helps us to interpret the LATEs that we estimate. We find
that compliers make up about 10% of our sample. The observable characteristics of this
group differ on a few dimensions from the sample as a whole. Compliers are less likely to
have been charged with a drug offense, to have been charged with a "serious misdemeanor"
(punishable by more than 100 days in jail), to have misdemeanor or felony convictions within
the prior year, and to be non-citizens.
    Our 2SLS estimates are larger in absolute value than our OLS estimates. This difference
could be due to selection bias in the OLS estimates and/or the composition of the complier
sample. We reweight our OLS estimates to match the sample of compliers using two different
reweighting schemes, finding that the reweighted OLS estimates are very similar to the
unweighted OLS estimates (Dahl, Kostøl and Mogstad, 2014; Bhuller et al., 2020). This
implies that the differences between our OLS and 2SLS estimates are likely being driven by
negative selection: arraigning ADAs are more likely to prosecute defendants at lower risk
of subsequent criminal justice contact. This negative selection biases OLS estimates toward
finding that prosecution has less detrimental effects than it does.11 Our 2SLS estimates
remove this selection bias.
    We estimate marginal treatment effects (MTEs) to explore heterogeneity in the LATE
(Heckman and Vytlacil, 2005; Heckman, Urzua and Vytlacil, 2006).12 Consistent with the
hypothesis of negative selection, we find larger negative treatment effects as ADA leniency
increases.
    The results of our analysis imply that if all arraigning ADAs acted more like the most
lenient ADAs in our sample when deciding which cases to prosecute, Suffolk County would
likely see a reduction in criminal justice involvement for these nonviolent misdemeanor defen-
dants. Because nonviolent misdemeanor defendants in Suffolk County are disproportionately
Black, reducing the prosecution of nonviolent misdemeanor offenses would disproportionately
benefit Black residents of the county.
    We conclude by analyzing the effects of a policy change in Suffolk County establishing
  11
      We report evidence suggesting that youth is an example of a characteristic that may contribute to this
negative selection effect, since ADAs are more likely to not prosecute younger defendants, despite their higher
risk of future criminal justice contact.
   12
      See Doyle Jr (2007), Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2013), French and Song (2014), Arnold, Dobbie and
Yang (2018), and Bhuller et al. (2020) for empirical examples of MTE estimation in leniency designs.



                                                      6
a presumption of nonprosecution for a list of nonviolent misdemeanor charges. In a series
of event study, difference-in-differences (DD), and 2SLS DD models using the date of the
policy change as an instrument for nonprosecution, both with and without the inclusion
of nonviolent felony cases as a comparison group, we find results that are consistent with
our main results: increasing nonprosecution reduced the likelihood of subsequent criminal
complaints within a one-year post-arraignment window. In addition, there does not appear
to have been an increase in reported crime due to the policy change.
    Most closely related to our work is Mueller-Smith and Schnepel (2019), which studies
the impact of deferred adjudication for felony cases in Texas. Deferred adjudication is an
alternative to prosecution in Texas whereby a defendant pleads guilty to a charge, but the
charge is later dismissed after successful completion of a period of probation. Mueller-
Smith and Schnepel (2019) exploit two policy changes which changed the probability of
deferred adjudication for felony defendants. They find that marginal felony defendants who
received deferred adjudication had significantly lower probabilities of subsequent conviction
and higher probabilities of subsequent employment.
    In our view this study contributes to the literature in several ways. First, we provide the
first evidence on the causal effects of the decision to prosecute misdemeanor defendants--a
topic of tremendous policy interest. Second, our findings contribute to the literature on the
net costs and benefits of criminal justice intervention, and the diminishing marginal returns
to such interventions. In this context, it appears that prosecuting defendants for nonviolent
misdemeanor offenses has substantial costs for those individuals without any evidence of
public safety benefits (and suggestive evidence of public safety costs). Finally, we add to
a growing literature that uses as-if randomization of cases to decision makers (in this case
arraigning ADAs) to measure the causal effects of their decisions. There has been substantial
recent work refining this econometric method, and we apply this method in a new context,
using current best practices.


2    Background
The large volume of misdemeanor cases in the United States arises from the criminalization
of relatively common behaviors. These behaviors may include (depending on the jurisdic-
tion) disorderly conduct, disturbing the peace, possession of small quantities of prohibited
substances, trespassing, and driving without a valid license/registration/insurance. Some
have argued that, in fact, the criminalization of relatively minor unwanted behaviors may
increase their incidence, relative to other strategies (Natapoff, 2018). Many such behaviors
may stem from root causes such as poverty, mental illness, or substance abuse; for these,

                                              7
alternative strategies such as directing social services to those engaged in these behaviors
could potentially be more successful. Misdemeanor convictions can decrease employment
prospects, increasing the likelihood that those with misdemeanor conviction records turn
to illegal forms of economic activity (Uggen et al., 2014; Leasure, 2019). Even when mis-
demeanor prosecutions do not result in convictions, lengthy prosecutions of misdemeanor
arrests both disrupt defendants' work and family lives, and increase the probability that the
arrest goes onto the defendant's criminal record, again potentially increasing the likelihood of
subsequent offending behavior. Natapoff (2018) argues that, for these reasons, misdemeanor
prosecution "makes our entire country less safe."
    Misdemeanor prosecutions may also change post-arraignment law enforcement behavior,
even with no post-arraignment changes in employer or defendant behavior. If during subse-
quent criminal justice contact decision makers see previous criminal charges or convictions,
they may be more likely to move forward with arrest and/or prosecution.13
    On the other hand, misdemeanor prosecution may increase "specific deterrence" (Becker,
1968) by increasing the punitiveness of misdemeanor defendants' post-arrest experience. By
increasing specific deterrence, misdemeanor prosecution could decrease defendants' likelihood
of engaging in post-arraignment behavior that would increase the risk of new complaints,
prosecutions, and criminal records. Existing empirical work provides little guidance on
the potential specific deterrence impacts of misdemeanor prosecution. There is evidence
that sanctions (or more severe sanctions) for driving violations or DUIs decrease subsequent
infractions for individuals who experience the sanction (Hansen, 2015; Gehrsitz, 2017; Dusek
and Traxler, 2020). But there is also evidence that felony prosecutions increase the likelihood
of future felony convictions and decrease future net employment and earnings (Mueller-Smith
and Schnepel, 2019).14
    It is unclear if the downstream effects of misdemeanor prosecution are more likely to
be similar to those that follow from driving infractions, or to those that follow from felony
prosecution. The net effect of misdemeanor prosecution is an empirical question--one that
is being hotly debated in many cities and counties around the United States. So far we
know next to nothing about the causal impacts of alternatives to misdemeanor prosecution
  13
      As reported in Column (1) of Table 2, for example, individuals against whom nonviolent misdemeanor
criminal complaints have been issued in Suffolk County are more likely to be prosecuted if they have records
of prior convictions within the past year.
   14
      Most work on specific deterrence has focused on incarceration (which also imposes an incapacitation
effect), and the findings are mixed. Some have found that incarceration or longer periods of incarceration
decrease future crime; others have found increases in future crime (Chen and Shapiro, 2007; Drago, Galbiati
and Vertova, 2009; Hjalmarsson, 2009; Di Tella and Schargrodsky, 2013; Aizer and Doyle, 2015; Mueller-
Smith, 2015; Bhuller et al., 2020; see Nagin, Cullen and Jonson, 2009, Raphael and Stoll, 2014, Chalfin and
McCrary, 2017, and Doleac, 2020 for reviews).



                                                     8
on defendants' criminal justice outcomes.15


2.1     Misdemeanor Prosecution in Suffolk County, Massachusetts
In this paper we study the effects of nonviolent misdemeanor prosecution in Suffolk County,
Massachusetts (which includes the cities of Boston, Chelsea, Revere, and Winthrop). In
Suffolk County, misdemeanor charges are processed in one of nine municipal or district
courts.16 Each of these courts has a geographically defined jurisdiction.
    Applications for misdemeanor criminal complaints (typically made by police officers) are
brought to the court with geographic jurisdiction for the location at which the alleged offense
occurred. A Clerk Magistrate within each court first reviews each application to determine
if there is probable cause to issue a criminal complaint. This determination is generally
based simply on whether there is a statement of alleged facts attached to the application for
complaint; a police report suffices to establish probable cause. After a criminal complaint has
been issued, the complaint is assigned an arraignment date and the individual named in the
complaint is issued a notification to appear at the arraignment hearing. Within each court,
arraignment hearings are scheduled to be heard in designated arraignment courtrooms by
the court with jurisdiction over the case, without regard to the identity of the ADA assigned
to arraign cases in that arraignment courtroom on that day.
    ADAs are assigned to arraignment courtrooms by SCDAO supervisors on a weekly or
monthly basis based on availability and experience.17 Typically more junior ADAs are more
likely to be assigned to shifts in the arraignment courtrooms. In our data, ADAs are assigned
to arraignment courtrooms in the municipal and district courts for an average of 85 days
  15
     A few other studies consider variation in prosecutors' leniency. Rehavi and Starr (2014) and Tuttle (2021)
both report evidence that federal prosecutors exhibit racial bias in their prosecution decisions. Sloan (2020a)
and Sloan (2020b) use random assignment of cases to prosecutors in the office of the District Attorney of New
York County to document variation in prosecutorial leniency and to test for other-race bias in prosecutors'
decisions. All four studies highlight the discretion that prosecutors have about when and how to prosecute
defendants, particularly in low-level, nonviolent cases. However, none of these studies estimates the causal
impacts of prosecutors' decisions on defendants' subsequent outcomes.
  16
     These courts are the Brighton Division, Boston Municipal Court; Central Division, Boston Municipal
Court; Charlestown Division, Boston Municipal Court; Chelsea District Court; Dorchester Division, Boston
Municipal Court; East Boston Division, Boston Municipal Court; Roxbury Division, Boston Municipal Court;
South Boston Division, Boston Municipal Court; and West Roxbury Division, Boston Municipal Court.
  17
     There are a few exceptions to this general practice, triggered by specific charge types. Cases with felony
charges may receive additional scrutiny from supervising ADAs, strategic assignment to more experienced
arraigning ADAs, and/or the involvement of ADAs from the Superior Court. We therefore exclude any
cases in which defendants are charged with felony offenses, regardless of the final disposition of those felony
charges. We also exclude cases with violent or firearm charges for similar reasons: in these cases more
experienced ADAs may be called in to support or handle the arraignment. Our analysis sample thus consists
of cases with only nonviolent misdemeanor charges, where the process for assigning arraigning ADAs is as
described above.



                                                      9
dispersed across an average of 3.4 years.18 Arraigning ADAs decide whether to proceed
with the prosecution of a misdemeanor complaint. For cases that proceed past the day of
arraignment, a different ADA, assigned through a different process, takes over subsequent
case stages. All other court actors, such as judges and public defenders, are also assigned
to cases through procedures that are independent of the process through which arraigning
ADAs are assigned to arraignment courtrooms.
    In practice, an arraigning ADA is given a large stack of paper files in the arraignment
courtroom on the morning of arraignment, and needs to quickly work through how to proceed
in each case. If an arraigning ADA is called away to a meeting during an arraignment
session, another ADA may take over the role of arraigning ADA in that courtroom. Unless
an arraigning ADA has a conflict of interest in a specific case (e.g., the ADA went to school
with the defendant), SCDAO procedures do not allow for a defendant or an attorney to
influence which arraigning ADA is overseeing a case, or for arraigning ADAs to select cases
they prefer.19
    During an arraignment hearing, the defendant is officially charged, the criminal complaint
is read into the record, and a plea is entered on the defendant's behalf. The arraigning ADA
has the discretion to dispose of a complaint prior to or during the arraignment hearing, or
to proceed with prosecution. In our data, we are able to observe final charge dispositions
and the dates of those dispositions. We define "nonprosecution" to include cases that receive
final dispositions on all charges on the day of arraignment, such that no disposition results
in a criminal conviction or an "admission to sufficient facts"; "prosecution" includes all
other outcomes.20 Nonprosecution dispositions, at the level of an individual charge, include
dismissal/nolle prosequi (observed in 81% of all nonprosecuted cases in our sample) and
pretrial probation (observed in 2% of all nonprosecuted cases in our sample).21 In the case
of dismissal or decline to prosecute, the charge is dismissed immediately; in the case of
pretrial probation, the charge will be dismissed after successful completion of a period of
pretrial probation.22
  18
      This undercounts the duration of ADA arraignment shifts because the count is based only on the cases
for which arraigning ADA information is recorded. Section 6.1 explores a variety of strategies to impute
missing ADA information.
   19
      When we asked current and former ADAs and supervisors if there is any way for a specific ADA to avoid
handling a specific nonviolent misdemeanor case in the absence of a conflict of interest, or for a defendant
to avoid a particular arraigning ADA, they emphatically said that was not possible in this context.
   20
      Under Massachusetts law defendants may "admit to sufficient facts to warrant a finding of guilty."
Admissions have some of the same adverse consequences for defendants as do guilty pleas; we do not include
admissions in our definition of nonprosecution.
   21
      No disposition details are recorded in 15.9% of nonprosecuted cases in our sample, although for these
cases we see that there are no additional case events after the first event, and that no convictions are recorded.
   22
      If pretrial probation is not successfully completed, the District Attorney's office may reopen the case. A
final disposition of pretrial probation on the day of arraignment, with no further case events, implies that


                                                       10
    Finally, Massachusetts statute stipulates that complaints disposed of prior to a defen-
dant's formal arraignment do not become part of a defendant's criminal record, as maintained
by the Massachusetts Department of Criminal Justice Information Services (DCJIS). Com-
plaints disposed of at or after arraignment become part of a defendant's criminal record,
even if the complaint does not result in a conviction.


3     Data
3.1     Sources and Sample
Our data are sourced from the Suffolk County District Attorney's Office, and include all
criminal complaints issued in the county between January 1, 2000 and September 1, 2020.
Cases are dated using the date of the first "event" recorded in a case; we refer to that date
as the day of arraignment. Defendants are identified with unique IDs. In our main analysis,
we follow each defendant in a case for a period of two years following the arraignment
hearing. Our sample includes cases with arraignment dates between January 1, 2004 and
September 1, 2018; we use data from January 1, 2000 to generate criminal histories, and
we follow defendants up to September 1, 2020.23 Arraigning ADAs are identified as those
ADAs recorded as the ADA of record at the arraignment hearing. Cases heard in the nine
district/municipal courts are identified by a court location code.
    98.5% of charges are identified in the SCDAO data with an offense severity code indicating
whether a charge is a misdemeanor, a felony, or a civil violation (e.g., a civil motor vehicle
violation). We exclude any case with at least one charge identified as a felony charge. We
use text extraction to identify charge types. As described previously, violent offenses may
be treated differently during arraignment and thus we exclude cases with any charge for a
violent offense--including assault, assault and battery, violating a domestic abuse prevention
order, and criminal harassment--and those with any firearms-related charges. We sort the
remaining charges into the following categories: motor vehicle, drug, disorder/theft, and
the case was not reopened. In our data, we only observe final dispositions. We do not observe dispositions
at arraignment if cases are reopened post-arraignment due to failure to complete probation. We implicitly
characterize as "prosecution" any (unobserved) pretrial probation dispositions at arraignment where the
case is reopened post-arraignment. Our ADA leniency measure, described below, will code ADAs offering
pretrial probation on the day of arraignment as more lenient if more of those cases are not reopened past
arraignment (perhaps because of less restrictive probationary conditions). Based on our conversations with
SCDAO staff we believe that few charges are resolved with pretrial probation at arraignment; the data we
do have indicate that only 2% of the cases in our sample are resolved with pretrial probation on the day of
arraignment and are not later reopened.
  23
     We analyze one- and three-year followup periods in supplemental results. The one-year followup sample
adds in one additional year of criminal cases (to September 1, 2019); the three-year followup sample subtracts
one year of criminal cases (to September 1, 2017).


                                                     11
other. We refer to this final set of charges as "nonviolent misdemeanors."
    Charges are associated with a variety of different final disposition codes. We characterize
final dispositions at the charge level as resulting in a criminal conviction or no conviction.
Final dispositions that result in convictions are pleas of guilty and guilty verdicts after bench
or jury trials. Final dispositions that do not result in conviction are all other dispositions,
including dismissal, pretrial probation, nolle prosequi, admission to sufficient facts, or a
finding of not guilty after a jury or bench trial.
    SCDAO also requested data from the criminal records database maintained by the Mas-
sachusetts DCJIS for the complete set of defendants in the SCDAO case management system.
They matched these data to their case data by docket numbers and provided us with in-
formation about whether a case record matched to a DCJIS record. Not all cases in the
SCDAO case management database are recorded in the DCJIS database. As noted earlier,
cases that are disposed of prior to arraignment should not result in DCJIS records.24 Other
cases in the SCDAO case records may not match to a case record in the DCJIS case records
because of human error in docket number entry.


3.2     Descriptive Statistics
Our main estimation sample includes cases whose arraignment hearings occur between Jan-
uary 1, 2004 and September 1, 2018; that do not include violent, firearms, or felony charges;
that are arraigned in one of Suffolk County's nine district/municipal courts; and for which
an ADA is identified at the arraignment hearing.25 We further restrict our estimation sample
to those nonviolent misdemeanor cases overseen at arraignment by an ADA who oversees
at least 30 other nonviolent misdemeanor cases at arraignment hearings, and to those cases
that are not "singletons" within our set of court-by-time fixed effects (defined below). Ta-
ble 1 reports descriptive statistics for this sample. There are 67,553 cases in the SCDAO
data that meet these criteria. Using our definition of prosecution, 21% of these nonviolent
misdemeanor cases are not prosecuted; the remaining 79% are prosecuted. 74% of nonvi-
olent misdemeanor cases that are prosecuted are eventually disposed of without criminal
convictions.
    Nonviolent misdemeanor cases that are not prosecuted are clearly different from cases
  24
     We cannot identify whether a final disposition on the day of arraignment occurs before or after arraign-
ment itself.
  25
     Many cases are missing an identified arraigning ADA. Our primary estimation sample is restricted to
the 33% of nonviolent misdemeanor cases arraigned between 2004 and 2018 for which an ADA is identified at
arraignment. In Section 6.1 we explore the missingness of ADA information, finding that the missingness of
arraigning ADA is not closely related to other case and defendant features, and that our findings are robust
to several strategies for imputing missing data on arraigning ADAs.



                                                     12
that are prosecuted. Nonviolent misdemeanor defendants who are not prosecuted are is-
sued criminal complaints that include fewer counts, fewer misdemeanor counts, and fewer
"serious" misdemeanor counts (punishable by greater than 100 days incarceration). They
are less likely to have had a misdemeanor or felony conviction within one year prior to the
arraignment hearing in their case. They are more likely to be citizens.26
    We include the following nonviolent misdemeanor charge types as covariates: motor
vehicle charge, drug charge, disorder/theft charge, and other charge. Defendants who are
not prosecuted are more likely to have been charged with a motor vehicle offense, and less
likely to have been charged with a drug offense or a disorder/theft offense. For the purpose
of assessing the monotonicity of our instrument, we also code offense types as "victimless" or
"victim" offenses.27 Defendants who are not prosecuted are more likely to have been charged
with a "victimless" offense.
    By construction, defendants who are not prosecuted have fewer days to disposition and are
less likely to receive convictions, relative to prosecuted defendants. They are also less likely to
acquire DCJIS records of their complaint, relative to prosecuted defendants. Defendants who
are not prosecuted are then significantly less likely to receive a a new criminal complaint,
to be prosecuted, and to receive a new DCJIS record within two years post-arraignment,
relative to defendants who are prosecuted. However, because prosecution is clearly correlated
with observable pre-treatment characteristics (and likely correlated with unobservable pre-
treatment characteristics as well), we cannot draw conclusions about the effect of prosecution
on the probability of post-arraignment outcomes from these data alone.


4      Research Design
We want to estimate the effect of misdemeanor nonprosecution on post-arraignment out-
comes. Consider the following model, where Yict is the outcome of interest for individual i
in case c in year t, Xict is a vector of case- and defendant-level covariates, ct are court-by-
  26
     For some of the defendants in our estimation sample we are able to identify defendant date of birth,
race/ethnicity, and gender. However, as we report in Section 6.1, these demographic features are systemati-
cally less likely to have been recorded for defendants who were not prosecuted. This problem is particularly
acute for missing race/ethnicity information; race/ethnicity was also less likely to have been recorded for
defendants who were not rearrested during our time period. In our main analyses we do not include these
covariates. We consider robustness to the inclusion of gender and age (which are only slightly missing) and
to predicted race/ethnicity in Section 6.1. Our results are robust to the inclusion of these demographic
characteristics.
  27
     "Victim" offenses include property offenses (e.g., larceny, shoplifting, burglary), threats, property dam-
age, and leaving the scene of property damage or personal injury.




                                                      13
time fixed effects described later, and ict is an error term:

                       Yict = 1 Not Prosecutedict + 2 Xit + ct + ict                      (1)

1 is our parameter of interest. The key problem for causal inference is that ordinary least
squares (OLS) estimates of Equation 1 are likely to be biased by the correlation between
prosecution and unobserved defendant characteristics that are correlated with the outcomes.
This selection bias could be either positive or negative. For example, arraigning ADAs are
more likely to prosecute misdemeanor defendants who have prior criminal convictions; de-
fendants with prior convictions are more likely to have subsequent criminal justice contact.
As reported in Section 7.1, arraigning ADAs are less likely to prosecute younger defendants;
younger defendants are also more likely to have subsequent criminal justice contact. Un-
observable characteristics could presumably be causing selection bias in either direction as
well.
    The as-if random assignment of misdemeanor cases to arraigning ADAs, described above,
creates the opportunity to identify a source of variation in nonprosecution that does not de-
pend on defendant or case characteristics. We estimate the causal impacts of misdemeanor
nonprosecution by using the propensity of an as-if randomly assigned ADA to not prosecute
a defendant as an instrument for nonprosecution. We interpret our causal effects in the local
average treatment effect (LATE) framework (Imbens and Angrist, 1994). That is, if the as-
sumptions discussed below hold, we are able to recover the local causal effects of misdemeanor
nonprosecution decisions for defendants on the margin of being not prosecuted--those whose
treatment status would be changed by switching from a less to a more "lenient" ADA at
arraignment.
    We construct a residualized leave-out ADA leniency measure for our instrument (French
and Song, 2014; Dahl, Kostøl and Mogstad, 2014; Dobbie, Goldin and Yang, 2018). We leave
out all cases involving a given defendant arraigned by a given ADA from the construction of
the instrument for that defendant's cases, in order to avoid introducing the same estimation
errors on the left- and right-hand sides of the regression. We residualize out court and time
fixed effects to account for the systematic ways that ADAs in Suffolk County are assigned to
misdemeanor cases. As-if randomization of cases to arraigning ADAs occurs within one of the
nine municipal or district courts in Suffolk County, and within time periods. For example,
multiple ADAs may be assigned to work in the Central Division of the Boston Municipal
Court between February and November of 2015, and may rotate arraignment shifts across
days of the week. Because misdemeanor case types may vary by court, month, and day of
week, a simple leave-out measure of ADA leniency could be confounded by selection. We


                                              14
residualize out court and time fixed effects from our ADA leniency measure to address this
potential source of bias.
    More specifically, we include court-by-year-month and court-by-day-of-week fixed effects,
ct , in the construction of our instrument. The inclusion of these court-by-time fixed effects
allows us to interpret variation in the instrument as variation in the tendency of an as-if-
randomly assigned ADA to prosecute a nonviolent misdemeanor defendant, relative to the
other nonviolent misdemeanor cases brought in that court in that month, and in that court
on that day of the week.28 Call this residual nonprosecution decision Not Prosecuted  ict .
    As is standard to avoid the small-sample correlation between the ADA decision in this case
and her average leniency, we then construct the leave-out mean measure of ADA nonprose-
cution (leniency) for each nonviolent misdemeanor case using these residual nonprosecution
decisions:

                                    na                                 nia
                         1
            Zcta =                        (Not   Prosecutedikt )   -         (Not Prosecutedict )   (2)
                      na - nia      k=0                                c=0

where na is the number of nonviolent misdemeanor cases arraigned by ADA a and nia is the
number of nonviolent misdemeanor cases involving defendant i arraigned by ADA a. This
construction removes from the instrument the residualized nonprosecution decisions in all of
a defendant's nonviolent misdemeanor cases arraigned by ADA a.
    Figure 1 reports the distribution of our residualized ADA nonprosecution measure. As
noted previously, we restrict the sample to exclude nonviolent misdemeanor cases overseen
by arraigning ADAs assigned to fewer than 30 nonviolent misdemeanor cases, and cases that
are "singletons" within our set of court-by-time fixed effects. After these restrictions, the
sample includes 315 arraigning ADAs. The median number of nonviolent misdemeanor cases
overseen by an arraigning ADA is 156 cases; the average is 214 cases. After residualizing out
our set of court-by-time effects, the ADA measure ranges from -0.09 at the first percentile
to 0.09 at the ninety-ninth percentile. That is, moving from the first to the ninety-ninth
percentile of ADA leniency increases the rate of nonprosecution by 18 percentage points, an
86% change from the mean nonprosecution rate of 21 percentage points.
    Our main analysis will be based on 2SLS estimates of second-stage Equation 1 (with and
without case- and defendant-level covariates) and a first stage for individual i and case c
assigned to arraigning ADA a at time t, using a linear probability model:

                         Not Prosecutedicta = 1 Zcta + 2 Xit + ct + ict                             (3)
  28
    In Table A.15 we also consider a version of the instrument that uses a "raw" measure of ADA leniency
based on the non-residualized nonprosecution rate and find similar results.


                                                     15
where, again, ct are the court-by-month and court-by-day-of-week fixed effects, and Xict
includes case- and defendant-level covariates (number of counts, number of serious misde-
meanor counts, any convictions for previous felonies or misdemeanors in the previous year,
offense type, and citizenship). Zcta are the leave-out measures of residualized ADA leniency
described previously. Robust standard errors are clustered at both the defendant and ADA
level. We also compute and report Anderson-Rubin confidence intervals by inverting the
weak-instrument test of Anderson and Rubin (1949) (Andrews, Stock and Sun, 2019, Lee
et al., 2020).29
    Under the LATE assumptions of exogeneity, relevance, and monotonicity, we will estimate
a weighted average of the causal impact of nonprosecution among the compliers--defendants
whose prosecution decisions could have been different had their cases been (as-if randomly)
handled by a different ADA at arraignment. We argue this particular LATE is also a policy
relevant treatment effect (PRTE)--it estimates the local effect of policies that increase the
leniency of prosecution decisions for marginal defendants (Heckman and Vytlacil, 2001).
    In addition, we also estimate marginal treatment effects (MTEs) to explore heterogeneity
based on unobservables and to understand the distribution of treatment effects (Bj¨  orklund
and Moffitt (1987), Heckman and Vytlacil (2005), Heckman, Urzua and Vytlacil (2006)).
The MTEs are the average effects of nonprosecution for defendants on the margin between
being prosecuted and nonprosecuted, where these margins correspond to percentiles of the
distribution of the unobserved propensity to be not prosecuted. The MTEs are estimated
by taking the derivative of the outcome with respect to the probability of nonprosecution.30
Other treatment effect parameters can be calculated as different weighted averages of these
MTEs if there is full support of the probability of nonprosecution over the interval [0,1]
(Heckman and Vytlacil, 2005). Without full support, the weights can be rescaled so that
  29
      It is somewhat of an open question how to evaluate the possibility of many-weak-instrument bias in
leniency/examiner designs (Hull, 2017; Frandsen, Lefgren and Leslie, 2019; Bhuller et al., 2020). We report
the robust first-stage F-statistic, which is large in our setting (Montiel Olea and Pflueger, 2013). Rather
than rely on a threshold rule based on this first-stage F-statistic, we also construct Anderson-Rubin con-
fidence intervals, which are of correct size and optimal power even with weak instruments when treating
the leniency measure as a single non-constructed instrument (for more on these confidence intervals in over-
identified models see Davidson and MacKinnon (2014)). In Appendix C.1 we further explore alternative
IV specifications that account for potential biases from the construction of our leniency measure, including:
using all the ADA dummies directly as instruments, using lasso to pick the most informative ADA dummies,
and using the UJIVE estimation strategy proposed by Koles´     ar (2013). Across different estimation strategies
we robustly find a negative relationship similar in magnitude to our baseline estimate.
   30
      Estimating the MTEs requires the same assumptions as the LATE framework, including monotonicity,
plus the additional assumption that there is additive separability between the observed and unobserved
heterogeneity in the treatment effects, needed when the propensity score does not have full support, as ours
does not (see e.g. Brinch, Mogstad and Wiswall, 2017, Mogstad and Torgovitsky, 2018, Andresen, 2018).
For further details on the derivation of the MTEs in the potential outcomes framework see the citations in
this paragraph, as well as Appendix C.2 and the citations therein.



                                                      16
they integrate to one over the region that does have common support between the treated
and untreated (Carneiro, Heckman and Vytlacil, 2011). Using this strategy, we also use
the MTE estimates to calculate overall average treatment effects, average treatment on the
treated, and average treatment on the untreated.


4.1     Assessing the Instrument
4.1.1   Exogeneity

In order to be able to interpret our 2SLS estimates as the local average treatment effect
(LATE) of misdemeanor nonprosecution, it must be the case that defendant and case char-
acteristics do not covary systematically with arraigning ADA assignment. Table 2 reports
the results of this randomization test.
    First we consider the data without exploiting the as-if random assignment of arraigning
ADAs. The first column of Table 2 reports linear probability estimates of the correlation
between nonprosecution and case and defendant characteristics, after controlling for court-
by-time fixed effects and clustering standard errors at both the defendant and the ADA level.
Mirroring what we saw in the summary statistics, even with court-by-time fixed effects we
see that the decision to not prosecute a particular defendant is not at all random. We show
in Column (1) that defendants are more likely to be not prosecuted if they have more counts
in the current case; have more serious misdemeanor counts; had a misdemeanor or felony
conviction within the past year; have drug-related, disorder/theft, or other charges; and are
not citizens.
    In contrast, our measure of ADA leniency is not correlated with these observable charac-
teristics. Column (2) reports estimates of the correlations between ADA leniency and these
case and defendant characteristics, using the same specification. Consistent with our under-
standing that cases are allocated as-if randomly to arraigning ADAs, we find that arraigning
ADAs with varying propensities to prosecute handle very similar nonviolent misdemeanor
defendants (joint p-value = 0.23).

4.1.2   Instrument Relevance (First Stage)

The validity of our instrument also requires that our measure of ADA leniency be a strong
predictor of nonprosecution decisions. Figure 1 plotted a local linear regression of nonprose-
cution on ADA leniency after controlling for our set of court-by-time fixed effects, for ADA
leniency ranging from the first to the 99th percentiles. Nonprosecution is monotonically and
approximately linearly increasing in ADA leniency.



                                             17
    Table 3 reports first stage results from Equation 3. Column (1) of Table 3 reports
results only with court-by-time fixed effects. Column (2) adds case and defendant covariates:
number of counts; number of misdemeanor counts; number of serious misdemeanor counts;
whether the defendant had a prior misdemeanor conviction within the past year; whether
the defendant had a prior felony conviction within the past year; indicators for whether the
defendant is facing charges for a motor vehicle, drug, disorder/theft, or other crime; and
defendant citizenship status. Consistent with Figure 1, our residualized ADA instrument is
highly predictive of whether a defendant is not prosecuted. The estimated first stage result
is robust to the inclusion of controls in Column (2), which is consistent with as-if random
arraigning ADA assignment. With all controls, a nonviolent misdemeanor defendant assigned
to an arraigning ADA who is 10 percentage points more likely to not prosecute a defendant
is approximately 5.5 percentage points more likely to be not prosecuted.31

4.1.3    Exclusion Restriction

We also need it to be the case that arraigning ADA assignment only affects defendant out-
comes through the probability of nonprosecution at arraignment. The exclusion restriction
would be violated if ADA assignment were correlated with case and defendant characteristics
that are also correlated with outcomes. As described above, Table 2 shows that assignment
of cases to arraigning ADAs appears random after we condition on our court-by-time fixed
effects.
    The exclusion restriction would also be violated if arraigning ADAs affected future out-
comes through channels other than the decision to prosecute or not prosecute. We cannot di-
rectly test the assumption that ADAs only systematically affect defendant outcomes through
the prosecution decision. However, we believe that the exclusion restriction assumption is
reasonable in our setting. Recall that after arraignment a different ADA, assigned through a
different process, takes over the subsequent case stages. All other court actors, such as judges
and public defenders, are also attached to cases through a different process. These institu-
tional characteristics make it unlikely that the assignment of an arraigning ADA is correlated
with post-arraignment actions that could independently affect defendant outcomes.
    We first partially explore potential threats to the exclusion restriction by looking at the
effect of arraigning ADA assignment on case outcomes other than through the initial decision
to prosecute/not prosecute. We test whether our ADA leniency measure is predictive of the
number of days to case disposition or the likelihood of a criminal conviction in a misdemeanor
  31
    This table also reports robust first-stage F-statistics, which in the just-identified case are equivalent to
the effective F-statistic of Montiel Olea and Pflueger (2013). Both of these F-statistics exceed the critical
value of 23.11 they propose for just-identified models with  =10% of worst case bias.



                                                      18
defendant's case within the sample of defendants who are prosecuted. If arraigning ADAs
only have power over the prosecution decision, their leniency should not affect these outcomes
when we restrict attention to prosecuted defendants.
    Table A.1 reports these results. Consistent with the exclusion restriction, we find that
our preferred leave-out instrument is not predictive of either days to disposition, or a crim-
inal conviction in a misdemeanor case, conditional on a defendant being prosecuted. This
supports our hypothesis that our main results operate through arraigning ADAs' effects on
the initial decision to prosecute/not prosecute, not through other channels.
    One other decision the arraigning ADA may make at the arraignment hearing is whether
to request bail in cases that they decide to prosecute. Because these are relatively minor
offenses, bail is typically not requested: the arraigning ADA requests bail in only 8% of
cases that they choose to prosecute, and bail is set by the judge in only 6.6% of prosecuted
cases.32 In Section 5.3 we address the issue of bail requests in several ways and show that
our main results still hold. Section 5.3 also reports reduced form estimates of the effects of
our leave-out instrument on outcomes. If the exclusion restriction is violated, our reduced
form estimates can still be interpreted as the causal effects of being assigned to a more or
less lenient arraigning ADA.

4.1.4    Monotonicity

With constant treatment effects, the above assumptions on exclusion and randomization
would be sufficient to recover causal effects. Under heterogeneous treatment effects, in order
to recover the LATE--the causal impact for the compliers--we also need it to be the case
that the impact of ADA assignment on the probability of nonprosecution is monotonic across
defendants. This monotonicity assumption implies that defendants who are not prosecuted
by stricter ADAs would also be not prosecuted by more lenient ADAs, and that defendants
prosecuted by more lenient ADAs would also be prosecuted by stricter ADAs.
    We cannot test this assumption directly, but there are several indirect tests we can
pursue. Frandsen, Lefgren and Leslie (2019) provide a test for the joint null hypothesis that
the exclusion and monotonicity assumptions hold. We calculate this test within the nine
courts in our dataset, controlling for our main set of covariates and year-month and day-of-
week fixed effects. In Table A.2 we show that within six of the nine courts in our data we
fail to reject the joint null hypothesis that exclusion and monotonicity hold.
  32
     Using data from Massachusetts Trial Courts and DCJIS, Bishop et al. (2020) show that across all cases--
including violent misdemeanors and felonies--bail is imposed in 11-17% of arraignment hearings depending
on the race of the defendant. Given that our analysis focuses on nonviolent misdemeanors, the low rates of
bail assigned at arraignment we observe appear consistent with statewide data.



                                                    19
    Frandsen, Lefgren and Leslie (2019) also show that one can relax the strict (pair-wise)
monotonicity assumption of the original LATE framework to an average monotonicity as-
sumption and still recover a weighted average of individual treatment effects. That is, average
monotonicity is sufficient to interpret our 2SLS estimates as the causal effects of nonprose-
cution. This average monotonicity assumption implies that the covariance between a defen-
dant's prosecutor-specific treatment and the prosecutor's overall propensity to not prosecute
is weakly positive. One test of this assumption is that prosecutors' group-specific nonpros-
ecution rates should be positively correlated with overall nonprosecution--prosecutors that
are more lenient overall should be more likely to not prosecute people in any observable sub-
group. This is equivalent to showing that the first stage should be positive in all subsamples
of the data, as is common in the literature (Dobbie, Goldin and Yang, 2018; Bhuller et al.,
2020).33
    Table A.3 presents first stage results for a large variety of subsamples of our data: sepa-
rately by number of counts, number of misdemeanor counts, number of serious misdemeanor
counts, whether the defendant was convicted of a misdemeanor charge in the prior year,
whether the defendant was convicted of a felony charge in the prior year, whether the de-
fendant was a citizen, charge type, and victim/victimless offense, using the full sample of
cases to calculate our measure of ADA leniency. Consistent with the average monotonicity
assumption, we find that the relationship between our residualized measure of ADA leniency
and nonprosecution is positive and significant in all subsamples.34 In specification checks in
Section 5.3, we also create versions of our instrument that are interacted with various ADA
and case characteristics to relax these monotonicity assumptions.


5      Results
Tables 4 and 5 present OLS and 2SLS estimates of the impacts of misdemeanor nonprosecu-
tion on post-arraignment outcomes. We start with our main outcome of interest in Table 4:
  33
      de Chaisemartin (2017) offers another way of relaxing the strict monotonicity assumption. Under a
weaker condition he calls the "compliers-defiers" (CD) condition--for any pair of ADAs, there is a subset
of compliers that is the same size as the subset of defiers (defendants who violate monotonicity for this
pair) and that has the same local average treatment effect as the defiers--the 2SLS estimates are the LATE
for the subgroup of the remaining compliers. The CD condition holds if the treatment effect has the same
sign for both compliers and defiers, and if the treatment effect for compliers is greater than the treatment
effect for defiers. We do not have strong reasons to believe that compliers and defiers would have differently
signed treatment effects. This weaker "compliers-defiers" condition is also tested by the joint monotonicity-
exclusion test of Frandsen, Lefgren and Leslie (2019), which we fail to reject across a large share of our
sample.
   34
      We show the equivalent first stage monotonicity checks for subsamples based on gender, age, and
race/ethnicity in Section 6.1; these similarly all show positive and statistically significant relationships be-
tween ADA leniency and nonprosecution.


                                                      20
the likelihood of a subsequent criminal complaint within two years post-arraignment. We
separately consider the likelihood of any subsequent complaint, the likelihood of subsequent
misdemeanor charges, and the likelihood of subsequent felony charges. OLS estimates with
controls in Column (2) imply that nonprosecution reduces the probability of a subsequent
criminal complaint by 10 percentage points (a 27% decrease relative to the mean for prose-
cuted defendants). The 2SLS estimates with controls in Column (4) indicate that marginal
nonprosecuted misdemeanor defendants are 33 percentage points less likely to receive a new
complaint within two years (p < 0.01). This represents a 58% decrease relative to the mean
for complier defendants who were prosecuted.35 Nonprosecution in the initial case reduces
the likelihood of a subsequent misdemeanor complaint by 24 percentage points (60%; p <
0.01), and of a subsequent felony complaint by 8 percentage points (47%; not significant).
Reduced form estimates are presented in Table A.14. These reduced form estimates are also
large, negative, and statistically significant.
    Figure 2 shows how this effect evolves over the two-year followup period in three month
bins. We see an immediate drop in the likelihood of a new complaint within the first three
months after the arraignment hearing, and that effect remains steady through the first year.
At that point the negative effect begins to grow larger over time.
    Table A.4 shows similar results for the number of subsequent criminal complaints. With
all controls (Column (4)), the 2SLS estimates indicate that nonprosecution reduces the
number of subsequent criminal complaints by 2.1 complaints (69%; p < 0.01). The number
of subsequent misdemeanor complaints is reduced by 1.2 complaints (67%; p < 0.01), and
the number of subsequent felony complaints by 0.7 complaints (75%; p < 0.05).
    Table A.5 reports 2SLS estimates with all controls for complaints within two years by
subsequent crime type (violent, motor vehicle, disorder/theft, drug, and other). We find
significant declines in all types of subsequent complaints except for drug and other charges.
Nonprosecution reduces the rates at which nonviolent misdemeanor defendants are charged
with subsequent violent offenses by 64%, with subsequent disorder/property offenses by 91%,
and with subsequent motor vehicle offenses by 63%.
    A subsequent complaint might not be consequential if it is not prosecuted or if it does
not result in a criminal record. For this reason we also consider effects on future prosecutions
and DCJIS records. Table 5 reports OLS and 2SLS estimates of the impacts of misdemeanor
nonprosecution on the likelihoods of subsequent prosecution and subsequent acquisition of a
DCJIS criminal record within a two-year interval post-arraignment. We see that nonprosecu-
  35
    See Appendix C.3 for details on the calculation of average outcomes among prosecuted compliers. See
Section 7.1 for more on the comparisons between OLS and 2SLS. Mueller-Smith and Schnepel (2019) find
that felony deferred adjudication reduces subsequent convictions by 45%, a similar order of magnitude.



                                                  21
tion meaningfully decreases the probability that a marginal defendant will be prosecuted or
receive a future DCJIS record. With the full set of controls (Columns (2) and (4)), the 2SLS
estimates indicate that the marginal nonprosecuted misdemeanor defendant is 35 percentage
points less likely to be prosecuted within two years post-arraignment (66%; p < 0.01), and
40 percentage points less likely to acquire a criminal record of a new complaint within two
years post-arraignment (69%; p < 0.01).
    Our main results use a two-year followup period for all defendants when considering the
effects of nonprosecution on subsequent criminal justice contact. We also consider one-year
and three-year followup periods. Our analysis sample becomes a bit larger when we look
at a one-year followup window (N = 74,631); it becomes a bit smaller when we look at a
three-year followup window (N = 63,655). Tables A.6 and A.9 show that our evidence for
the randomization of ADA leniency across cases still holds in these samples; and Tables
A.7 and A.10 show that our first stage results are strong and very similar in these samples.
Our main results are replicated in these samples in Tables A.8 and A.11. Results are a bit
smaller and less statistically significant with a one-year followup window, in line with what
we saw in Figure 2. The results are a bit larger and more significant for all outcomes with
a three-year followup window. Figure A.1 shows how these results evolve over time. As in
Figure 2, we see a reduction in criminal complaints that holds steady through the first year,
and then begins to grow over time.


5.1    Mechanisms
We consider three mechanisms that may be driving our findings. The first is that nonprose-
cution eliminates the possibility that defendants will spend a lengthy period of time in the
criminal justice system with an open case. As reported in Table 1, cases for prosecuted non-
violent misdemeanor defendants in our sample take on average 185 days or approximately
6 months to resolve. Time spent in the criminal justice system--attending hearings and
meetings with lawyers, for instance--can disrupt defendants' work lives, increasing the risk
of reoffending.
    The second mechanism that may be driving our findings is that nonprosecution eliminates
the possibility that a defendant will receive a conviction in their case. As reported in Table 1,
26% of prosecuted nonviolent misdemeanor cases in our sample result in a conviction. Crim-
inal records of misdemeanor convictions may damage defendants' labor market prospects,
raising the risk of reoffending, and may increase the likelihood of future prosecution and
conviction, conditional on future arrest.
    The third mechanism that may be driving our findings is that nonprosecution reduces the


                                               22
probability that a defendant will receive a DCJIS criminal record of their misdemeanor arrest,
and thus reduces the probability that law enforcement officers and employers will see a record
of this arrest. Cases dismissed prior to formal arraignment do not receive DCJIS records
in Massachusetts. Cases that proceed to formal arraignment do receive DCJIS records. In
our data we can only identify day of final disposition, not whether a final disposition that
occurs on the day of arraignment occurs before or after formal arraignment. We expect,
however, that cases that are not prosecuted under our definition will have significantly lower
rates of DCJIS record acquisition, relative to cases that are prosecuted. Table A.12 reports
OLS and 2SLS estimates of the impacts of misdemeanor nonprosecution on the likelihood
that a defendant receives a DCJIS criminal record in the case. With the full set of controls
(Column (4)), the 2SLS estimates indicate that the marginal nonprosecuted misdemeanor
defendant is 55 percentage points less likely to receive a misdemeanor complaint record in
the DCJIS database (56%, p < 0.01). Prosecuted defendants who acquire DCJIS records
of their criminal complaints may have decreased labor market prospects, increasing the risk
of reoffending, and increased likelihood of future prosecution and conviction, conditional on
future arrest.


5.2    Heterogeneity
Misdemeanor prosecution may have such negative effects for marginal nonviolent defendants
because it pulls some defendants into the criminal justice system who otherwise would remain
outside that system. If this is the case, then we would expect to see larger effects for first-time
defendants.
    In Table 6 we repeat our main analyses separately for first-time and repeat defendants,
defined in three different ways. In Columns (1)-(2), we split defendants based on whether
they had any previous complaints filed against them in Suffolk County. In Columns (3)-(4),
we split defendants based on whether they had any previous complaints in Suffolk County
that resulted in a DCJIS record. And in Columns (5)-(6), we split defendants based on
whether they had any previous complaints in Suffolk County that resulted in a conviction.
    We see suggestive evidence that first-time defendants realize greater benefits from non-
prosecution than repeat defendants. The effects of nonprosecution on subsequent criminal
justice contact are generally larger and more precisely estimated for first-time defendants.
Because effects are imprecisely estimated for repeat defendants, we cannot generally reject
the null hypothesis that the impacts for the two groups are the same. But the point estimates
imply that marginal nonprosecuted defendants without previous SCDAO complaints are 80%
less likely to receive a new criminal complaint within two years, relative to prosecuted com-


                                                23
pliers (p < .01), while the risk of subsequent criminal complaints for nonprosecuted repeat
defendants is reduced by only 16%, relative to prosecuted compliers (p > .10).
    In Section 6.1 below we discuss heterogeneity across demographic groups. We find no
meaningful differences by gender or race/ethnicity, but suggestive evidence of differences by
age group. In Section 8.1 we describe our marginal treatment effect estimates, which show
heterogeneity by the (unobservable) probability of nonprosecution.


5.3    Specification Checks
In this section we pursue a variety of modifications to our primary specifications. First, as
discussed earlier, ADAs can make bail requests at the arraignment hearing (although for
the nonviolent misdemeanor cases in our sample bail is requested in only 8% of cases). We
might worry that our leniency measure confounds two types of leniency: "nonprosecution
leniency" and "no-bail leniency." In Table A.13 we address this in three ways, showing the
2SLS estimate for the effect on subsequent criminal complaints in each case. First, we create
a "no-bail leniency" measure based on ADAs' propensity to request bail in other defendants'
cases, and simply control for it in our regressions. Our results are nearly identical. Second,
we use our no-bail leniency measure as an instrument for not receiving bail, and estimate
the effect on subsequent complaints. We find a negative coefficient (which could be due to
the correlation of the bail decision with the nonprosecution decision) but it is insignificant.
Third, we use both nonprosecution leniency and no-bail leniency as instruments in the same
regression, to measure the separate effects of the nonprosecution and no-bail decisions. Our
estimate for nonprosecution is nearly identical to our main estimate, and the estimated effect
of no-bail is near-zero and statistically insignificant. Based on these results, we conclude
that arraigning ADAs' decisions about whether to request bail do not explain our results.
These analyses again support our hypothesis that the only meaningful channel through which
arraigning ADAs affect defendants' outcomes is through the decision of whether to prosecute
the case.
    Table A.14 reports reduced form estimates of the effects of our leave-out instrument
on post-arraignment outcomes. If the exclusion restriction is violated, our reduced form
estimates can still be interpreted as the causal effects of being assigned to a more or less
lenient arraigning ADA. These reduced form estimates are very similar to the 2SLS estimates
reported above, consistent with the strong first-stage relationship between the propensity of
an arraigning ADA to not prosecute and a defendant's own arraignment outcome.
    Table A.15 reports 2SLS estimates for receiving a DCJIS record in the initial case, and for
subsequent complaints, prosecutions, and DCJIS records, for different versions of our instru-


                                              24
ment. Column (2) reports estimates using a version of our leave-out mean instrument that
does not residualize out court-by-time fixed effects. This instrument is thus a raw measure of
an ADA's leave-out nonprosecution rate. Results are slightly larger for most outcomes and
remain significant between p < 0.01 and p < 0.05. Columns (3)-(5) report estimates for more
flexible instruments constructed by interacting our main leave-out instrument with various
ADA or case characteristics. This relaxes our monotonicity assumption and allows the effect
of ADA leniency to vary with each of the following: (i) high versus low ADA experience (as
measured by above- or below-median number of nonviolent misdemeanors arraigned as of the
time of this case's arraignment), (ii) whether the crime is categorized as victimless, or (iii)
several mutually-exclusive crime types. In all cases estimates are qualitatively similar to the
main estimates presented above; coefficients maintain the same sign and are of similar mag-
nitudes. With the ADA-by-crime-type instrument the impact on subsequent misdemeanor
arrests is no longer statistically significant, although the overall effect is, and the impact on
subsequent felony arrests gains significance.
    In Appendix C.1 we further explore alternative IV specifications that account for po-
tential biases from the construction of our leniency measure: including using all the ADA
dummies directly as instruments, using lasso to pick the most informative ADA dummies,
and using the UJIVE estimation strategy proposed by Koles´       ar (2013). Across different es-
timations strategies we robustly find a negative relationship similar in magnitude to our
baseline estimate.


6     Missing Data
6.1    Missing Demographic Data
Both the institutional details of how cases are assigned to arraigning ADAs, as well as the
data we observe, give us confidence that ADA leniency is not correlated with any defen-
dant or case characteristics. However, as noted above, we do not observe age, gender, or
race/ethnicity for all defendants in our sample. These demographic characteristics are more
likely to be missing for cases that were not prosecuted, likely because SCDAO staff are time-
constrained and may have deemed it less important to enter this information when cases
were not moving forward. This selective missingness makes it problematic to include these
variables in our main analysis; doing so could introduce bias.
    This problem is less acute for gender and age. Only 1.4$ of cases are missing either
gender or age (though 2.5% are missing either among nonprosecuted cases and 1.1% are
missing either among prosecuted cases). However, 16.1% of cases are missing race/ethnicity


                                               25
information, with 27% of nonprosecuted cases missing race/ethnicity and 13% of prosecuted
cases missing race/ethnicity. Moreover, as reported in Table A.16, the missingness of infor-
mation on race/ethnicity is correlated not only with whether a case is prosecuted, but also
with whether a defendant has subsequent criminal justice involvement. Defendants have at
least one subsequent criminal complaint within two years post-arraignment in 26% of cases
that are not prosecuted and not missing race/ethnicity information, but in only 10% of cases
that are not prosecuted and missing race/ethnicity; and in 40% of cases that are prosecuted
and not missing race/ethnicity information, but in only 18% of cases that are prosecuted
and missing race/ethnicity.
    The correlation of missing data on defendant race/ethnicity and rates of subsequent
criminal justice contact is likely due to the way that defendant data are entered and stored
in SCDAO electronic records. When a new case is entered into SCDAO's case management
system, the administrator entering the case first searches for the defendant's name in the case
database. If the administrator finds the defendant's name (possibly after further narrowing
his selection by date of birth, social security number, and/or address), he selects the name
to start a new case record. Any defendant demographic information already entered in
the database will be auto-populated in the new case record. Any missing demographic
information can be filled in, and the new information will be stored as part of the defendant's
record. The likelihood that a defendant has race/ethnicity information associated with his
case records is thus an increasing function of the number of times he is processed through
SCDAO.
    However, given the importance of age, gender, and race/ethnicity in predicting current
case outcomes and future criminal justice involvement, we use the data we do have to (1)
confirm the robustness of our analyses above to the inclusion of demographic characteristics,
and (2) to consider the heterogeneity of our results across demographic groups. Because of
the large and selective missingness of race/ethnicity, we construct an alternative measure
using defendants' names to compute the probabilities that an individual is Black, white,
and/or Hispanic.36 These probability estimates will measure actual race/ethnicity with
error, but the error will not be correlated with whether or not a case was prosecuted.
    Table A.17 reports summary statistics including these demographic variables for the
sample of cases not missing gender or age. 80% of defendants are male. We sort defendants
into age group buckets to allow for measurement error in precise age. 23.1% of defendants
are less than 24 years old; 24.6% are 24-30; 21.8% are 31-40; and 30.6% are over age 40.37 In
  36
     Specifically, we use Bayesian Improved Surname Geocoding (BISG) relying on the Census Bureau's
surname list via the R package WRU. This is the same algorithm used by the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau for race/ethnicity prediction.
  37
     Note these cutoffs represent the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of age among those for whom we have


                                                   26
the smaller sample for which race information is recorded in the SCDAO database, 45.8% of
defendants are coded as Black, 36.3% as white, and 16% as Hispanic. In the larger sample
and using predicted race/ethnicity, 34.5% of defendants are most likely to be Black, 25.6%
are most likely to be white, and 33.2% are most likely to be Hispanic.
    Table A.18 shows the results of our randomization test when gender, age groups, and
predicted race/ethnicity are included. Column (1) uses nonprosecution as an outcome, where
we see that younger (age < 24 is the base group) and female defendants are more likely to
be not prosecuted. When we use ADA leniency as the outcome, the p-value on the joint
F-test of the significance of all the coefficients is 0.17. The only coefficient that is significant
is that for male defendants, although the coefficient is small and we might expect one signif-
icant coefficient out of 17 coefficients. We also know that gender is one of the demographic
characteristics that is selectively missing, so a significant difference is not surprising. No-
tably, the coefficients on age groups (which are also systematically missing) and predicted
race/ethnicity are all near-zero and statistically insignificant. Table A.19 checks for mono-
tonicity within each of these demographic groups. We sort defendants into race/ethnicity
categories based on their highest predicted-race probabilities. The first stage is positive and
significant for all subgroups. Table A.20 shows the first stage estimates when gender, age
groups, and predicted race/ethnicity are included in the set of case and defendant covariates.
Results are nearly identical to those in our main analysis.
    Table A.21 shows our main results (effect of nonprosecution on the likelihood of a sub-
sequent criminal complaint) with these demographic characteristics included as covariates.
Our results are again nearly identical to those we described above. Of note, in the SCDAO
administrative data approximately 46% of nonviolent misdemeanor defendants are Black.
Only approximately 24% of Suffolk County residents are Black (U.S. Census Bureau, 2019
Population Estimates Program). Reducing the prosecution of nonviolent misdemeanor of-
fenses would disproportionately benefit Black residents of the county.
    We interpret these results as further support for our assumption of as-if random assign-
ment of ADAs (and for the claim that ADA leniency is uncorrelated with case and defendant
characteristics). While our results are robust to the inclusion of demographic characteristics,
the selective missingness of these data leads us to prefer the specifications that do not include
these variables. We thus highlight the main results presented earlier.
    Table A.22 considers heterogeneity of the nonprosecution effect across different demo-
graphic groups. There is no difference by gender: effects for men and women are nearly
identical. Estimated effects are larger for older defendants (24+) and smaller for defendants
less than 24 years old. Effect sizes are similar across predicted race groups.
age.


                                                27
6.2    Missing ADA Data
As noted earlier, 67% of cases meeting all our other sample criteria are missing information
on the identity of the arraigning ADA. As reported in Table A.23, arraigning ADA infor-
mation is missing in 64% of cases that are prosecuted, and in 75% of cases that are not
prosecuted. However, unlike the missingness of race/ethnicity information, missingness of
ADA information is not also strongly correlated with defendants' subsequent criminal justice
contact, or with other case/defendant characteristics. The rates at which defendants have
subsequent criminal justice contact are nearly identical for those with and without arraigning
ADA information recorded, for both prosecuted and not prosecuted defendants.
    The relative lack of correlation between missing ADA information and case/defendant
characteristics is likely due to the way that ADA information is entered and stored in the
SCDAO case management database. In contrast to the way that defendant race/ethnicity
information is stored in SCDAO records and is auto-populated when a defendant receives
a new criminal complaint, ADA information must be entered anew for each case. The
missingness of ADA information is thus likely more idiosyncratic than the missingness of
race/ethnicity information.
    Nonetheless, the missingness of ADA information does appear to be correlated with prose-
cution/nonprosecution. To address the possible bias introduced by this selective missingness,
we construct four alternative measures of imputed ADA assignment based on progressively
more expansive criteria. Our first imputed measure of ADA assignment ("Imputation 1")
identifies a) court/days with only one observed arraigning ADA, where that ADA either
arraigns at least two cases or arraigns one case and there is only one other case missing ADA
information, and assigns that ADA to any other cases on that court/day that are missing
ADA information; and b) court/weeks with only one observed ADA, where that ADA ar-
raigns at least four cases in total on at least two days, and assigns that ADA to any other
cases in that court/week that are missing ADA information. Our second imputed measure
of ADA assignment ("Imputation 2") additionally identifies a) court/days with only one ob-
served arraigning ADA, and assigns that ADA to any other cases on that court/day that are
missing ADA information; and b) court/weeks with only one observed ADA, and assigns that
ADA to any other cases in that court/week that are missing ADA information. Our third
imputed measure of ADA assignment ("Imputation 3") additionally identifies court/days
with multiple observed arraigning ADAs but with a single modal arraigning ADA, and as-
signs that ADA to any other cases on that court/day that are missing ADA information.
Our fourth imputed measure of ADA assignment ("Imputation 4") additionally identifies
court/weeks with multiple observed arraigning ADAs but with a single modal arraigning
ADA, and assigns that ADA to any other cases in that court/week that are missing ADA

                                             28
information.
    Table A.24 reports the proportions of our main estimation sample and the four imputation
samples that are missing arraigning ADA information. The imbalance on missingness of
arraigning ADA information for prosecuted and not prosecuted cases progressively decreases
as the imputation samples grow larger. In our largest imputed sample ("Imputation 4",
containing 149,185 observations or 76.4% of the sample of nonviolent misdemeanor cases
meeting all other sample criteria), 24% of prosecuted cases are missing arraigning ADA
information, and 22% of not prosecuted cases are missing arraigning ADA information.
    Table A.25 reports two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of nonprosecution on
the probability of a subsequent criminal complaint within two years, for alternative samples
of cases for which ADA assignment has been imputed. All models instrument for nonpros-
ecution using our main ADA leniency measure, estimated using only cases assigned to an
observed arraigning ADA, and include all covariates included in Table 4. Because we are
imputing ADA assignment by week, we implement court-by-week fixed effects instead of
court-by-month fixed effects. Table A.25 also reports p-values from regressions that mimic
our randomization tests in Table 2 Column (2) and first stage results that mimic Table 3
Column (2). Column (1) reports estimates for our primary estimation sample with court-
by-week fixed effects. Columns (2) - (5) progressively expand the sample of cases to include
those cases where arraigning ADA assignment has been imputed ("Imputation 1" - "Impu-
tation 4"). Randomization p-values for the imputation samples range between 0.31 and 0.62.
First stage coefficients are all large and positive, with F statistics ranging between 14 and
19. Second stage estimates for the imputation samples range between -0.50 and -0.65 and
are all significant at p < .01. None of the second stage Anderson-Rubin confidence intervals
contain zero.
    The results from the imputation samples suggest that our primary estimates are not
being driven by selection bias from missing arraigning ADA information. Our estimates are
robust even in our most aggressively constructed imputation sample, containing 76.4% of
the cases meeting all other sample criteria.


7    Understanding the LATE
Our 2SLS estimates represent the LATE for marginal defendants--defendants who would
have received a different prosecution decision had their case been assigned to a different
arraigning ADA. To better understand this LATE, we characterize the number of compliers
and their characteristics following the approach developed by Abadie (2003) and Dahl, Kostøl
and Mogstad (2014), and applied by Dobbie, Goldin and Yang (2018) and Bhuller et al.

                                             29
(2020). Details of these calculations can be found in Appendix C.3.
    In Table A.26 we estimate these shares in several ways. We define most and least lenient
ADAs by their percentiles in the residualized leniency distribution, defining the least lenient
ADAs as those at the  percentile and the most lenient as those at the (100 - ) percentile,
where  varies between 1, 1.5, and 2. In the first three columns of Table A.26, we use a
linear specification of the first stage, given by Equation 3. Under this linear specification,
we find that ten percent of our sample are compliers, 73 percent are never takers, and 18
percent are always takers. The latter three columns use a local linear version of our first
stage of nonprosecution on the residualized measure of ADA leniency, controlling for court-
by-time fixed effects. Under this more flexible analog to our first stage equation, we find
that nine percent of our sample are compliers, 72 percent are never-takers, and 18 percent
are always-takers.
    We then use a similar insight to describe observable characteristics of compliers by calcu-
lating the fraction of compliers in different subsamples (Abadie, 2003).38 Table A.27 shows
these results for various observable characteristics: in Column (1) we show the proportion of
our sample represented by this subset of observable characteristics; in Column (2) we show
the estimated proportion of this subsample composed of compliers; in Column (3) we show
the ratio of how often the trait occurs in the estimated complier group, relative to the full
sample. Compliers look similar to the full sample on many dimensions, but differ on others.
In particular, compliers are less likely to have been charged with a drug offense, to have
been charged with a serious misdemeanor (punishable by more than 100 days in jail), to
have misdemeanor or felony convictions within the prior year, and to be noncitizens. We
also estimate complier shares within demographic groups for the sample of data for which
we have data on age and gender (see Section 6.1). Compliers are more likely to be younger
(less than 24 years old) and also more likely to be female.


7.1     Comparing OLS and 2SLS Estimates
Our main OLS estimates are smaller in absolute value than our 2SLS estimates. OLS and
2SLS estimates can differ due to heterogeneity in the effect of nonprosecution on subsequent
criminal justice contact for the compliers and/or due to selection bias. To explore possible
heterogeneity, in Table A.28 we reweight our OLS estimates to match the sample of compliers
using two different reweighting schemes (Dahl, Kostøl and Mogstad, 2014; Bhuller et al.,
2020). Columns (1)-(3) use our main covariates; Columns (4)-(6) also include age, gender,
  38
    For these calculations we use the linear specification of the first stage and a  = 1% cutoff to define most
and least lenient ADAs.



                                                      30
and predicted race (and thus are estimated in the sample not missing age or gender).39 We
see that the reweighted OLS estimates are very similar to the unweighted OLS estimates
under both reweighting schemes, implying that the differences between the OLS and 2SLS
estimates are unlikely to be accounted for by heterogeneity in causal effects for compliers by
observable characteristics (we cannot rule out heterogeneity on unobservable characteristics).
    The differences we see, then, are likely driven by selection bias: arraigning ADAs are, on
average, choosing to not prosecute defendants who have higher risk of subsequent criminal
justice contact than marginal defendants. There are a variety of characteristics that ADAs
might interpret as mitigating circumstances making defendants less culpable of their crimes
or more worthy of a second chance, but that also increase the risk of subsequent criminal
justice contact. Previously, we hypothesized that age could induce such negative selection.
As reported in Table A.18 Column (1), older defendants are much less likely to be not prose-
cuted than defendants age 23 or younger (the base group in that regression); that is, younger
defendants are less likely to be prosecuted. Arraigning ADAs may view younger defendants
as less culpable or want to give them a second chance. However, younger defendants are at
significantly higher risk of future criminal justice contact than are older defendants.40 If we
compare OLS and 2SLS estimates from Table A.22, which reports 2SLS and OLS estimates
by demographic groups, we see that the point estimates for 2SLS and OLS are much closer
within the age category of 18-23 years than for the overall sample, and that we cannot sta-
tistically distinguish between the two point estimates. This implies less room for selection
bias within this age group. Given the larger differences between OLS and 2SLS for older de-
fendants, other unobservable defendant characteristics are likely to be driving selection bias
for other age groups. Because selection bias based on unobservable characteristics appears
to be important in this context, we focus on our 2SLS estimates.


8      Policy Relevance and Moving beyond the LATE
Our 2SLS estimates give us a weighted average of the effect of nonprosecution among those
defendants induced into nonprosecution by being (as-if randomly) assigned a more lenient
ADA at arraignment--the LATE. The decision to prosecute or not prosecute a defendant
against whom a criminal complaint has been issued is a decision that rests squarely with
  39
    More details on these reweighting schemes can be found in the notes to Table A.28.
  40
    It is true generally that younger people are more likely to have criminal justice contact, relative to older
people (Laub and Sampson, 2001; Landersø, Nielsen and Simonsen, 2017). It is also true in the context of
our data: in an unreported regression, defendants age 23 or younger are 3.5 pp (10%) more likely to have a
new criminal complaint in the next two years than those age 24-30; 6 pp (20%) more likely than those age
31-40, and 8.8 pp (26%) more likely than those older than 40 (all comparisons p < 0.01).



                                                      31
the office of the District Attorney in that jurisdiction. Conditional on the set of behaviors
that are considered criminal, and the behavior of police in arresting individuals suspected
of committing those crimes, the only policy lever available to change nonprosecution rates
is to increase the leniency of the individuals within a District Attorney's office who make
the prosecution decision. This LATE estimate is thus also a policy-relevant treatment effect
(PRTE) (Heckman and Vytlacil, 2001; Heckman and Urzua, 2010; Cornelissen et al., 2016).
    As we increase leniency, we would presumably be drawing different marginal defendants
into nonprosecution. Our LATE estimates do not tell us directly how these marginal de-
fendants may differ in their treatment effects from defendants likely to be on the margin of
prosecution for less lenient ADAs. We explore this question in two ways. First, we estimate
marginal treatment effects (MTEs). These MTEs give insight into what might happen if we
implemented a policy that increased ADA leniency. However, we cannot extrapolate beyond
the data that we have: the MTEs are only estimated for predicted probabilities of non-
prosecution for which we see both prosecuted and nonprosecuted individuals--the common
support of the propensity score for nonprosecution.
    Second, we consider the effects of a policy change. Several district attorney's offices
around the country have begun to implement policies of presumptive nonprosecution for
certain (usually low-level/misdemeanor) offenses. To the extent that such policies still al-
low room for ADA discretion, the presumption of nonprosecution may be applied largely
to marginal nonviolent misdemeanor defendants, and may have similar effects as those esti-
mated above. However, to the extent that the policies expand the set of marginal defendants
beyond those in our sample, and/or are applied to non-marginal defendants, the policies may
have different effects. We use the inauguration of Rachael Rollins as District Attorney of
Suffolk County on January 2, 2019 as a natural experiment to explore such policy effects.
During her 2018 election campaign, then-candidate Rollins pledged to establish a presump-
tion of nonprosecution for a set of defined offenses. We use the transition to the Rollins
administration to explore how increases in nonprosecution induced by the arrival of a new
District Attorney impacted both subsequent criminal complaints and the rate of crimes re-
ported to the Boston Police Department.


8.1    Marginal Treatment Effects
Because defendants are (as-if) randomly assigned to a large number of ADAs with different
leniency rates, we can trace out the effects of nonprosecution along different margins by esti-
mating marginal treatment effects (MTEs). These margins correspond to percentiles of the
distribution of the unobserved propensity to be not prosecuted (Heckman and Vytlacil, 2005;


                                              32
Heckman, Urzua and Vytlacil, 2006; See Appendix C.2 for more details on the derivation of
the MTE in the potential outcomes framework).41
    Marginal treatment effects are given by the derivative of the probability of a criminal
complaint within two years with respect to the predicted probability of nonprosecution--the
propensity score estimated using the leniency of the arraignment ADA as well as covariates
and court-by-time fixed effects.42 For a particular realization of the predicted probability
of nonprosecution, the MTE captures the mean effect of nonprosecution on future criminal
complaints for those who would not be prosecuted if assigned an ADA with a slightly higher
leniency, and prosecuted if assigned to an ADA with a slightly lower leniency. The predicted
probability of nonprosecution is increasing in ADA leniency. At the lowest levels of the
predicted probability of nonprosecution, the MTEs report the effects of nonprosecution for
defendants who would be not prosecuted by all but the least-lenient ADAs (i.e., defendants
who are closer to the always-takers). At the highest levels of the predicted probability of
nonprosecution, the MTEs report the effects of nonprosecution for defendants who would
be not prosecuted by only more-lenient ADAs (i.e., defendants closer to the never-takers).
The MTEs thus show how subsequent criminal justice contact varies across defendants who
are induced into nonprosecution as the predicted probability of nonprosecution varies with
the instrument. With these estimates we can explore heterogeneity by the unobservable
propensity to be not prosecuted. As this propensity increases, the instrument is impacting
different marginal defendants.
    Figure 3a shows the support of the predicted probability of nonprosecution (the propen-
sity score) for prosecuted and non-prosecuted defendants. We can only trace out the MTEs
along this range of common support. The estimates can become imprecise at the extreme
ends of this distribution given smaller numbers of ADAs, so when estimating the MTEs we
trim the top and bottom one percentiles of this common support distribution.
    Figure 3b shows the estimated MTEs. Given the potential outcomes model outlined in
Appendix C.2, we can interpret the x-axis as the predicted probability of nonprosecution.
The MTEs decline monotonically as this probability increases, indicating that there is het-
erogeneity in the effect of nonprosecution on the probability of a future criminal complaint.
The reduction in the probability of future criminal complaints is larger for defendants on the
margin of nonprosecution for more-lenient ADAs (i.e., the defendants who are closer to the
never-takers in our IV framework). Defendants on the margin of nonprosecution for less-
lenient ADAs (i.e., defendants closer to the always-takers) experience a suggestive increase
  41
     See Doyle Jr (2007), Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2013), French and Song (2014), Arnold, Dobbie and
Yang (2018), and Bhuller et al. (2020) for empirical examples of MTE estimation in leniency designs.
  42
     In practice, we use the Stata package mtefe (Andresen, 2019).



                                                  33
in the probability of a future criminal complaint as a consequence of nonprosecution, but the
estimates at this more extreme end of the propensity score distribution are not statistically
significantly different from zero and have wide confidence intervals.
    We can express other treatment effect parameters as weighted averages of the MTEs, such
as the (overall) average treatment effect (ATE), average treatment on the treated (ATT), and
average treatment on the untreated (ATUT). We rescale the weights so that they integrate to
one over the common support region shown in Figure 3a and estimate these three treatment
effects (Carneiro, Heckman and Vytlacil, 2011, Andresen, 2019). We report the estimates in
the upper right corner of Figure 3b. The estimated ATE is smaller than our LATE estimates
but still large, negative, and statistically significant.
    These estimates imply that increasing the leniency of ADA nonprosecution decisions--
that is, not prosecuting more defendants who are currently never-takers in our IV framework--
would, if anything, cause larger decreases in subsequent criminal justice contact than the
average estimates reported earlier.


8.2     Effects of a Presumption of Nonprosecution
In this subsection we explore the impacts of the inauguration of Rachael Rollins as District
Attorney of Suffolk County on January 2, 2019. During her 2018 election campaign, District
Attorney Rollins pledged to establish a presumption of nonprosecution for 15 nonviolent
misdemeanor offenses.43 The proposed policy allowed for some ADA discretion in nonprose-
cution decisions, with supervisor approval. Figure B.1 reports monthly event study estimates
of the effects of the Rollins inauguration on nonprosecution rates between January 1, 2018
and September 1, 2019 for a) cases with nonviolent misdemeanor offenses on the Rollins
list, b) cases with nonviolent misdemeanor offenses not on the Rollins list, c) cases with any
nonviolent misdemeanor offenses, and d) cases with nonviolent felony offenses. All models
include fixed effects for court and day of week and all case-level covariates used throughout
the paper; all plots report 90% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors clustered
on defendants. There is seasonality in nonprosecution rates but no clear pre-inauguration
directional time trends, for any category of case. After the inauguration of District Attorney
Rollins, nonprosecution rates rose not only for cases involving the nonviolent misdemeanor
offenses on the Rollins list, but also for those involving nonviolent misdemeanor offenses not
on the Rollins list (and for all nonviolent misdemeanor cases). However, nonprosecution
  43
     https://rollins4da.com/policy/charges-to-be-declined/. Some charges on the Rollins list may be charged
as felonies. We restrict our attention to changes in nonprosecution rates for nonviolent misdemeanor offenses
(on and off the Rollins list), as defined earlier in the paper.




                                                     34
rates did not rise for cases involving nonviolent felonies.44
    Figure B.2 reports estimated effects of the Rollins inauguration on nonprosecution rates
for these categories of nonviolent misdemeanor cases, with and without nonviolent felony
cases as a control group, and estimated effects of nonprosecution on subsequent criminal
complaints within one year of the current case, using the Rollins inauguration as an in-
strument for nonprosecution, again with and without nonviolent felony cases as a control
group. The time period remains January 1, 2018 - September 1, 2019; defendants are fol-
lowed for one year after the initiation of their current case, up to September 1, 2020. All
models include fixed effects for court, month, and day of week and all case-level covariates
used throughout the paper. Figure B.2 reports 95% confidence intervals based on robust
standard errors clustered on defendants.
    The top three coefficients reported in Panel A of Figure B.2 report OLS estimates of
the average effects of the Rollins inauguration on nonprosecution rates for cases involving
(i) nonviolent misdemeanors on the Rollins list, (ii) nonviolent misdemeanors not on the
Rollins list, and (iii) all nonviolent misdemeanors. The bottom three coefficients reported
in Panel A of Figure B.2 report difference-in-differences estimates of these effects, relative
to nonprosecution rates for nonviolent felony cases. These latter estimates indicate that
nonprosecution rates for cases involving nonviolent misdemeanors (on and off the Rollins list
and overall) increased by five to eight percentage points on average between January 2, 2019
and September 1, 2019, or by 15 - 20% relative to the average 2018 nonprosecution rates
for these cases (ranging between 34% for nonviolent misdemeanor offenses on the Rollins
list to 38% for nonviolent misdemeanor offenses not on the Rollins list). All estimates are
significant at p < 0.01.
    The top three coefficients reported in Panel B of Figure B.2 report 2SLS estimates of the
average effects of nonprosecution on the rates at which defendants are issued new criminal
complaints within one year of the current case, for all three categories of nonviolent misde-
meanors, using the Rollins inauguration as an instrument for nonprosecution. These second
stage estimates are all negative and significant at p < 0.01. The bottom three coefficients
reported in Panel B of Figure B.2 report 2SLS difference-in-differences estimates of these
effects, relative to nonviolent felony cases.45 These second-stage IV DD estimates indicate
that the increases in nonprosecution after the Rollins inauguration led to a 41 percentage
  44
     District Attorney Rollins issued a formal memo announcing the new nonprosecution policy on March 25,
2019, and SCDAO ADAs were trained in the new policy after that date. However, as can be seen in Figure
B.1, increases in nonprosecution occurred between District Attorney Rollins' inauguration and March 25,
2019.
  45
     Ouss and Stevenson (2020) use a similar IV difference-in-differences strategy in their study of a change
in bail policy in Philadelphia.



                                                     35
point decrease in new criminal complaints for nonviolent misdemeanor cases on the Rollins
list (not significant), a 47 percentage point decrease in new criminal complaints for nonvio-
lent misdemeanor cases not on the Rollins list (p < .05), and a 56 percentage point decrease
in new criminal complaints for all nonviolent misdemeanor cases (p < .05).
    Similar to our main estimation of impacts of increased ADA leniency at arraignment,
these estimates suggest that policies introducing a presumption of nonprosecution for non-
violent misdemeanor offenses may have social benefits. The increases in nonprosecution of
nonviolent misdemeanor offenses induced by the Rollins inauguration appear to have de-
creased the rates at which defendants are issued new criminal complaints within one year of
the current case.
    It is possible that future criminal complaints are not a good proxy for future criminal
behavior, if police are less likely to arrest or cite individuals when their offenses are unlikely to
be prosecuted. It is also possible that a change in policy to reduce prosecution of nonviolent
misdemeanors could increase the number of crimes committed by other residents (who are
not yet in our data) by reducing general deterrence. In both cases, looking directly at the
number of crimes reported in Suffolk County would be helpful.
    Figure B.3 shows the effects of District Attorney Rollins' inauguration on crimes reported
to the Boston Police Department.46 We focus on the types of offenses that could be affected
by a presumption of nonprosecution--that is, crime types where the expected probability of
prosecution has fallen. The data include crime reports from January 2017 through February
2020 (before COVID-19). We group incidents into the following categories: property damage,
theft and fraud, disorder, drug, and other offenses.47 Overall, we find significant reductions
in reports of property damage and reports of theft/fraud. There is no evidence of an increase
in any of these crime types.
    Overall, we interpret these effects of District Attorney Rollins' inauguration and imple-
mentation of policies that reduced the prosecution of nonviolent misdemeanors as suggestive
evidence that this policy shift reduced the future criminal justice involvement of this broader
pool of defendants. Effects on reported crime are noisy, but there is certainly no evidence
that this policy change had detrimental effects on public safety. It will be important to track
changes over time in this setting and elsewhere, to more fully understand what trade-offs, if
any, exist.
  46
    Source: https://data.boston.gov/dataset/crime-incident-reports-august-2015-to-date-source-new-system
  47
    There was a marked increase in the number of "verbal disputes" in the reported crime data beginning
in October 2019--a near-doubling of such incidents. Because this seems to be driven by some other factor,
we exclude this crime category from the analysis.




                                                 36
9    Discussion
Misdemeanor cases make up over 80 percent of the cases processed by the U.S. criminal
justice system. Yet we know little about the causal impacts of misdemeanor prosecution or
nonprosecution. We report the first estimates of the causal effects of misdemeanor nonprose-
cution on rates of post-arraignment criminal complaints, prosecutions, and criminal records.
To do this, we leverage the as-if random assignment of nonviolent misdemeanor cases to
arraigning ADAs in a large urban district attorney's office. Our findings imply that not
prosecuting marginal nonviolent misdemeanor defendants substantially reduces their sub-
sequent criminal justice contact, or, in other words, that prosecuting marginal nonviolent
misdemeanor defendants substantially increases their subsequent criminal justice contact.
    These findings are troubling, given the volume of misdemeanor prosecutions pursued in
the United States. If prosecution of the marginal misdemeanor defendant increases the risk of
post-arraignment criminal justice involvement, it is possible that misdemeanor prosecution
also has negative labor market effects (Mueller-Smith and Schnepel, 2019). This in turn
could lead to an increase in criminal activity. We may in fact be undermining public safety
by criminalizing relatively minor forms of misbehavior.
    The key policy question that motivated this study is whether scaling back the prosecution
of nonviolent misdemeanor prosecution would enhance or reduce public safety. Our results
reflect the combined effects of nonprosecution on defendant behavior and responses to that
behavior from the criminal justice system, which makes the answer to this question less
straightforward than it first appears. Since decisions to prosecute in future cases may be
sensitive to a defendant's record of previous arrests/prosecutions/convictions, the effects of
nonprosecution on future prosecution and criminal record acquisition may reflect, to large
degree, the "ratcheting up" of criminal justice consequences for repeat offenders. That is,
a repeat defendant may be more likely to be prosecuted than a first-time defendant, even
when the criminal behavior they are accused of is the same. For this reason, a change in
future prosecution and criminal record acquisition may not reflect a meaningful change in
public safety. That said, future prosecutions and criminal records certainly incur a cost to
the defendant (time, legal fees, court costs, and perhaps lost employment), and we should
consider whether this cost is justified by any benefit to the community. If nonprosecution in
an initial case helps defendants avoid future prosecutions and criminal records, with little to
no change in their criminal behavior, that could easily yield net social benefits.
    Future criminal complaints may provide a more objective measure of future criminal
behavior, because police officers may be less likely to know/consider a person's criminal his-
tory when they are issuing complaints than prosecutors are to know/consider that history


                                              37
when deciding to prosecute. In this case, our finding that nonprosecution reduces the like-
lihood of future criminal complaints implies that scaling back the prosecution of nonviolent
misdemeanor cases would indeed have social benefits due to a reduction in offending.
    Our results suggest that inducing arraigning ADAs to be more lenient in their prosecution
decisions could yield net social benefits. Preliminary evidence on the effects of a related policy
change in Suffolk County--a presumption of nonprosecution for nonviolent misdemeanor
offenses--supports this policy implication. We look forward to seeing future work on the
longer-run effects of the SCDAO policy, and on the effects of similar prosecutor-led reforms
in other contexts.




                                               38
References
Abadie, Alberto. 2003. "Semiparametric instrumental variable estimation of treatment re-
 sponse models." Journal of Econometrics 113(2):231­263.

Ahrens, Achim, Christian Hansen and Mark Schaffer. 2019. "ivlasso and pdslasso: Pro-
 grams for post-selection and post-regularization OLS and IV estimation and inference.".

Aizer, Anna and Jr. Doyle, Joseph J. 2015. "Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and
  Future Crime: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges." The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 130(2):759­803.

Anderson, Theodore W and Herman Rubin. 1949. "Estimation of the parameters of a single
 equation in a complete system of stochastic equations." Annals of Mathematical statistics
 20(1):46­63.

Andresen, Martin E. 2018. "Exploring marginal treatment effects: Flexible estimation using
 Stata." The Stata Journal 18(1):118­158.

Andresen, Martin E. 2019. "MTEFE: Stata module to compute marginal treatment effects
 with factor variables.". This version November 2020.

Andrews, Isaiah, James H Stock and Liyang Sun. 2019. "Weak instruments in instrumental
 variables regression: Theory and practice." Annual Review of Economics 11:727­753.

Aneja, Abhay P and Carlos F Avenancio-Le´ on. 2019. No Credit For Time Served? Incar-
 ceration and Credit-Driven Crime Cycles. Working paper.

Angrist, Joshua and Brigham Frandsen. 2020. Machine labor. Working Paper 26584 National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

Angrist, Joshua D and Alan B Keueger. 1991. "Does compulsory school attendance affect
 schooling and earnings?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(4):979­1014.

Angrist, Joshua David, Guido W Imbens and Alan B Krueger. 1999. "Jackknife instrumental
 variables estimation." Journal of Applied Econometrics 14(1):57­67.

Arnold, David, Will Dobbie and Crystal S Yang. 2018. "Racial bias in bail decisions." The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(4):1885­1932.

Arteaga, Carolina. 2020. Parental Incarceration and Children's Educational Attainment.
  Working paper.

                                           39
Becker, Gary S. 1968. "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach." Journal of Political
  Economy 76(2):169­217.

Bekker, Paul A. 1994. "Alternative approximations to the distributions of instrumental
  variable estimators." Econometrica pp. 657­681.

Belloni, Alexandre, Daniel Chen, Victor Chernozhukov and Christian Hansen. 2012. "Sparse
  models and methods for optimal instruments with an application to eminent domain."
  Econometrica 80(6):2369­2429.

Belloni, Alexandre, Victor Chernozhukov and Christian Hansen. 2014. "Inference on treat-
  ment effects after selection among high-dimensional controls." The Review of Economic
  Studies 81(2):608­650.

Bhuller, Manudeep, Gordon B Dahl, Katrine V Loken and Magne Mogstad. 2018. "Inter-
  generational effects of incarceration." AEA Papers and Proceedings 108:234­40.

Bhuller, Manudeep, Gordon Dahl, Katrine Loken and Magne Mogstad. 2020. "Incarceration,
  Recidivism and Employment." Journal of Political Economy 128(4).

Bishop, Elizabeth, Brook Hopkins, Chijindu Obiofuma and Felix Owusu. 2020. Racial Dis-
  pariies in the Massachusetts Criminal System. Technical report Criminal Justice Policy
  Program Harvard Law School.
  URL: https://hls.harvard.edu/content/uploads/2020/11/Massachusetts-Racial-Disparity-
  Report-FINAL.pdf

Bj¨
  orklund, Anders and Robert Moffitt. 1987. "The estimation of wage gains and welfare
  gains in self-selection models." The Review of Economics and Statistics 69:42­49.

Bound, John, David A Jaeger and Regina M Baker. 1995. "Problems with instrumental
  variables estimation when the correlation between the instruments and the endogenous
  explanatory variable is weak." Journal of the American statistical association 90(430):443­
  450.

Brinch, Christian N, Magne Mogstad and Matthew Wiswall. 2017. "Beyond LATE with a
  discrete instrument." Journal of Political Economy 125(4):985­1039.

Carneiro, Pedro, James J Heckman and Edward J Vytlacil. 2011. "Estimating marginal
  returns to education." American Economic Review 101(6):2754­81.

Chalfin, Aaron and Justin McCrary. 2017. "Criminal deterrence: A review of the literature."
 Journal of Economic Literature 55(1):5­48.

                                             40
Chao, John C and Norman R Swanson. 2005. "Consistent estimation with a large number
 of weak instruments." Econometrica 73(5):1673­1692.

Chen, M Keith and Jesse M Shapiro. 2007. "Do harsher prison conditions reduce recidivism?
 A discontinuity-based approach." American Law and Economics Review 9(1):1­29.

Collinson, Robert and Davin Reed. 2019. The effects of evictions on low-income households.
  Working paper.

Cornelissen, Thomas, Christian Dustmann, Anna Raute and Uta Sch¨ onberg. 2016. "From
  LATE to MTE: Alternative methods for the evaluation of policy interventions." Labour
  Economics 41:47­60.

Dahl, Gordon B, Andreas Ravndal Kostøl and Magne Mogstad. 2014. "Family welfare
 cultures." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4):1711­1752.

Davidson, Russell and James G MacKinnon. 2014. "Confidence sets based on inverting
  Anderson­Rubin tests." The Econometrics Journal 17(2):S39­S58.

de Chaisemartin, Clement. 2017. "Tolerating defiance? Local average treatment effects
  without monotonicity." Quantitative Economics 8(2):367­396.

Di Tella, Rafael and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2013. "Criminal Recidivism after Prison and
  Electronic Monitoring." Journal of Political Economy 121(1):28­73.

Diamond, Rebecca, Adam Guren and Rose Tan. 2020. The effect of foreclosures on homeown-
  ers, tenants, and landlords. Working Paper 27358 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Dobbie, Will, Hans Gr¨onqvist, Susan Niknami, M°   arten Palme and Mikael Priks. 2018. The
 intergenerational effects of parental incarceration. Working Paper 24186 National Bureau
 of Economic Research.

Dobbie, Will, Jacob Goldin and Crystal S. Yang. 2018. "The Effects of Pretrial Detention on
 Conviction, Future Crime, and Employment: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges."
 American Economic Review 108(2):201­40.

Dobbie, Will, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham and Crystal S Yang. 2017. "Consumer Bankruptcy
 and Financial Health." The Review of Economics and Statistics 99(5).

Doleac, Jennifer L. 2020. Encouraging desistance from crime. Working paper.

Doyle Jr, Joseph J. 2007. "Child protection and child outcomes: Measuring the effects of
  foster care." American Economic Review 97(5):1583­1610.

                                            41
Drago, Francesco, Roberto Galbiati and Pietro Vertova. 2009. "The deterrent effects of
  prison: Evidence from a natural experiment." Journal of Political Economy 117(2):257­
  280.

Dusek, Libor and Christian Traxler. 2020. "Learning from law enforcement.".

Eren, Ozkan and Naci Mocan. 2019. "Juvenile Punishment, High School Graduation, and
  Adult Crime: Evidence from Idiosyncratic Judge Harshness." Review of Economics and
  Statistics pp. 1­14.

Frandsen, Brigham. 2020. "TESTJFE: Stata module to perform test for instrument validity
  in the judge fixed effects design.".

Frandsen, Brigham R., Lars J. Lefgren and Emily C. Leslie. 2019. Judging Judge Fixed
  Effects. Working Paper 25528 National Bureau of Economic Research.

French, Eric and Jae Song. 2014. "The effect of disability insurance receipt on labor supply."
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(2):291­337.

Gehrsitz, Markus. 2017. "Speeding, Punishment, and Recidivism: Evidence from a Regres-
 sion Discontinuity Design." The Journal of Law and Economics 60(3):497­528.

Hansen, Benjamin. 2015. "Punishment and deterrence: Evidence from drunk driving."
  American Economic Review 105(4):1581­1617.

Hausman, Jerry A, Whitney K Newey, Tiemen Woutersen, John C Chao and Norman R
  Swanson. 2012. "Instrumental variable estimation with heteroskedasticity and many in-
  struments." Quantitative Economics 3(2):211­255.

Heckman, James J and Edward Vytlacil. 2001. "Policy-relevant treatment effects." American
  Economic Review 91(2):107­111.

Heckman, James J and Edward Vytlacil. 2005. "Structural equations, treatment effects, and
  econometric policy evaluation 1." Econometrica 73(3):669­738.

Heckman, James J and Sergio Urzua. 2010. "Comparing IV with structural models: What
  simple IV can and cannot identify." Journal of Econometrics 156(1):27­37.

Heckman, James J, Sergio Urzua and Edward Vytlacil. 2006. "Understanding instrumental
  variables in models with essential heterogeneity." The Review of Economics and Statistics
  88(3):389­432.


                                             42
Hjalmarsson, Randi. 2009. "Juvenile jails: A path to the straight and narrow or to hardened
  criminality?" The Journal of Law and Economics 52(4):779­809.

Hull, Peter. 2017. Examiner Designs and First-Stage F Statistics: A Caution. Technical
 report.

Humphries, John Eric, Nicholas S Mader, Daniel I Tannenbaum and Winnie L Van Dijk.
 2019. Does eviction cause poverty? Quasi-experimental evidence from Cook County, IL.
 Working Paper 26139 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Imbens, Guido W and Joshua D Angrist. 1994. "Identification and Estimation of Local
  Average Treatment Effects." Econometrica pp. 467­475.

Kling, Jeffrey R. 2006. "Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings." American Eco-
  nomic Review 96(3):863­876.

Koles´
     ar, Michal. 2013. "Estimation in an instrumental variables model with treatment effect
 heterogeneity." Unpublished Working Paper .

Landersø, Rasmus, Helena Skyt Nielsen and Marianne Simonsen. 2017. "School starting age
  and the crime-age profile." The Economic Journal 127(602):1096­1118.

Laub, John H and Robert J Sampson. 2001. "Understanding desistance from crime." Crime
  and justice 28:1­69.

Leasure, Peter. 2019. "Misdemeanor Records and Employment Outcomes: An Experimental
  Study." Crime & Delinquency 65(13):1850­1872.

Lee, David S., Marcelo J. Moreira, Justin McCrary and Jack Porter. 2020. arXiv e-prints .
  arXiv:2010.05058.

Leslie, Emily and Nolan G. Pope. 2017. "The Unintended Impact of Pretrial Detention
  on Case Outcomes: Evidence from New York City Arraignments." Journal of Law and
  Economics 60(3).

Loeffler, Charles E. 2013. "Does imprisonment alter the life course? Evidence on crime and
  employment from a natural experiment." Criminology 51(1):137­166.

Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J Mullen and Alexander Strand. 2013. "Does disability insurance
 receipt discourage work? Using examiner assignment to estimate causal effects of SSDI
 receipt." American Economic Review 103(5):1797­1829.


                                            43
Mogstad, Magne and Alexander Torgovitsky. 2018. "Identification and extrapolation of
 causal effects with instrumental variables." Annual Review of Economics 10:577­613.

Montiel Olea, Jos´
                 e Luis and Carolin Pflueger. 2013. "A robust test for weak instruments."
 Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 31(3):358­369.

Mueller-Smith, Michael. 2015. The Criminal and Labor Market Impacts of Incarceration.
 Working paper. https://sites.lsa.umich.edu/mgms/wp-content/uploads/sites/
 283/2015/09/incar.pdf.

Mueller-Smith, Michael and Kevin T. Schnepel. 2019. Diversion in the Criminal Justice
 System. Working paper. https://sites.lsa.umich.edu/mgms/wp-content/uploads/
 sites/283/2019/01/Diversion.pdf.

Nagin, Daniel S, Francis T Cullen and Cheryl Lero Jonson. 2009. "Imprisonment and reof-
  fending." Crime and Justice 38(1):115­200.

Natapoff, Alexandra. 2018. Punishment Without Crime: How Our Massive Misdemeanor
  System Traps the Innocent and Makes America More Unequal. New York: Basic Books.

Norris, Samuel, Matthew Pecenco and Jeffrey Weaver. 2020. "The effects of parental and
  sibling incarceration: Evidence from ohio." Available at SSRN 3590735 .

Ouss, Aurelie and Megan Stevenson. 2020. "Bail, Jail, and Pretrial Misconduct: The Influ-
 ence of Prosecutors." http://aouss.github.io/NCB.pdf.

Raphael, Steven and Michael A. Stoll. 2014. "A New Approach to Reducing Incarceration
  While Maintaining Low Rates of Crime.". Hamilton Project Discussion Paper 2014-03.

Rehavi, M. Marit and Sonja B. Starr. 2014. "Racial Disparity in Federal Criminal Sentences."
  Journal of Political Economy 122(6).

Sloan, CarlyWill. 2020a. "How Much Does Your Prosecutor Matter? An Estimate of Pros-
  ecutorial Discretion.". Working paper.

Sloan, CarlyWill. 2020b. "Racial Bias by Prosecutors: Evidence from Random Assignment.".
  Working paper.

Stevenson, Megan and Sandra Mayson. 2018. "The scale of misdemeanor justice." Boston
  University Law Review 98:731.

Stevenson, Megan T. 2018. "Distortion of justice: How the inability to pay bail affects case
  outcomes." The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 34(4):511­542.

                                            44
Tuttle, Cody. 2021. "Racial Disparities in Federal Sentencing: Evidence from Drug Manda-
  tory Minimums.". Working paper.

Uggen, Christopher, Mike Vuolo, Sarah Lageson, Ebony Ruhland and Hilary K. Whitham.
  2014. "The Edge of Stigma: An Experimental Audit of the Effects of Low-Level Criminal
  Records on Employment." Criminology 52(4):627­654.




                                          45
                                             Figure 1: ADA Leniency and Nonprosecution




                                                                                               .35
                               .1




                                                                                                     Residualized Rate of Nonprosecution
                               .075




                                                                                               .3
          Fraction of Sample
                               .05




                                                                                               .25
                               .025




                                                                                               .2
                               0




                                      -.15    -.1      -.05        0         .05   .1    .15
                                                              ADA Leniency


Note: This figure shows the distribution of our leave-out mean measure of ADA "leniency," residualized
by court-by-month and court-by-day-of-week. More lenient ADAs have higher rates of not prosecuting
nonviolent misdemeanor cases. The solid line is a local linear regression of nonprosecution on ADA leniency,
along with the 95% confidence interval, estimated from the 1st to 99th percentiles of ADA leniency--a local
linear version of our first stage. A case assigned to a more lenient ADA (computed using all cases except
the current case and other cases with the same defendant) has a higher likelihood of being not prosecuted.




                                                                  46
                                                               Figure 2: LATE Over Time (2 Years)
                                                  .1
          IV Estimates of Effect of Nonprosecution
           -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1              0




                                                       3   6        9         12        15        18     21   24
                                                                    Criminal Complaint Within X Months

                                                                        All             Misdemeanors
                                                                        Felonies



Note: This figure shows the local average treatment effect of nonprosecution on the likelihood of a new
criminal complaint (y-axis) within a given number of months after the arraignment hearing (x-axis). Esti-
mates are based on 2SLS regressions including covariates (the equivalent of Column (4) in Table 4). The
circles show coefficients; the lines show 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                   47
                                              Figure 3: Marginal Treatment Effects
                 (a) Common Support                                                                                                       (b) MTE
                             Common support                                                                                       Marginal Treatment Effects




                                                                              Treatment Effect: Complaint w/in 2 years
     10




                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                                                                                           ATE Estimate: -0.153 (p=0.007)
                                                                                                                                                           ATUT Estimate: -0.190 (p=0.003)
                                                                                                                                                           ATT Estimate: -0.060 (p=0.204)
     8




                                                                                                           .2
         6
  Density




                                                                                                   0
 4




                                                                                           -.2
     2




                                                                                    -.4
     0




                                                                                                                         0   .1    .2         .3          .4       .5        .6       .7
             0   .2              .4              .6             .8   1
                      Predicted probability of nonprosecution
                                                                                                                                  Predicted probability of nonprosecution

                              Treated              Untreated                                                                        MTE               95% CI                ATE




Note: In (a) the dashed lines represent the upper and lower bounds on the common support of the propen-
sity score (based on 1% trimming) used to estimate the MTEs. Propensity scores are predicted via a
logit regression with all case- and defendant-level covariates included, including court-by-time FE. The
MTE estimation is based on a local IV using a cubic polynomial specification in the sample with common
support. The x-axis in Figure (b) is the predicted probability of nonprosecution estimated from the assigned
ADA after residualizing out covariates and court-by-time fixed effects. Standard errors and resulting
95% confidence intervals are estimated using 100 bootstrap replications. The outcome of interest is the
probability of a new criminal complaint within two years. The upper right corner on Panel (b) shows
the estimated average treatment effect (ATE), average treatment on the untreated (ATUT), and average
treatment on the treated (ATT). These were estimated by rescaling the weights on the MTEs for those
parameters to integrate over the common support shown in (a) (Carneiro, Heckman and Vytlacil, 2011).
All estimations were done via mtefe in Stata (Andresen, 2019).




                                                                         48
                                    Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                (1)           (2)      (3)
                                                                                       Not
                                                                All      Prosecuted Prosecuted
     Baseline:
     Not Prosecuted                           0.205                         0.000           1.000
     Number Counts                            1.716                         1.751           1.581
     Number Misdemeanor Counts                1.319                         1.365           1.141
     Number of Serious Misdemeanor Counts     0.575                         0.649           0.289
     Misd Conviction within Past Year         0.085                         0.099           0.030
     Felony Conviction within Past Year       0.044                         0.052           0.014
     Citizen                                  0.765                         0.744           0.849
     Disorderly/Theft                         0.284                         0.307           0.194
     Motor Vehicle                            0.395                         0.333           0.633
     Drug                                     0.152                         0.184           0.027
     Other Crime                              0.170                         0.176           0.146
     Victimless Crime                         0.817                         0.789           0.925
     Case Outcomes:
     ADA Requested Bail                       0.064                         0.080           0.000
     Bail Set at Arraignment                  0.052                         0.066           0.000
     Amount Bail Set (Cond.)                 401.759                       401.759            .
     Days to Disposition                     146.667                       184.510          0.000
     DCJIS Record of Case                     0.686                         0.770           0.363
     Any Conviction                           0.209                         0.263           0.000
     Post-Case Outcomes:
     Criminal Complaint Within 2 Years        0.339                         0.371           0.215
     Misdemeanor Complaint Within 2 Years     0.225                         0.243           0.155
     Felony Complaint Within 2 Years          0.114                         0.128           0.060
     Prosecution Within 2 Years               0.305                         0.341           0.164
     Misdemeanor Prosecution Within 2 Years   0.193                         0.216           0.105
     Felony Prosecution Within 2 Years        0.112                         0.126           0.059
     DCJIS Record Within 2 Years              0.278                         0.311           0.152
     Misdemeanor DCJIS Record Within 2 Years 0.179                          0.199           0.101
     Felony DCJIS Record Within 2 Years       0.099                         0.112           0.051
     Observations                             67553                         53698           13855

Note: This sample includes cases with an arraignment hearing between January 1, 2004 ­ September 1,
2018, that have no felony or violent/gun misdemeanor charges, that are arraigned in one of Suffolk County's 9
district/municipal courts, that have an identified Assistant District Attorney (ADA) at arraignment, that are
processed by an ADA who arraigned at least 30 nonviolent misdemeanor cases, and that are not "singletons"
within our set of court-by-time fixed effects. Source: SCDAO.




                                                     49
                                       Table 2: Randomization

                                                                (1)                 (2)
                                                           Nonprosecution       ADA Leniency
         Number Counts                                         -0.019***              -0.000
                                                                 (0.003)             (0.000)
         Number Misdemeanor Counts                              0.018***               0.000
                                                                 (0.004)             (0.001)
         Number of Serious Misdemeanor Counts                  -0.102***              -0.000
                                                                 (0.006)             (0.000)
         Misd Conviction within Past Year                      -0.068***              -0.001
                                                                 (0.005)             (0.000)
         Felony Conviction within Past Year                    -0.053***              -0.001
                                                                 (0.006)             (0.001)
         Citizen                                                0.042***              -0.000
                                                                 (0.004)             (0.000)
         Disorderly/Theft                                        -0.014*              -0.001
                                                                 (0.008)             (0.001)
         Motor Vehicle                                          0.105***              -0.000
                                                                 (0.009)             (0.000)
         Drug                                                  -0.094***              -0.001
                                                                 (0.009)             (0.001)
         Constant                                               0.224***               0.001
                                                                 (0.009)             (0.002)
         Observations                                            67553                67553
         Joint F-Test p-value                                      0                  0.234

Note: This table reports regressions testing the random assignment of cases to arraigning ADAs. ADA
leniency is estimated using data from other nonviolent misdemeanor cases assigned to an arraigning ADA
following the procedure described in the text. Column (1) reports estimates from an OLS regression of
nonprosecution on the variables listed and court-by-time fixed effects. Column (2) reports estimates from
an OLS regression of ADA leniency on the variables listed and court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard
errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses. The p-value reported
at the bottom of Columns (1) and (2) is for an F-test of the joint significance of the variables listed with
standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                    50
                    Table 3: First Stage: ADA Leniency and Nonprosecution

                                                             (1)         (2)
                             ADA Leniency                 0.60***     0.55***
                                                           (0.07)      (0.07)
                             Observations                  67553       67553
                             Court x Time FE                Yes         Yes
                             Case/Def Covariates            No          Yes
                             Mean Not Prosecuted           0.205
                             First Stage F-Stat            67.38       58.94

Note: This table reports first stage results via a linear probability model where the outcome variable is
nonprosecution. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. ADA
leniency is estimated using data from other cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the procedure
described in the text. Column (1) reports results controlling for our full set of court-by-time fixed effects.
Column (2) adds defendant and case covariates: number of counts; number of misdemeanor counts; number
of serious misdemeanor counts; whether the defendant had a prior misdemeanor conviction within the past
year; whether the defendant had a prior felony conviction within the past year; indicators for whether the
defendant faces charges for a disorder/theft, motor vehicle, drug, or other offense; and defendant citizenship
status. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported in paren-
theses. Robust (Kleibergen-Paap) first stage F reported (which is equivalent to the effective F-statistic of
Montiel Olea and Pflueger (2013) in this case of a single instrument). ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                     51
                   Table 4: Probability of a Subsequent Criminal Complaint

                                                          OLS                             IV
                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)                 (4)
 Panel A: Criminal Complaint Within 2 Years
 Not Prosecuted                      -0.14***                -0.10***        -0.34***         -0.33***
                                      (0.01)                  (0.01)          (0.10)           (0.11)
                                                                          [-0.55, -0.13]   [-0.54, -0.10]
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted              0.37
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers    0.57
 Panel B: Misdemeanor Complaint Within 2 Years
 Not Prosecuted                     -0.08*** -0.06***                        -0.24***         -0.24***
                                     (0.00)    (0.00)                         (0.09)           (0.09)
                                                                          [-0.42, -0.06]   [-0.43, -0.05]
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted               0.24
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers     0.40
 Panel C: Felony Complaint Within 2 Years
 Not Prosecuted                      -0.06***                -0.04***        -0.10*                -0.08
                                      (0.00)                  (0.00)         (0.06)               (0.07)
                                                                          [-0.22, 0.03]        [-0.21, 0.06]
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted                           0.13
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers                 0.17
 Observations                                     67553         67553         67553               67553
 Court x Time FE                                   Yes           Yes           Yes                 Yes
 Case/Def Covariates                                No           Yes           No                  Yes

Note: This table reports OLS and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of nonprosecution on
the probability of a subsequent criminal complaint within two years. The regressions are estimated on the
sample as described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent variables are identified in the panel headings.
Each panel reports the mean of the dependent variable for all prosecuted defendants, and for prosecuted
defendants within the set of compliers. See Appendix C.3 for details on the calculation of mean outcomes
among prosecuted compliers. Two-stage least squares models instrument for nonprosecution using an ADA
leniency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the
procedure described in the text. All specifications control for court-by-month and court-by-day-of-week fixed
effects. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses
in Columns (1)-(4). For the IV estimates, confidence intervals based on inversion of the Anderson-Rubin
test are shown in brackets. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                     52
      Table 5: Probability of a Subsequent Prosecution or Subsequent DCJIS Record

                                                  Subsq. Prosecution          Subsq. DCJIS Record
                                                  (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)
                                                  OLS            IV            OLS             IV
 Panel A: Any Within 2 years
 Not Prosecuted                                -0.12***        -0.35***    -0.11***         -0.40***
                                                (0.01)          (0.11)      (0.01)           (0.09)
                                                            [-0.55, -0.12]               [-0.59, -0.21]
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted               0.34                                  0.31
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers     0.53                                  0.58
 Panel B: Misdemeanor Within 2 Years
 Not Prosecuted                      -0.08***                  -0.25***    -0.07***         -0.29***
                                      (0.00)                    (0.09)      (0.00)           (0.08)
                                                            [-0.43, -0.07]               [-0.46, -0.12]
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted             0.22                                    0.20
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers   0.36                                    0.38
 Panel C: Felony Within 2 Years
 Not Prosecuted                    -0.04***                      -0.09       -0.04***        -0.11*
                                    (0.00)                      (0.07)        (0.00)         (0.06)
                                                            [-0.22, 0.05]                 [-0.23, 0.01]
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted                          0.13                          0.11
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers                0.16                          0.20
 Observations                                    67553          67553          67553         67553
 Court x Time FE                                  Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Case/Def Covariates                              Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes

Note: This table reports OLS and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of nonprosecution on the
probability of a subsequent prosecution or a subsequent DCJIS record within two years. The regressions are
estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent variables are identified in the
super-column headings combined with panel headings. Each panel reports the mean of the dependent variable
for all prosecuted defendants, and for prosecuted defendants within the set of compliers. See Appendix C.3
for details on the calculation of mean outcomes among prosecuted compliers. Two-stage least squares models
instrument for nonprosecution using an ADA leniency measure that is estimated using data from other cases
assigned to an arraigning ADA following the procedure described in the text. All specifications control for
court-by-month and court-by-day-of-week fixed effects. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the
individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses in Columns (1)-(4). For the IV estimates, confidence
intervals based on inversion of the Anderson-Rubin test are shown in brackets. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05
,*p < 0.10.




                                                    53
                               Table 6: Heterogeneous Effects: First Time Defendants versus Repeat Defendants

                                                                Any Prev Complaint                Any Prev DCJIS                 Any Prev Conviction
                                                                  (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)
                                                                  No             Yes              No              Yes              No              Yes
            Panel A: Criminal Complaint Within 2 Years
            Not Prosecuted                                      -0.20*            -0.10         -0.29***          0.13           -0.26**           -0.11
                                                                (0.12)           (0.23)          (0.10)          (0.30)           (0.11)          (0.37)
                                                             [-0.42, 0.07]   [-0.56, 0.41]   [-0.50, -0.07]   [-0.44, 0.87]   [-0.48, -0.03]   [-0.85, 0.76]
            Mean Dep Var Prosecuted                               0.20             0.52           0.22             0.54            0.28             0.59
            Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers                     0.25             0.62           0.32             0.61            0.40             0.86
            Panel B: Prosecuted Within 2 Years
            Not Prosecuted                                      -0.25**           -0.11         -0.31***          0.09           -0.29***          -0.11
                                                                 (0.11)          (0.23)          (0.10)          (0.30)           (0.11)          (0.38)
                                                             [-0.45, 0.01]   [-0.57, 0.41]   [-0.50, -0.08]   [-0.50, 0.81]   [-0.51, -0.06]   [-0.90, 0.76]
            Mean Dep Var Prosecuted                               0.18             0.48           0.20             0.51            0.25             0.56
            Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers                     0.25             0.53           0.31             0.53            0.37             0.78
54




            Panel C: DCJIS Record Within 2 Years
            Not Prosecuted                                      -0.20**         -0.40*          -0.27***          -0.22          -0.32***          -0.29
                                                                 (0.10)          (0.22)          (0.09)          (0.26)           (0.09)          (0.37)
                                                             [-0.38, 0.02]   [-0.92, 0.03]   [-0.44, -0.09]   [-0.79, 0.33]   [-0.51, -0.13]   [-1.10, 0.52]
            Mean Dep Var Prosecuted                               0.15            0.45            0.15             0.49            0.22             0.52
            Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers                     0.20            0.82            0.25             0.87            0.39             1.04
            Observations                                         33803           33617           38929            28487           49752            17678
            Court x Time FE                                       Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
            Case/Def Covariates                                   Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes

     Note: This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of nonprosecution on subsequent criminal justice involvement, for first-time
     and repeat defendants (defined in turn as (i) having any prior complaint in Suffolk County, (ii) having a prior complaint in Suffolk County that
     resulted in a DCJIS record, and (iii) having a prior complaint in Suffolk County that resulted in a conviction). The dependent variables are identified
     in the panel headings. Each panel reports the means of the dependent variable for prosecuted defendants, by subsample. See Appendix C.3 for details
     on the calculation of mean outcomes among prosecuted compliers. The models instrument for nonprosecution using an ADA leniency measure that
     is estimated using data from other cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the procedure described in the text. All specifications control for
     court-by-month and court-by-day-of-week fixed effects. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported in
     parentheses in Columns (1)-(4). For the IV estimates, confidence intervals based on inversion of the Anderson-Rubin test are shown in brackets.
     ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.
                                                           Online Appendix ­ Not for Publication


A      Additional Figures and Tables

                                                               Figure A.1: LATE Over Time (3 Years)
                                                  .1
          IV Estimates of Effect of Nonprosecution
           -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1              0




                                                       3   6    9    12     15    18     21    24    27    30   33   36
                                                                      Criminal Complaint Within X Months

                                                                         All             Misdemeanors
                                                                         Felonies



Note: This figure shows the effect of nonprosecution on the likelihood of a new criminal complaint (y-axis)
within a given number of months after the arraignment hearing (x-axis), for a three-year post-arraignment
window. Estimates are based on 2SLS regressions including covariates (the equivalent of Column (4) in
Table A.11). The circles show coefficients; the lines show 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                    55
                    Table A.1: First Stage Results for Other Case Outcomes

                                                      Prosecuted Defendants
                                                          (1)           (2)
                         Panel A: Days to Disposition
                         ADA Leniency                  21.937         21.937
                                                      (36.764)       (36.764)
                         Mean Not Prosecuted          184.398
                         Panel B: Conviction
                         ADA Leniency                 -0.0390        -0.0428
                                                      (-0.54)        (-0.61)
                         Mean Not Prosecuted             0.263
                         Observations                    53657        53657
                         Court x Time FE                  Yes          Yes
                         Case/Def Covariates              No           Yes

Note: This table reports additional first stage results for days to disposition and whether a defendant
receives a criminal conviction among defendants who are prosecuted. All specifications control for court-by-
time fixed effects. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported
in parentheses. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.


                 Table A.2: Frandsen, Lefgren, Leslie (2020) Test of Joint Null
                           of Exclusion and Monotonicity, by Court


                                                             FLL
                                                      Count p-value
                                  Dorchester          15467  0.107
                                  Roxbury             15055  0.167
                                  Central             10335  0.000
                                  West Roxbury        9514   0.460
                                  East Boston         7757   0.639
                                  South Boston        6385   0.517
                                  Chelsea              1223  0.000
                                  Brighton            1177   0.000
                                  Charlestown          577   0.265

Note: This table presents results from the test proposed in Frandsen, Lefgren, and Leslie (2020) for the
joint null hypothesis that the monotonicity and exclusion restrictions hold. We test this null within courts
using day-of-week and year-month fixed effects along with our main covariates. A failure to reject the null
implies that we cannot reject the hypothesis that the monotonicity and exclusion restrictions jointly hold.
This test was implemented in Stata via the package testjfe (Frandsen, 2020).



                                                    56
                                                                  Table A.3: Monotonicity

                                                   (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)            (5)           (6)
                                                                                     Misd            Misd         Ser Misd      Ser Misd
                                                 1 Count        > 1 Count          1 Count         > 1 Count      1 Count       > 1 Count
                     Not Prosecuted              0.60***          0.57***          0.61***          0.47***        0.60***       0.48***
                                                  (0.08)           (0.09)           (0.08)           (0.07)         (0.08)        (0.07)
                     Observations                 37065            30341            48552            18869          36042         31336

                                                  (7)              (8)              (9)               (10)           (11)          (12)
                                             No Misd Conv      Misd Conv      No Felony Conv      Felony Conv
                                              w/in 1 Year      w/in 1 Year     w/in 1 Year        w/in 1 Year      Citizen     Non-Citizen
                     Not Prosecuted              0.62***          0.31***          0.60***           0.37*         0.26***       0.68***
                                                  (0.08)           (0.12)           (0.07)           (0.20)         (0.08)        (0.08)
57




                     Observations                 63610            3717             65862             1394          15739         51658

                                                  (13)            (14)              (15)             (16)            (17)         (18)
                                                  Any             Any               Any              Any          Victimless     Victim
                                             Disorder Crime     MV Crime         Drug Crime       Other Crime       Crime        Crime
                     Not Prosecuted              0.64***          0.54***           0.10*            0.43**        0.65***        0.13*
                                                  (0.13)           (0.11)           (0.06)           (0.21)         (0.08)        (0.07)
                     Observations                 22225            30576            14132             8092          55164         12274

                     Court x Time FE               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes
                     Case/Def Covariates           No               No               No               No             No            No

     Note: This table reports first stage results by subsamples based on case and defendant characteristics, as listed in the column headers. The regressions
     are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors
     two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10
                    Table A.4: Number of Subsequent Criminal Complaints

                                                          OLS                            IV
                                                   (1)           (2)         (3)                   (4)
        Panel A: Number Criminal Complaints Within 2 Years
        Not Prosecuted                      -0.73*** -0.55***              -2.22***              -2.06***
                                             (0.04)    (0.04)               (0.65)                (0.67)
                                                                        [-3.60, -0.96]        [-3.48, -0.77]
        Mean Dep Var Prosecuted             1.63
        Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers   2.99
        Panel B: Number Misdemeanor Complaints Within 2 Years
        Not Prosecuted                    -0.43*** -0.32***                -1.28***              -1.19***
                                           (0.02)     (0.02)                (0.37)                (0.37)
                                                                        [-2.06, -0.57]        [-1.99, -0.47]
        Mean Dep Var Prosecuted               0.94
        Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers     1.77
        Panel C: Number Felony Complaints Within 2 Years
        Not Prosecuted                     -0.25*** -0.17***               -0.74**               -0.66**
                                             (0.02)    (0.02)               (0.32)                (0.33)
                                                                        [-1.41, -0.13]        [-1.36, -0.01]
        Mean Dep Var Prosecuted                    0.51
        Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers          0.88
        Observations                              67553         67553      67553                 67553
        Court x Time FE                            Yes           Yes        Yes                   Yes
        Case/Def Covariates                         No           Yes        No                    Yes

Note: This table reports OLS and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of nonprosecution on
numbers of subsequent criminal complaints within two years post-arraignment. The regressions are estimated
on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent variables are identified in the panel
headings. Each panel reports the mean of the dependent variable for all prosecuted defendants, and for
prosecuted defendants within the set of compliers. See Appendix C.3 for details on the calculation of mean
outcomes among prosecuted compliers. Two-stage least squares models instrument for nonprosecution using
an ADA leniency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to an arraigning ADA
following the procedure described in the text. All specifications control for court-by-month and court-by-
day-of-week fixed effects. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are
reported in parentheses in Columns (1)-(4). For the IV estimates, confidence intervals based on inversion of
the Anderson-Rubin test are shown in brackets. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                    58
            Table A.5: Probability of a Subsequent Complaint by Complaint Type
                                         2SLS Only

                                            (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                                        Disorder/
                                         Violent           MV            Theft            Drugs           Other
 Panel A: Any Complaint within 2 Years
 Not Prosecuted                      -0.14**       -0.10*                -0.21***           -0.07          0.00
                                      (0.06)       (0.06)                 (0.07)           (0.07)         (0.04)
                                 [-0.27, -0.03] [-0.23, 0.01]         [-0.34, -0.07]   [-0.20, 0.07]   [-0.07, 0.08]
 Mean Dep Var Pros.                     0.08         0.10                  0.16              0.08          0.04
 Mean Dep Var Pros. Compliers          0.22          0.16                  0.23             0.11           0.02
 Panel B: Misdemeanor Complaint within 2 Years
 Not Prosecuted                     -0.16***       -0.11*                -0.14**            -0.06          0.01
                                      (0.05)       (0.06)                 (0.06)           (0.06)         (0.04)
                                 [-0.28, -0.06] [-0.23, 0.00]         [-0.27, -0.02]   [-0.19, 0.07]   [-0.07, 0.09]
 Mean Dep Var Pros.                     0.05         0.09                  0.12              0.06          0.04
 Mean Dep Var Pros. Compliers          0.19          0.16                  0.18             0.08           0.01
 Panel C: Felony Complaint within 2 Years
 Not Prosecuted                        -0.02         0.00                  -0.05            -0.02          -0.01
                                      (0.04)       (0.01)                 (0.04)           (0.04)         (0.01)
                                  [-0.10, 0.07] [-0.02, 0.02]          [-0.14, 0.04]   [-0.09, 0.06]   [-0.04, 0.00]
 Mean Dep Var Pros.                     0.04         0.00                   0.06             0.03           0.00
 Mean Dep Var Pros. Compliers          0.07         -0.00                   0.06             0.05           0.01
 Observations                         67553         67553                  67553           67553           67553
 Court x Time FE                        Yes          Yes                    Yes              Yes            Yes
 Case/Def Covariates                    Yes          Yes                    Yes              Yes            Yes


Note: This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of nonprosecution on rearrest
probabilities by complaint type (i.e., the dependent variable in Column (1) is any violent complaint within
two years). The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent
variables are identified in the column headings combined with the panel headings (i.e., in Panel B Column
(1), the dependent variable is any violent misdemeanor criminal complaint within two years). Each panel
reports the mean of the dependent variable for all prosecuted defendants and for prosecuted defendants
within the set of compliers. See Appendix C.3 for details on the calculation of mean outcomes among
prosecuted compliers. Two-stage least squares models instrument for nonprosecution using an ADA leniency
measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the procedure
described in the text. All specifications control for court-by-month and court-by-day-of-week fixed effects.
Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses in
Columns (1)-(4). For the IV estimates, confidence intervals based on inversion of the Anderson-Rubin test
are shown in brackets. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                    59
                       Table A.6: Randomization (1-Year Followup Sample)

                                                                   (1)                  (2)
                                                              Nonprosecution        ADA Leniency
         Number Counts                                            -0.019***                0.000
                                                                    (0.003)              (0.000)
         Number Misdemeanor Counts                                 0.020***               -0.000
                                                                    (0.004)              (0.000)
         Number of Serious Misdemeanor Counts                     -0.110***               -0.000
                                                                    (0.006)              (0.000)
         Misd Conviction within Past Year                         -0.068***               -0.000
                                                                    (0.005)              (0.000)
         Felony Conviction within Past Year                       -0.062***               -0.001
                                                                    (0.006)              (0.001)
         Citizen                                                   0.042***               -0.000
                                                                    (0.004)              (0.000)
         Disorderly/Theft                                           -0.015*               -0.001
                                                                    (0.008)              (0.001)
         Motor Vehicle                                             0.113***               -0.000
                                                                    (0.009)              (0.000)
         Drug                                                     -0.093***               -0.001
                                                                    (0.008)              (0.001)
         Constant                                                  0.239***                0.001
                                                                    (0.009)              (0.002)
         Observations                                               74631                74631
         Joint F-Test p-value                                         0                  0.325

Note: This table reports regressions testing the random assignment of cases to arraigning ADAs for the
sample consisting of a one-year followup period post-arraignment. ADA leniency is estimated using data
from other nonviolent misdemeanor cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the procedure described
in the text. Column (1) reports estimates from an OLS regression of nonprosecution on the variables listed
and court-by-time fixed effects. Column (2) reports estimates from an OLS regression of ADA leniency
on the variables listed and court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the
individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses. The p-value reported at the bottom of Columns (1)
and (2) is for an F-test of the joint significance of the variables listed with standard errors two-way clustered
at the individual and ADA level. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                       60
                        Table A.7: First Stage (1-Year Followup Sample)

                                                             (1)         (2)
                             ADA Leniency                 0.57***     0.53***
                                                           (0.07)      (0.07)
                             Observations                  74631       74631
                             Court x Time FE                Yes         Yes
                             Case/Def Covariates            No          Yes
                             Mean Not Prosecuted           0.221
                             First Stage F-Stat            65.55       58.05

Note: This table reports first stage results via a linear probability model where the outcome variable is
nonprosecution. The regressions are estimated on the one-year followup sample. ADA leniency is estimated
using data from other cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the procedure described in the text.
Column (1) reports results controlling for our full set of court-by-time fixed effects. Column (2) adds defen-
dant and case covariates: number of counts; number of misdemeanor counts; number of serious misdemeanor
counts; whether the defendant had a prior misdemeanor conviction within the past year; whether the defen-
dant had a prior felony conviction within the past year; indicators for whether the defendant faces charges
for a disorder/theft, motor vehicle, drug, or other offense; and defendant citizenship status. Robust standard
errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses. Robust first-stage F
reported (which is equivalent to the effective F-statistic of Montiel Olea and Pflueger (2013) in this case of
a single instrument). ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                     61
   Table A.8: Probability of Subsequent Criminal Complaint (1-Year Followup Sample)

                                                          OLS                          IV
                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)
  Panel A: Criminal Complaint Within 1 Years
  Not Prosecuted                      -0.11***               -0.08***       -0.20**            -0.18*
                                       (0.00)                 (0.00)         (0.09)            (0.09)
                                                                         [-0.36, -0.02]     [-0.35, 0.02]
  Mean Dep Var Prosecuted              0.28
  Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers    0.42
  Panel B: Misdemeanor Complaint Within 1 Years
  Not Prosecuted                     -0.06*** -0.05***                       -0.15**           -0.15*
                                      (0.00)    (0.00)                        (0.08)            (0.08)
                                                                          [-0.30, 0.01]     [-0.30, 0.02]
  Mean Dep Var Prosecuted               0.19
  Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers     0.32
  Panel C: Felony Complaint Within 1 Years
  Not Prosecuted                      -0.05***               -0.03***         -0.05              -0.03
                                       (0.00)                 (0.00)         (0.05)             (0.06)
                                                                          [-0.15, 0.06]     [-0.14, 0.09]
  Mean Dep Var Prosecuted                          0.10
  Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers                0.10
  Observations                                    74631         74631        74631             74631
  Court x Time FE                                  Yes           Yes          Yes               Yes
  Case/Def Covariates                               No           Yes          No                Yes

Note: This table reports OLS and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of nonprosecution on
the probability of a subsequent criminal complaint within one year. The regressions are estimated on
the one-year followup sample. The dependent variables are identified in the panel headings. Each panel
reports the mean of the dependent variable for all prosecuted defendants, and for prosecuted defendants
within the set of compliers. See Appendix C.3 for details on the calculation of mean outcomes amongst
prosecuted compliers. Two-stage least squares models instrument for nonprosecution using an ADA leniency
measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the procedure
described in the text. All specifications control for court-by-month and court-by-day-of-week fixed effects.
Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses in
Columns (1)-(4). For the IV estimates, confidence intervals based on inversion of the Anderson-Rubin test
are shown in brackets. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                    62
                       Table A.9: Randomization (3-Year Followup Sample)

                                                                   (1)                  (2)
                                                              Nonprosecution        ADA Leniency
         Number Counts                                            -0.017***               -0.000
                                                                    (0.003)              (0.000)
         Number Misdemeanor Counts                                 0.015***                0.000
                                                                    (0.004)              (0.001)
         Number of Serious Misdemeanor Counts                     -0.098***              -0.000*
                                                                    (0.006)              (0.000)
         Misd Conviction within Past Year                         -0.066***               -0.000
                                                                    (0.005)              (0.000)
         Felony Conviction within Past Year                       -0.055***               -0.001
                                                                    (0.006)              (0.001)
         Citizen                                                   0.041***               -0.000
                                                                    (0.004)              (0.000)
         Disorderly/Theft                                            -0.013               -0.001
                                                                    (0.008)              (0.001)
         Motor Vehicle                                             0.099***               -0.000
                                                                    (0.009)              (0.001)
         Drug                                                     -0.094***              -0.001*
                                                                    (0.009)              (0.001)
         Constant                                                  0.218***                0.001
                                                                    (0.009)              (0.002)
         Observations                                               63655                63655
         Joint F-Test p-value                                         0                  0.331

Note: This table reports regressions testing the random assignment of cases to arraigning ADAs for the
sample consisting of a three-year followup period post-arraignment. ADA leniency is estimated using data
from other nonviolent misdemeanor cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the procedure described
in the text. Column (1) reports estimates from an OLS regression of nonprosecution on the variables listed
and court-by-time fixed effects. Column (2) reports estimates from an OLS regression of ADA leniency
on the variables listed and court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the
individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses. The p-value reported at the bottom of Columns (1)
and (2) is for an F-test of the joint significance of the variables listed with standard errors two-way clustered
at the individual and ADA level. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                       63
                        Table A.10: First Stage (3-Year Followup Sample)

                                                             (1)         (2)
                             ADA Leniency                 0.64***     0.59***
                                                           (0.07)      (0.07)
                             Observations                  63655       63655
                             Court x Time FE                Yes         Yes
                             Case/Def Covariates            No          Yes
                             Mean Not Prosecuted           0.197
                             First Stage F-Stat            83.24       74.31

Note: This table reports first stage results via a linear probability model where the outcome variable
is nonprosecution. The regressions are estimated on the three-year followup sample. ADA leniency is
estimated using data from other cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the procedure described in
the text. Column (1) reports results controlling for our full set of court-by-time fixed effects. Column (2)
adds defendant and case covariates: number of counts; number of misdemeanor counts; number of serious
misdemeanor counts; whether the defendant had a prior misdemeanor conviction within the past year;
whether the defendant had a prior felony conviction within the past year; indicators for whether the defendant
faces charges for a disorder/theft, motor vehicle, drug, or other offense; and defendant citizenship status.
Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses.
Robust first-stage F reported (which is equivalent to the effective F-statistic of Montiel Olea and Pflueger
(2013) in this case of a single instrument). ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                     64
  Table A.11: Probability of Subsequent Criminal Complaint (3-Year Followup Sample)

                                                          OLS                           IV
                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)               (4)
 Panel A: Criminal Complaint Within 3 Years
 Not Prosecuted                      -0.15***                -0.12***        -0.43***         -0.43***
                                      (0.01)                  (0.01)          (0.10)           (0.10)
                                                                          [-0.63, -0.23]   [-0.63, -0.21]
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted              0.42
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers    0.63
 Panel B: Misdemeanor Complaint Within 3 Years
 Not Prosecuted                     -0.08*** -0.07***                        -0.30***         -0.31***
                                     (0.00)    (0.00)                         (0.09)           (0.09)
                                                                          [-0.48, -0.12]   [-0.49, -0.12]
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted               0.28
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers     0.43
 Panel C: Felony Complaint Within 3 Years
 Not Prosecuted                      -0.07***                -0.04***        -0.13**            -0.12*
                                      (0.00)                  (0.00)          (0.06)            (0.07)
                                                                          [-0.26, -0.00]     [-0.25, 0.02]
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted                           0.14
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers                 0.20
 Observations                                     63655         63655         63655             63655
 Court x Time FE                                   Yes           Yes           Yes               Yes
 Case/Def Covariates                                No           Yes           No                Yes

Note: This table reports OLS and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of nonprosecution on
the probability of a subsequent criminal complaint within three years. The regressions are estimated on the
sample as described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent variables are identified in the panel headings.
Each panel reports the mean of the dependent variable for all prosecuted defendants, and for prosecuted
defendants within the set of compliers. See Appendix C.3 for details on the calculation of mean outcomes
among prosecuted compliers. Two-stage least squares models instrument for nonprosecution using an ADA
leniency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the
procedure described in the text. All specifications control for court-by-month and court-by-day-of-week fixed
effects. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses
in Columns (1)-(4). For the IV estimates, confidence intervals based on inversion of the Anderson-Rubin
test are shown in brackets. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                     65
                               Table A.12: DCJIS Record Acquisition

                                                           OLS                            IV
                                                     (1)          (2)            (3)               (4)
 Not Prosecuted                                  -0.37***     -0.32***        -0.58***          -0.55***
                                                  (0.01)       (0.01)          (0.10)            (0.11)
                                                                           [-0.77, -0.37]    [-0.76, -0.31]
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted                            0.77
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers                  0.99
 Observations                                      67553         67553         67553             67553
 Court x Time FE                                    Yes           Yes           Yes               Yes
 Case/Def Covariates                                 No           Yes           No                Yes

Note: This table reports OLS and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of nonprosecution on the
probability that a criminal complaint receives a DCJIS record (an official record of the criminal record in the
criminal offender record information database). The regressions are estimated on the sample as described
in the notes to Table 1. We report the mean of the dependent variable for all prosecuted defendants, and
for prosecuted defendants within the set of compliers. See Appendix C.3 for details on the calculation of
mean outcomes among prosecuted compliers. Two-stage least squares models instrument for nonprosecution
using an ADA leniency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to an arraigning
ADA following the procedure described in the text. All specifications control for court-by-month and court-
by-day-of-week fixed effects. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are
reported in parentheses in Columns (1)-(4). For the IV estimates, confidence intervals based on inversion of
the Anderson-Rubin test are shown in brackets. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.

                   Table A.13: Separating Nonprosecution and Bail Decisions

                                    (1)             (2)              (3)                          (4)
                                                Control For           IV
                                   Main       No Bail Leniency No Bail Leniency                Both IVs
    Not Prosecuted              -0.335***          -0.338***                                   -0.341**
                                  (-3.11)            (-2.85)                                    (-2.56)
    No Bail                                                                 -0.248              0.0204
                                                                            (-1.41)             (0.10)
    Observations                  67553              67553                   67553              67553
    Court x Time FE                Yes                Yes                     Yes                Yes
    Case/Def Covariates            Yes                Yes                     Yes                Yes

Note: This table reports 2SLS estimates that explore the role of bail requests on the probability that a
defendant receives a new criminal complaint within two years post-arraignment. Column (1) reports our
main estimates from Column (4) of Table 4, Panel A. Column (2) includes as a covariate a "no-bail leniency"
measure based on ADAs' propensity to request bail in other defendants' cases. Column (3) uses the no-bail
leniency measure as an instrument for not receiving bail. Column (4) includes both nonprosecution leniency
and no-bail leniency as instruments in the same regression. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed
effects and all case/defendant covariates. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and
ADA level are reported in parentheses. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.


                                                      66
           Table A.14: Reduced Form: Subsequent Criminal Justice Involvement

                                   Subq. Complaint         Subq. Prosecution          Subq. DCJIS
                                     (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
 Panel A: Any
 ADA Leniency                     -0.21***    -0.19***     -0.22***    -0.19***    -0.25***     -0.22***
                                   (0.07)      (0.07)       (0.07)      (0.07)      (0.06)       (0.06)
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted            0.37                     0.34                    0.31
 Panel B: Misdemeanors
 ADA Leniency                      -0.14**     -0.13**     -0.15***     -0.14**    -0.17***     -0.16***
                                    (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.05)     (0.05)       (0.05)
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted             0.24                    0.22                    0.20
 Panel C: Felonies
 ADA Leniency                      -0.07*        -0.06      -0.07*       -0.05      -0.08**      -0.06*
                                   (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.03)      (0.03)
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted            0.13                     0.13                     0.11
 Observations                      67553        67553       67553       67553        67553       67553
 Court x Time FE                    Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
 Case/Def Covariates                 No          Yes          No         Yes           No         Yes

Note: This table reports reduced form OLS estimates of the impact of case assignment to a more "lenient"
ADA. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent
variables are identified in the column and panel headings. Each panel reports the mean of the dependent
variable for prosecuted defendants. ADA leniency is estimated using data from other cases assigned to an
arraigning ADA following the procedure described in the text. All specifications control for court-by-time
fixed effects. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported in
parentheses. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                   67
                                                           Table A.15: Different IV Definitions

                                                             (1)               (2)                   (3)               (4)              (5)
                                                            Main         Non-Residualized         Experience        Victimless      Crime Type
             DCJIS Record                                  -0.55***            -0.87***             -0.51***       -0.60***            -0.61***
                                                             (0.11)              (0.17)               (0.12)         (0.14)              (0.12)
                                                        [-0.76, -0.31]      [-1.32, -0.55]       [-0.76, -0.24] [-0.89, -0.29]      [-0.86, -0.37]
             Complaint within 2 Years                      -0.34***            -0.43***             -0.36***        -0.30**             -0.28**
                                                             (0.11)              (0.16)               (0.12)         (0.14)              (0.11)
                                                        [-0.54, -0.11]      [-0.80, -0.10]       [-0.63, -0.11] [-0.57, 0.04]       [-0.51, -0.03]
             Misd Complaint within 2 Years                  -0.23**             -0.35**              -0.22**        -0.27**               -0.13
                                                             (0.09)              (0.14)               (0.11)         (0.12)              (0.10)
                                                        [-0.42, -0.04]      [-0.68, -0.07]       [-0.46, -0.00] [-0.53, -0.01]       [-0.33, 0.11]
             Felony Complaint within 2 Years                  -0.10               -0.08                -0.13          -0.03             -0.15**
                                                             (0.07)              (0.11)               (0.09)         (0.10)              (0.07)
68




                                                         [-0.23, 0.04]       [-0.32, 0.18]        [-0.33, 0.05] [-0.21, 0.21]        [-0.31, 0.00]
             Prosecution within 2 Years                    -0.35***             -0.40**             -0.39***        -0.34**             -0.26**
                                                             (0.11)              (0.16)               (0.12)         (0.13)              (0.11)
                                                        [-0.55, -0.12]      [-0.75, -0.06]       [-0.65, -0.14] [-0.59, -0.02]      [-0.47, -0.01]
             DCJIS Record within 2 Years                   -0.40***            -0.39***             -0.40***       -0.37***            -0.31***
                                                             (0.09)              (0.15)               (0.12)         (0.12)              (0.10)
                                                        [-0.59, -0.21]      [-0.72, -0.08]       [-0.67, -0.16] [-0.62, -0.09]      [-0.52, -0.11]

     Note: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of nonprosecution on the probability of the outcomes in the rows, for different
     definitions of the instrument. All models instrument for nonprosecution using an ADA leniency measure that is estimated using data from other
     cases assigned to an arraigning ADA. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects and case/defendant covariates. Robust standard errors
     two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses. Column (1) repeats our main 2SLS results with covariates. In Column
     (2) we consider a version of our leave-out instrument that does not residualize out court-by-time fixed effects, and that is thus a raw measure of ADAs'
     leave-out nonprosecution rates. Columns (3)-(5) interact our main leave-out instrument with high/low ADA experience (as measured by above- or
     below-median number of nonviolent misdemeanors arraigned as of the time of this case's arraignment), with an indicator for whether the crime is
     categorized as victimless, and with our mutually exclusive crime types. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.
                                     Table A.16: Missing Race

                                                        Not Prosecuted               Prosecuted
                                                    (1)           (2)            (3)       (4)
                                                  Missing     Not Missing      Missing Not Missing
                                                   Race          Race           Race      Race
 Outcomes:
 Criminal Complaint Within 2 Years                  0.10           0.26          0.18          0.40
 Prosecution Within 2 Years                         0.06           0.20          0.16          0.37
 DCJIS Record Within 2 Years                        0.05           0.19          0.14          0.34
 Baseline:
 Number Counts                                      1.45           1.63          1.73          1.75
 Number Misdemeanor Counts                          1.10           1.16          1.28          1.38
 Number of Serious Misdemeanor Counts               0.28           0.29          0.71          0.64
 Misd Conviction within Past Year                   0.01           0.04          0.03          0.11
 Felony Conviction within Past Year                 0.00           0.02          0.02          0.06
 Citizen                                            0.96           0.81          0.94          0.71
 Disorderly/Theft                                   0.11           0.23          0.28          0.31
 Motor Vehicle                                      0.67           0.62          0.41          0.32
 Drug                                               0.01           0.03          0.15          0.19
 Observations                                       3742          10113         7176          46522
 Proportion Missing Race                            0.270                       0.134

Note: This table reports summary statistics for the samples of nonviolent misdemeanor cases meeting all
other sample criteria that do and do not have information on defendant race/ethnicity, as indicated by the
column headers.




                                                   69
                Table A.17: Summary Statistics (with Demographic Variables)

                                                              (1)          (2)          (3)
                                                                                        Not
                                                              All     Prosecuted     Prosecuted
        Baseline:
        Not Prosecuted                                       0.204       0.000          1.000
        Number Counts                                        1.717       1.752          1.581
        Number Misdemeanor Counts                            1.320       1.365          1.142
        Number of Serious Misdemeanor Counts                 0.575       0.648          0.290
        Misd Conviction within Past Year                     0.086       0.100          0.031
        Felony Conviction within Past Year                   0.045       0.053          0.014
        Citizen                                              0.764       0.743          0.848
        Disorderly/Theft                                     0.284       0.307          0.196
        Motor Vehicle                                        0.394       0.333          0.633
        Drug                                                 0.152       0.185          0.027
        Other Crime                                          0.170       0.176          0.144
        Victimless Crime                                     0.817       0.789          0.925
        Male                                                 0.799       0.814          0.739
        Age  23                                              0.231       0.233          0.222
        Age 24-30                                            0.246       0.245          0.250
        Age 31-40                                            0.218       0.220          0.210
        Age  41                                              0.306       0.302          0.318
        Prob Hispanic                                        0.332       0.338          0.308
        Prob Black                                           0.345       0.355          0.307
        Prob White                                           0.256       0.242          0.312
        Admin Race Data: N=56605
        Black                                                0.458       0.468          0.412
        White                                                0.363       0.366          0.347
        Hispanic                                             0.160       0.148          0.217
        Case Outcomes:
        ADA Requested Bail                                  0.064        0.080          0.000
        Bail Set at Arraignment                             0.052        0.066          0.000
        Amount Bail Set (Cond.)                            403.995      403.995           .
        Days to Disposition                                146.921      184.477         0.000
        DCJIS Record of Case                                0.689        0.771          0.366
        Any Conviction                                      0.210        0.263          0.000
        Post-Case Outcomes:
        Criminal Complaint Within 2 Years                   0.341        0.372          0.217
        Misdemeanor Complaint Within 2 Years                0.226        0.244          0.156
        Felony Complaint Within 2 Years                     0.115        0.128          0.061
        Prosecution Within 2 Years                          0.307        0.343          0.167
        Misdemeanor Prosecution Within 2 Years              0.194        0.216          0.107
        Felony Prosecution Within 2 Years                   0.113        0.126          0.060
        DCJIS Record Within 2 Years                         0.280        0.312          0.154
        Misdemeanor DCJIS Record Within 2 Years             0.180        0.200          0.102
        Felony DCJIS Record Within 2 Years                  0.100        0.112          0.052
        Observations                                        67064        53411          13653
Note: This sample includes cases with an arraignment hearing between January 1, 2004 ­ September 1,
2018, that have no felony or violent/gun misdemeanor charges, that are arraigned in one of Suffolk County's
9 district/municipal courts, that have an identified Assistant District Attorney (ADA) at arraignment, that
are processed by an ADA who arraigned at least 30 nonviolent misdemeanor cases, that are not "singletons"
within our set of court-by-time fixed effects, and that are not missing gender or age.
                                                    70
                   Table A.18: Randomization (with Demographic Variables)

                                                                 (1)                (2)
                                                            Nonprosecution      ADA Leniency
            Number Counts                                      -0.017***             -0.000
                                                                 (0.003)            (0.000)
            Number Misdemeanor Counts                           0.016***             -0.000
                                                                 (0.004)            (0.001)
            Number of Serious Misdemeanor Counts               -0.101***             -0.000
                                                                 (0.006)            (0.000)
            Misd Conviction within Past Year                   -0.061***             -0.001
                                                                 (0.005)            (0.000)
            Felony Conviction within Past Year                 -0.050***             -0.001
                                                                 (0.006)            (0.001)
            Citizen                                             0.037***             -0.000
                                                                 (0.004)            (0.000)
            Disorderly/Theft                                    -0.021**             -0.001
                                                                 (0.008)            (0.001)
            Motor Vehicle                                       0.102***             -0.000
                                                                 (0.009)            (0.001)
            Drug                                               -0.093***             -0.001
                                                                 (0.008)            (0.001)
            Male                                               -0.060***           -0.001***
                                                                 (0.004)            (0.000)
            Age 24-30                                          -0.019***             0.000
                                                                 (0.005)            (0.000)
            Age 31-40                                          -0.024***             0.000
                                                                 (0.005)            (0.000)
            Age  41                                             -0.011**              0.001
                                                                 (0.005)            (0.000)
            Prob Hispanic                                      -0.075***             -0.001
                                                                 (0.014)            (0.002)
            Prob Black                                         -0.073***             -0.002
                                                                 (0.012)            (0.002)
            Prob White                                         -0.037***             -0.001
                                                                 (0.013)            (0.002)
            Constant                                            0.349***              0.003
                                                                 (0.015)            (0.003)
            Observations                                         67060               67060
            Joint F-Test p-value                                   0                 0.169

Note: This table reports regression results testing the random assignment of cases to arraigning ADAs,
using the sample described in Table A.17. ADA leniency is estimated using data from other nonviolent
misdemeanor cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the procedure described in the text. Column
(1) reports estimates from an OLS regression of nonprosecution on the variables listed and court-by-time
fixed effects. Column (2) reports estimates from an OLS regression of ADA leniency on the variables listed
and court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level
are reported in parentheses. The p-value reported at the bottom of Columns (1) and (2) is for an F-test
of the joint significance of the variables listed with standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and
ADA level. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.           71
                    Table A.19: Monotonicity (with Demographic Variables)

                               (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)            (5)       (6)       (7)
                              Black     Hispanic      White          Male         Female    Age25     Age>25
 Not Prosecuted             0.65***       0.13*      0.54***        0.44***       0.51***   0.55***   0.74***
                             (0.08)       (0.07)      (0.08)         (0.17)        (0.15)    (0.07)    (0.14)
 Observations                55164        12274       25833          8949         20458     53550      13383

 Court x Time FE               Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes
 Case/Def Covariates           No          No           No           No            No        No         No

Note: This table reports first stage results by demographic group, as coded in the SCDAO data. The
regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the "Admin Race Data" subsection of Table A.17.
ADA leniency is estimated using all cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the procedure described in
the text. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors two-way clustered
at the individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10




                      Table A.20: First Stage (with Demographic Variables)

                                                              (1)           (2)
                             ADA Leniency                 0.59***      0.53***
                                                           (0.07)       (0.07)
                             Observations                  66612        66612
                             Court x Time FE                Yes          Yes
                             Case/Def Covariates            No           Yes
                             Mean Not Prosecuted           0.203
                             First Stage F-Stat            63.19        55.90

Note: This table reports first stage results via a linear probability model where the outcome variable is
nonprosecution, for the sample as described in Table A.17. ADA leniency is estimated using data from
other cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the procedure described in the text. Column (1)
reports results controlling for our full set of court-by-time fixed effects. Column (2) adds defendant and
case covariates: number of counts; number of misdemeanor counts; number of serious misdemeanor counts;
whether the defendant had a prior misdemeanor conviction within the past year; whether the defendant
had a prior felony conviction within the past year; indicators for whether the defendant faces charges for a
disorder/theft, motor vehicle, drug, or other offense; defendant citizenship status; gender; binned age; and
predicted race/ethnicity. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are
reported in parentheses. Robust first-stage F reported (which is equivalent to the effective F-statistic of
Montiel Olea and Pflueger (2013) in this case of a single instrument). ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                     72
Table A.21: Probability of a Subsequent Criminal Complaint (With Demographic Variables)

                                                         OLS                             IV
                                                   (1)          (2)            (3)                (4)
 Panel A: Criminal Complaint Within 2 Years
 Not Prosecuted                      -0.14***               -0.10***        -0.35***         -0.27**
                                      (0.01)                 (0.01)          (0.11)           (0.11)
                                                                         [-0.56, -0.13]   [-0.48, -0.04]
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted              0.37
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers    0.55
 Panel B: Misdemeanor Complaint Within 2 Years
 Not Prosecuted                     -0.08*** -0.06***                       -0.24***         -0.22**
                                     (0.00)    (0.00)                        (0.09)           (0.09)
                                                                         [-0.42, -0.06]   [-0.41, -0.03]
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted               0.25
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers     0.38
 Panel C: Felony Complaint Within 2 Years
 Not Prosecuted                      -0.06***               -0.04***        -0.10*                -0.05
                                      (0.00)                 (0.00)         (0.06)               (0.07)
                                                                         [-0.23, 0.03]        [-0.18, 0.10]
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted                          0.13
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted Compliers                0.17
 Observations                                    66612         66612         66612               66612
 Court x Time FE                                  Yes           Yes           Yes                 Yes
 Case/Def Covariates                               No           Yes           No                  Yes

Note: This table reports OLS and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of nonprosecution on the
probability of a subsequent complaint within two years post-arraignment, using the sample as described in
Table A.17. The dependent variables are identified in the panel headings. Each panel reports the mean of the
dependent variable for all prosecuted defendants, and for prosecuted defendants within the set of compliers.
See Appendix C.3 for details on the calculation of mean outcomes among prosecuted compliers. Two-stage
least squares models instrument for nonprosecution using an ADA leniency measure that is estimated using
data from other cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the procedure described in the text. All
specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Where indicated they also include case and defendant
covariates, which in this case include binned age and gender (as reported in the SCDAO data) and predicted
race (see foonote 36. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported
in parentheses in Columns (1)-(4). For the IV estimates, Anderson-Rubin confidence intervals are shown in
brackets. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                    73
                                            Table A.22: Heterogeneous Effects: By Demographic Group

                                                         Male                 Female              Age 18-23             Age 24-31
                                                   (1)          (2)       (3)          (4)      (5)          (6)       (7)           (8)
                                                   OLS          IV        OLS          IV       OLS          IV        OLS           IV
                     Not Prosecuted             -0.10***     -0.30**    -0.08***    -0.26*    -0.10***      -0.16 -0.10***           -0.32
                                                 (0.01)       (0.12)     (0.01)     (0.15)     (0.01)      (0.18)  (0.01)           (0.22)
                     Observations                 53550       53550      13383       13383      12337      12337      16413         16413

                                                     Age 31-40              Age  40              Pred White            Pred Black
                                                   OLS          IV        OLS          IV       OLS          IV        OLS           IV
                     Not Prosecuted             -0.09***       -0.43    -0.09***    -0.28*    -0.10***      -0.28 -0.09***           -0.23
                                                 (0.01)       (0.27)     (0.01)     (0.16)     (0.01)      (0.17)  (0.01)           (0.14)
                     Observations                 14493       14493      20390       20390      24376      24376      26759         26759
74




                                                     Pred Hisp                White                  Black                   Hisp
                                                   OLS          IV        OLS          IV       OLS          IV        OLS           IV
                     Not Prosecuted             -0.09***       -0.26    -0.09***     -0.13    -0.09***      -0.24 -0.09*** -0.04
                                                 (0.01)       (0.24)     (0.01)     (0.23)     (0.01)      (0.19)  (0.01)  (0.52)
                     Observations                 14323       14323      20447       20447      25824      25824      8943          8943

                     Court x Time FE               Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes
                     Case/Def Covariates           Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes

     Note: This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of nonprosecution on the probability of a subsequent criminal complaint
     within two years, for the demographic groups specified in the column headings. The models instrument for nonprosecution using an ADA leniency
     measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to an arraigning ADA following the procedure described in the text. All specifications
     control for court-by-time fixed effects and case/defendant covariates (excluding race/ethnicity, age, and gender). Robust standard errors two-way
     clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses. The groups White, Black, and Hispanic are based on race/ethnicity data as
     coded by SCDAO. Predicted White, Predicted Black, and Predicted Hispanic groups are based on race probability variables, described in Section
     6.1. We label someone as "Predicted White" if the probability estimates suggest they are most likely to be white, "Predicted Black" if they are most
     likely to be Black, and "Predicted Hispanic" if they are most likely to be Hispanic. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.
                            Table A.23: Missing ADA at Arraignment

                                                          Not Prosecuted               Prosecuted
                                                      (1)            (2)           (3)       (4)
                                                    Missing      Not Missing     Missing Not Missing
                                                     ADA            ADA           ADA       ADA
 Outcomes:
 Criminal Complaint Within 2 Years                    0.21          0.22           0.36           0.37
 Prosecution Within 2 Years                           0.15          0.16           0.32           0.34
 DCJIS Record Within 2 Years                          0.14          0.15           0.29           0.31
 Baseline:
 Number Counts                                        1.62          1.58           1.71           1.75
 Number Misdemeanor Counts                            1.17          1.14           1.41           1.37
 Number of Serious Misdemeanor Counts                 0.29          0.29           0.72           0.65
 Misd Conviction within Past Year                     0.03          0.03           0.11           0.10
 Felony Conviction within Past Year                   0.01          0.01           0.06           0.05
 Citizen                                              0.90          0.85           0.82           0.74
 Disorderly/Theft                                     0.15          0.19           0.27           0.31
 Motor Vehicle                                        0.64          0.63           0.44           0.33
 Drug                                                 0.02          0.03           0.13           0.18
 Observations                                        42867          14184         97540          54748
 Proportion Missing ADA                              0.751                        0.640

Note: This table reports summary statistics for the samples of nonviolent misdemeanor cases meeting all
other sample criteria that do and do not have information on the identity of the arraigning ADA, as indicated
by the column headers.




               Table A.24: Proportion of Samples Missing ADA at Arraignment

                                             (1)          (2)          (3)
                                                                       Not
                                             All    Prosecuted      Prosecuted
                          Main Sample 0.67                0.64          0.75
                          Imputation 1 0.58               0.56          0.63
                          Imputation 2 0.41               0.40          0.45
                          Imputation 3 0.31               0.31          0.31
                          Imputation 4 0.24               0.24          0.22

Note: This table reports the proportions of our main estimation sample and of each imputation sample (as
described in the text) that are missing arraigning ADA information. See Section 6.2.



                                                     75
                                 Table A.25: 2SLS Results with ADA Imputation Samples

                                  (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)
                                 Main
                         (Court x Week FE) Imputation 1 Imputation 2 Imputation 3 Imputation 4
 Not Prosecuted               -0.531***        -0.501***        -0.652***        -0.553***        -0.535***
                                (0.161)          (0.149)          (0.188)          (0.152)          (0.166)
                           [-0.981, -0.233] [-0.882, -0.220] [-1.250, -0.339] [-0.982, -0.291] [-1.015, -0.250]
 Observations                    67123            85433           113148           134820           149185
 Court x Time FE                  Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
 Case/Def Covariates              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
 Mean Dep Var Prosecuted         0.371            0.371            0.369            0.370            0.371
 Randomization p                 0.491            0.316            0.313            0.383            0.623
 First-Stage Coef                0.429            0.424            0.340            0.350            0.322
 First-Stage F                   15.20            18.85            13.81            18.40            16.82
Note: This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of nonprosecution on the probability of a subsequent criminal
complaint within two years, for alternative samples of cases for which ADA assignment has been imputed (see Section 6.2 for details
on the imputation samples). All models instrument for nonprosecution using our main ADA leniency measure, estimated using only
cases assigned to an observed arraigning ADA following the procedure described in the text. All specifications include all covariates
and court-by-week and court-by-day-of-week fixed effects. We use court-by-week rather than court-by-month fixed effects because the
imputations are performed within a court-week (or a court-day; see text). Column (1) reports estimates for our primary estimation
sample, using court-by-week (and court-by-day of week) fixed effects (and dropping singletons in court-by-week groups). Columns (2) -
(5) progressively expand the sample of cases to include those cases where arraigning ADA assignment has been imputed following the
strategies described in the text. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are reported in parentheses.
***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                       Table A.26: Sample Share by Compliance Type

                                                              Linear              Local Linear
                                                       1%     1.5% 2% 1%              1.5% 2%
                                  Compliers            0.10   0.09 0.08 0.09          0.09 0.08
                                  Always Takers        0.18   0.18 0.19 0.18          0.19 0.19
                                  Never Takers         0.73   0.73 0.73 0.72          0.73 0.73

             Note: This table estimates the shares of our sample that are compliers, always-takers, and never-takers.
             The fraction of always-takers, a , is estimated by the share of the defendants who are not prosecuted by
             the least lenient ADA; the fraction of never-takers, n , by the share prosecuted by the most lenient ADA;
             and compliers as 1 - a - n . Least lenient ADAs are defined by being at the 1st, 1.5, or 2nd percentile of
             the residualized ADA leniency distribution, and most lenient are defined as being at the 99, 98.5, or 98th
             percentile. The first three columns use a linear specification of our first stage as in equation 3; the latter
             three use a local linear specification.




                                                                  76
                        Table A.27: Characteristics of Marginal Defendants

                                                                     (1)                 (2)                 (3)
                                                                 Pr[X = x]       Pr[X = x|Complier]         Ratio
 Counts = 1                                                         0.55                0.55                1.00
 Counts > 1                                                         0.45                0.42                0.92
 Misd Counts = 1                                                    0.72                0.74                1.03
 Misd Counts > 1                                                    0.28                0.22                0.78
 No Serious Misd                                                    0.53                0.57                1.07
 Serious Misd                                                       0.47                0.37                0.79
 No Misd Conviction 1 Yr Prior                                      0.94                0.97                1.03
 Misd Conviction 1 Yr Prior                                         0.06                0.03                0.57
 No Felony Conviction 1 Yr Prior                                    0.97                0.98                1.01
 Felony Conviction 1 Yr Prior                                       0.03                0.02                0.68
 Not Citizen                                                        0.23                0.10                0.43
 Citizen                                                            0.77                0.87                1.14
 Any Disorderly/Theft Charge                                        0.33                0.38                1.16
 Any Motor Vehicle Charge                                           0.45                0.41                0.91
 Any Drug Charge                                                    0.21                0.04                0.19
 Any Other Charge                                                   0.12                0.08                0.64
 Demographics (within demographic sample)
 Age  23                                                             0.23                  0.29              1.26
 Age 24-30                                                           0.25                  0.22              0.87
 Age 31-40                                                           0.22                  0.18              0.82
 Age  41                                                             0.31                  0.30              0.98
 Male                                                                0.79                  0.73              0.92
 Female                                                              0.20                  0.23              1.18
 (Predicted) Black                                                   0.40                  0.42              1.05
 (Predicted) White                                                   0.36                  0.34              0.94
 (Predicted) Hispanic                                                0.22                  0.22              1.01

Note: This table describes the observable characteristics of the complier sample, relative to the full sample.
Column (1) shows the probability that an individual has a given characteristic in the full analysis sample.
Column (2) shows the probability that someone in the complier group has that characteristic. Column (3)
shows the ratio of the two (Column (2) divided by Column (1)). The estimates in Column (2) are constructed
by calculating the shares of compliers within these various subsamples. The complier share calculations here
rely on a linear first-stage estimation and a 1% cut-off to define ADA leniency. See Section 7 for more detail.




                                                      77
                                                  Table A.28: Reweighted OLS

                                                       Main                               With Demographics
                                        (1)         (2)            (3)              (4)        (5)         (6)
                                                   Decile     Quart x Prev.                   Decile  Quart x Prev.
                                        OLS        Weigts      Charge Wts          OLS        Weights Charge Wgts
           Not Prosecuted            -0.104*** -0.102***         -0.101***      -0.099*** -0.094***         -0.093***
                                      (0.005)   (0.006)           (0.006)        (0.006)   (0.006)           (0.006)
           Observations                67553        67553          67553          66612        66612           66612
           Court x Time FE              Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes
           Case/Def Covariates          Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes
           Demographics                 No           No             No             Yes          Yes             Yes
           Complier Weights             No           Yes            Yes            No           Yes             Yes
Note: Column (1) recreates our main OLS estimates, and Column (4) recreates our main OLS estimates in the sample of defendants for
whom we have both age and gender. Columns (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) reweight those OLS estimates by splitting the sample into mutually
exclusive subgroups, calculating the shares of compliers in each subgroup (as in Table A.27), and using the share of compliers relative
to the share of the estimation sample in each subgroup as a weight. Columns (2) and (5) split the sample into 10 mutually exclusive
subgroups based on deciles of the predicted probability of nonprosecution estimated with all available covariates. Columns (3) and
(6) split the sample into 8 subgroups by quartiles of this propensity score and by whether the defendant has a previous complaint, an
important source of hetereogeneity. ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                                  78
B      Presumption of Nonprosecution

                 Figure B.1: Effects of Rollins Inauguration on Nonprosecution




                     (a) Rollins List                      (b) Other Nonviolent Misdemeanors




           (c) All Nonviolent Misdemeanors                        (d) Nonviolent Felonies

Note: This figure reports monthly event study estimates of the effects of the inauguration on January 2,
2019 of Rachael Rollins as District Attorney of Suffolk County. Each panel reports OLS estimates of monthly
changes in nonprosecution rates for different categories of cases, relative to the baseline month of December
2018, between January 1, 2018 and September 1, 2019. All models include court and day of week fixed effects
and all case-level covariates used throughout the paper. Robust standard errors clustered on defendant; 90%
confidence intervals.




                                                     79
                 Figure B.2: Effects of Rollins Inauguration on Nonprosecution
                             and Subsequent Criminal Complaints




                   (a) Nonprosecution                             (b) Subsequent Complaint

Note: This figure reports the effects of the inauguration on January 2, 2019 of Rachael Rollins as District
Attorney of Suffolk County, for cases initiated between January 1, 2018 and September 1, 2019. Panel A
reports OLS estimates of the average effects of the Rollins inauguration on nonprosecution rates for different
categories of cases; the bottom three coefficients in Panel A report these estimates relative to nonprosecution
rates for nonviolent felony cases. Panel B reports 2SLS estimates of the average effects of nonprosecution
on the likelihood that a defendant is issued a new criminal complaint within one year of the current case,
using the Rollins inauguration as an instrument for nonprosecution; the bottom three coefficients in Panel B
report these 2SLS estimates relative to nonviolent felony cases. All models include court, month, and day of
week fixed effects and all case-level covariates used throughout the paper. Robust standard errors clustered
on defendant; 95% confidence intervals.




                                                      80
                Figure B.3: Effects of Rollins Inauguration on Reported Crimes




        (a) Property Damage                (b) Theft & Fraud                   (c) Disorder




                                (d) Drug                        (e) Other

Note: This figure reports the effects of the inauguration on January 2, 2019 of Rachael Rollins as District
Attorney of Suffolk County, on the number of crime incidents reported to the Boston Police Department
between January 1, 2017 and February 29, 2020. Each subfigure is a coefficient plot showing the effect on
a particular category of reported crime. The y-axes show number of reported incidents; the x-axes show
time (month) relative to January 2019. The coefficient for t-7 includes months June 2018 and earlier; t+8
includes months September 2019 and later. All regressions include month-of-year fixed effects. Robust
standard errors; 95% confidence intervals.




                                                    81
C     Technical Appendix
C.1     Comparisons to Alternative Instrument Estimation Strate-
        gies
Our main instrument is a residualized leave-out mean leniency measure that is estimated from
the other nonviolent misdemeanor cases that an ADA has arraigned. For our main analyses
we proceed by implementing this instrument in an `as-if just-identified' manner: we report
robust F-statistics that do not adjust for the fact that the instrument is estimated (although
we also do not use these F-statistics directly in a threshold test), and we conduct inference
in the second stage using confidence intervals based on inversion of the Anderson-Rubin
test, which have correct size and optimal power even when instruments are weak in just-
identified models (Anderson and Rubin, 1949; Andrews, Stock and Sun, 2019). Performing
the estimation in this way is standard (Doyle Jr, 2007; French and Song, 2014; Dahl, Kostøl
and Mogstad, 2014; Dobbie, Goldin and Yang, 2018; Bhuller et al., 2020) and has some
attractive properties. We have 315 ADAs in our sample, each of whom could serve as a
potential instrument. With this many instruments, estimation using the ADA dummies can
suffer from bias from many (potentially weak) instruments (Bekker, 1994; Bound, Jaeger
and Baker, 1995; Hausman et al., 2012). We also have many fixed effects (court-by-month
and court-by-day of week) in the covariate set, necessary to identify the set of cases for
which ADAs are as-if randomly assigned, which can also cause bias in jackknife instrumental
variable estimators (JIVE) (Koles´  ar, 2013). It is also clear in the just-identified case how
to handle inference in the second stage that is robust to (potential) weak instrument issues
(Andrews, Stock and Sun, 2019). The continuous instrument also allows for the estimation
of marginal treatment effects (Heckman and Vytlacil, 2005).
    While this estimation strategy is convenient for the reasons mentioned above, it does not
take into account that the instrument itself is constructed. In this subsection we explore the
robustness of our main estimates to alternative estimation strategies in this setting. One
alternative approach is to estimate our 2SLS model using the full set of 315 ADA dummy
variables as instruments in the first stage. These results are shown in Table C.1, Column (2)
(Column (1) repeats our main 2SLS results using the residualized leave-out mean leniency
as an instrument). The estimated coefficient is -0.19, smaller in absolute value and closer to
OLS than our main leave-out mean 2SLS estimate, which is unsurprising given that the bias
from weak instruments moves estimates closer to the OLS estimate. Several strategies are
suggested when IV estimates suffer from bias from many (weak) instruments. In Column (3)
we estimate a limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) model with all the dummies


                                              82
as instruments (Bekker, 1994; Chao and Swanson, 2005; Angrist and Frandsen, 2020). The
coefficient in this model is -0.27, closer to our main leave-out mean 2SLS estimate than
the estimate in Column (2) with all the ADA dummy variables. LIML however is not
consistent with heteroskedastic errors or with heterogeneous treatment effects (Hausman
et al., 2012; Koles´
                   ar, 2013), which is the motivation for the UJIVE estimator we also use. In
Column (4) we estimate the unbiased JIVE (UJIVE) estimator of Koles´        ar (2013).48 JIVE
estimators are generally suggested when the number of instruments is large (Angrist, Imbens
and Krueger, 1999), although they can be biased with many covariates (Koles´        ar, 2013).
The UJIVE estimator is consistent (for a convex combination of LATE estimates) with a
large number of covariates. Here the coefficient is -0.26, again closer to our main leave-out
mean 2SLS estimate than the estimate in Column (2) with all the ADA dummy variables.
Another way to handle the potential bias from many (weak) instruments is to reduce the
number of instruments by using lasso to pick the most informative ADA dummies in a 2SLS
regression. We do this in Column (5) using a post-lasso first stage via the procedures of
Belloni, Chernozhukov and Hansen (2014).49
    In each case the coefficients we estimate with the alternative strategies are negative,
large, and statistically significant, implying that nonprosecution decreases criminal com-
plaints within two years post-arraignment between 33-70% relative to prosecuted compliers.
For the most part, given the estimated standard errors, we cannot reject the null that these
coefficients are the same as our main 2SLS estimate.50




  48
     We thank Sam Norris for sharing the code to calculate the UJIVE instrument used in Norris, Pecenco
and Weaver, 2020.
  49
     In practice implemented via the user-written package ivlasso in Stata (Ahrens, Hansen and Schaffer,
2019), using the post-lasso results and using the ivlasso defaults with a plug-in penalty. The procedure
retains three out of 315 instruments (similarly in the Angrist and Frandsen (2020) implementation of the
plug-in penalty, lasso retains two instruments out of 180 in a re-estimation of the Angrist and Keueger
(1991) QOB study). We also implemented a version of ivlasso with a cross-validated penalty; see Angrist
and Frandsen (2020) for details on implementation. The algorithm with the CV penalty chooses more
instruments, namely 173 out of the 315 in our case. The estimated post-lasso coefficient is smaller in
absolute value (-0.22, se=0.049). The simulation results of Angrist, Imbens and Krueger (1999) and Belloni
et al. (2012) imply that the plug-in penalty will have less bias although will also be less precise than the CV
penalty estimates.
  50
     The standard errors reported here for 2SLS or LIML using all the dummy variables have not been
adjusted to take into account the potential for weak instruments; other inference strategies may imply larger
confidence intervals.


                                                      83
                                 Table C.1: Different IV Strategies

                                            (1)        (2)         (3)     (4)                           (5)
                                        Main Leave-   2SLS        LIML
                                         out Mean All Dummies All Dummies UJIVE                         lasso
Not Prosecuted                             -0.34***         -0.19***         -0.27***      -0.26*** -0.40***
                                            (0.11)           (0.06)           (0.10)        (0.08)   (0.11)
Observations                                67553            67553            67553         66809       67553
Court x Time FE                              Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes
Case/Def Covariates                          Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes
First Stage F-Stat                          58.94            2.722            2.746         153.8       45.42
Mean Not Prosecuted                         0.371
Mean Not Prosecuted Compliers               0.570

Note: This table reports two-stage least squares estimates using various estimation strategies for the in-
strument, as indicated in the column headers. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects and
case/defendant covariates. The OLS estimate for this specification can be found in Table 4 Column (2),
and is -0.10 (se=0.01). Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the individual and ADA level are re-
ported in parentheses. Column (1) repeats our main 2SLS estimates using the residualized leave-out mean
leniency measure with covariates using (see Table 4, Column (4)). In Column (2) we use all 315 ADA
dummy variables directly as instruments in the first stage. Column (3) uses limited information maximum
likelihood estimation with all of the dummies as instruments. Column (4) uses the UJIVE estimator of
Koles´ ar (2013). Column (5) uses post-lasso from Belloni, Chernozhukov and Hansen (2014) to choose the
most informative ADA dummy variables; the algorithm chooses three of the ADA dummies as instruments.
***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10.




                                                    84
C.2     MTE Estimation
Re-orienting our framework to the potential outcome framework, let Yi (1) be the defendant's
outcome Y if not prosecuted (Di = 1) and Yi (0) the defendant's outcome if prosecuted
(Di = 0). An ADA makes a decision to prosecute or not prosecute a defendant based on
characteristics both observable to the econometrician, Xi , and unobservable to the econo-
                                                                              
metrician, i . Define the latent propensity to be not prosecuted as: Di        = µD (Zi , Xi ) + i .
                                                   
Di = 1, or the defendant is not prosecuted, if Di = µD (Zi , Xi ) + i  0 = µD (Zi , Xi ) 
i = F (µD (Zi , Xi ))  F (i ) and prosecuted otherwise, where F is the (unknown) cu-
mulative distribution function of  . F (µD (Zi , Xi )) = P (Zi , Xi ) is the propensity score: the
probability of nonprosecution conditional on observables, Xi , and ADA leniency, Zi . Call
F (µi ) = UD quantiles of the distribution of the unobserved propensity to be not prosecuted.
The marginal treatment effect is then defined as the treatment effect at a particular value
of the unobservable propensity to be not prosecuted: E (Yi (1) - Yi (0)|Xi = x, UDi = uD ),
that is the treatment effect for individuals on the margin of being not prosecuted when
P (Zi , Xi ) = uD . It can be estimated as the derivative of the average outcome conditional
on X and P (Zi , Xi ) = uD with respect to the propensity score.


C.3     Understanding Compliers
To calculate the shares of compliers, never-takers, and always-takers, we use the insights of
Abadie (2003) and Dahl, Kostøl and Mogstad (2014), and applied by Dobbie, Goldin and
Yang (2018) and Bhuller et al. (2020).
    Always-takers are defendants who would always be not prosecuted regardless of the ADA
assigned to their case. Given our monotonicity and conditional independence assumptions,
the fraction of always-takers can be calculated by the share of defendants not prosecuted by
the most strict ADA(s):

  a = P r(Not Prosecutedi = 1|Zi = z ) = P r(Not Prosecutedi (z ) = Not Prosecutedi (z ) = 1)
                                                                                            (4)

where z represents a maximum value of the ADA instrument (the most lenient ADA) and z
represents a minimum value of the instrument (the most strict ADA).
   Similarly, never-takers are defendants who would never be not prosecuted (always be
prosecuted). We can estimate their fraction by the share of defendants who are prosecuted




                                                85
by the most lenient ADA(s):

  n = P r(Not Prosecutedi = 0|Zi = z ) = P r(Not Prosecutedi (z ) = Not Prosecutedi (z ) = 0)
                                                                                            (5)

   Finally, compliers are defendants whose prosecution decisions would have been different
had their case been assigned to the most lenient instead of the most strict ADA:

  c = P r(Not Prosecutedi = 1|Zi = z ) - P r(Not Prosecutedi = 1|Zi = z ) =
                                           P r(Not Prosecutedi (z ) > Not Prosecutedi (z )) (6)

We can calculate this as 1 - a - n . Under a linear specification of the first stage Equation 3,
we can recover c as 1 (z - z ), a as 0 +     ^1 z , and n as 1 - 0 -  ^1 z , where 0 and 1 are
the estimated first stage coefficients. We also estimate these under more flexible local linear
estimations of our first stage.
    With these shares, we can then calculate average characteristics for complier defendants
who were prosecuted: E (Yi (0)|Not Prosecutedi (z ) > Not Prosecutedi (z )). Among the pros-
ecuted, average outcomes for defendants who were assigned to lenient ADAs are average
outcomes for the never-takers:

E (Yi |Not Prosecutedi = 0, zi = z ) = E (Yi (0)|Not Prosecutedi (z ) = Not Prosecutedi (z ) = 0)
                                                                                              (7)
Among the prosecuted, outcomes for defendants who were assigned to strict ADAs are a
weighted average of outcomes for compliers and never-takers, where the weights are their
shares in the population:


                                         c
E (Yi |N otP rosecutedi = 0, zi = z ) =      E (Yi (0)|Not Prosecutedi (z ) > Not Prosecutedi (z ))
                                      c + n
                                         n
                                    +        E (Yi (0)|Not Prosecutedi (z ) = Not Prosecutedi (z ) = 0)
                                       c + n
                                                                                           (8)

  Plugging Equation 7 into Equation 8, we can calculate average outcomes for compliers
among the prosecuted for any outcome Yi as:




                                               86
                                                      c + n
E (Yi (0)|Not Prosecutedi (z ) > Not Prosecutedi (z )) =      E (Yi |Not Prosecutedi = 0, zi = z )
                                                        c
                                                      n
                                                     - E (Yi |Not Prosecutedi = 0, zi = z )
                                                      c
                                                                                          (9)




                                               87
