                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                          THE RISE OF DUAL-CLASS STOCK IPOS

                                         Dhruv Aggarwal
                                            Ofer Eldar
                                          Yael Hochberg
                                         Lubomir P. Litov

                                       Working Paper 28609
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28609


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021



We are grateful to Andrew Metrick, Jay Ritter, Michelle Lowry, Peter Iliev, and Michael Ewens
for kindly providing access to their data. We are also grateful to Josh Lerner, Leslie Jeng, and the
Private Capital Research Institute for access to the certicates of incorporation data. We thank
Yakov Amihud, Bernard Black, Brian Broughman, Jamie Evans, Michael Ewens, Cam Harvey,
Jessica Jeffers, Kose John, Stephen Karolyi, Beni Lauterbach, Kate Litvak, Nadya Malenko,
William Megginson, Joan-Farre Mensa, Filippo Mezzanotti, Ramana Nanda, Harshit Rajaiya,
Adriano Rampini, Abraham Ravid, David Robinson, Bernard Sharfman, Jared Stanfield, Emily
Strauss, Deniz Yavuz, and participants at the Colloquium on Law and Economics at
Northwestern University, the finance seminar at University of Oklahoma Price College of
Business, the Finance brown bag at Duke Fuqua School of Business, the Business Law Workshop
at Texas University, the Chicago Entrepreneurship Festival at Northwestern University and
University of Chicago, and the annual meetings of the SFS Cavalcade North America, the
Midwest Finance Association, and the Venture Capital Section of the American Bar Association
for helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Mandy Chan, Robert Gholson, Tate
Johnson, Ali Kayer, SeungWha Lee, Asif Malik, Mayne Thomas, Brody Morgan, Shaoqin Tang,
and Peck Yang for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Dhruv Aggarwal, Ofer Eldar, Yael Hochberg, and Lubomir P. Litov. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Rise of Dual-Class Stock IPOs
Dhruv Aggarwal, Ofer Eldar, Yael Hochberg, and Lubomir P. Litov
NBER Working Paper No. 28609
March 2021
JEL No. G24,G28,G34

                                         ABSTRACT

We create a novel dataset to examine the nature and determinants of dual-class IPOs. We
document that dual-class firms have different types of controlling shareholders and wedges
between voting and economic rights. We find that the founders' wedge is largest when founders
have stronger bargaining power. The increase in founder wedge over time is due to increased
willingness by venture capitalists to accommodate founder control and technological shocks that
reduced firms' needs for external financing. Greater founder bargaining power is also associated
with a lower likelihood of sunset provisions that eliminate dual-class structures within specified
periods.

Dhruv Aggarwal                                  Yael Hochberg
Yale University School of Management            Jones Graduate School of Business
New Haven, CT                                   Rice University
dhruv.aggarwal@yale.edu                         6100 Main Street, MS-531
                                                McNair Hall Room 331
Ofer Eldar                                      Houston, TX 77005
Duke University                                 and Massachusetts Institute of Technology
210 Science Drive                               and also NBER
Durham, NC 27708                                hochberg@rice.edu
eldar@law.duke.edu
                                                Lubomir P. Litov
                                                University of Oklahoma
                                                Price College of Business
                                                Norman, OK 73019
                                                litov@ou.edu
                                 I.    Introduction
    Public markets have undergone dramatic changes in recent years. Most notably, the
number of publicly traded firms has been steadily declining, while private capital to fund
late-stage startups has become more available (Gao et al., 2013; de Fontenay, 2017; Ewens
and Farre-Mensa, 2020; Doidge et al., 2018). Also changing is the nature of the firms that
choose to go public. While publicly traded firms in the classic sense are thought of as
widely-held firms with dispersed shareholding, many of the firms that have recently elected
to go public are tightly controlled by their founders or other entities via a dual-class stock
structure. As shown in Figure 1, almost 30 percent of initial public offerings (IPOs) in
2017-2019 had dual-class structures. Well-known examples include IPOs of high-tech firms
such as Google in 2004, Facebook in 2012, and more recently, Snap in 2017. Yet, as Adams
and Ferreira (2009) state, "few papers tackle the issue of the determinants of dual-class
structure... Consequently, we still know very little about this issue." In this paper, we
empirically explore the recent rise in dual-class stock IPOs, and present new evidence on
the distribution and determinants of voting and economic rights across various stockholder
types.
    Why do firms adopt dual-class structures at the IPO, and what factors explain their
recent popularity? A typical dual-class structure allocates excess voting control to a partic-
ular group of shareholders, despite their claim to a much smaller share of cash flow rights.
Dual-class structures may entail substantial agency costs, as those shareholders with excess
control rights bear only a small proportion of the financial consequences of their decisions,
while retaining the ability to forestall takeovers and entrench themselves. Accordingly, from
a governance perspective, the increase in dual-class stock IPOs is puzzling. Dual-class struc-
tures were historically used infrequently, presumably because the agency costs associated
with such structures were high (Goshen and Hamdani, 2015). With institutional sharehold-
ers and proxy advisory firms placing growing pressure on corporations to remove provisions
that shield managers from shareholder monitoring, such as staggered boards (Cremers, Litov,
and Sepe, 2017) and poison pills (Catan, 2019), we might expect dual-class structures to fol-
low a similar declining trend. Moreover, almost half of the IPOs in recent years have been
from companies that raised financing from venture capital (VC) firms prior to going public
(see Figure 1), and many well-known dual-class stock offerings in recent years are of firms
belonging to technology sectors, such as software, that are a main focus for VC investors.
VC firms have incentives to design optimal governance systems for their portfolio firms when
those firms go public in order to preserve the value of their investment (Baker and Gompers,

                                              1
2003; Hochberg, 2012).1 Thus, one might expect VC firms to insist on a one-vote one-share
system for their portfolio companies at the IPO. In light of these concerns about agency costs,
it is natural to ask why IPO firms appear to increasingly be adopting dual-class structures.
     A key challenge in exploring the determinants of dual-class firm structures is that not
all dual-class firms are the same. While the academic literature has generally treated dual-
class firms as a single monolithic "type," measuring excess control rights for directors and
officers, in reality, the nature of controllers in different dual-class firms varies widely. In fact,
founders are controllers in less than half of dual-class IPOs. The controllers may be directors
or officers who are not the founders, parent or holding companies that issued shares in a
subsidiary, an extended family that has controlled the firm for generations, or even venture
capital or private equity investors that have chosen a structure that allows them to keep
control over the firm after the IPO. Furthermore, some dual-class structures are driven by
regulatory and tax considerations, rather than by governance considerations.
     To break open the dual-class black box, we create a novel database that identifies the
shareholders, voting rights and type of controller in each dual-class IPO over the years 1994-
2019. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first comprehensive study of dual-class
stock firms to date to classify and differentiate between various types of controllers and
control wedges. Using our taxonomy of dual-class firms, we are able to compute the wedge
between the economic and voting rights for different types of controllers, as well as for public
shareholders, and to examine the determinants of different types of dual-class firm structures.
The wedge for the public shareholders conveys the true measure of the potential agency costs
of dual-class firms, since it shows (no matter what kind of controller the company has) how
much outsider shareholders' voting rights lag behind their economic rights. To date, studies
of dual-class firms have only computed the wedge for directors and officers, which, as we
show below, may provide a distorted measure of the controllers' power and the agency costs
borne by shareholders.
     Our categorization of the different types of dual-class firms illustrates a variety of differ-
ent motivations underlying dual-class structures that have been largely ignored by existing
literature. The most common controllers of dual-class IPO firms are founders (4.9 percent
of all IPOs, including single- and dual-class), parent and holding companies (2.3 percent),
PE firms (1.0 percent), non-founder directors and officers (0.7 percent), and VC firms (0.4
percent). While the classic example of the founder-controlled software firm may be a salient
   1
    VC firms tend to relinquish their controlling stakes at the IPO (Black and Gilson, 1998; Kaplan and
Stromberg, 2003; Kaplan, Martel, and Stromberg, 2007), but usually unwind their positions within a year
or so following the company's listing (Barry et al., 1990; Field and Hanka, 2001; Iliev and Lowry, 2020).


                                                   2
one, there are many other notable examples of dual-class firms that do not fit this model. For
example, Chipotle, a food chain that went public in 2006, was not controlled by its founder,
but rather by McDonald's. First Data Corporation, a financial services company that went
public in 2016, was controlled by KKR, a well-known private equity firm. In both compa-
nies, the directors' and officers' economic rights exceeded their voting rights, and therefore
their wedge was negative (whereas the controller­such as McDonald's or KKR­had a posi-
tive wedge), and did not reflect the existence of controllers' true superior voting rights. In
contrast, our more detailed data allows us to accurately capture the structures and potential
agency costs of dual-class firms. More specifically, we find that the rise in dual-class IPOs
is associated with an increase in the controlling power of firms' founders. For example, in
2017-2019, a staggering 18 percent of all IPOs were founder-controlled. Thus, while there
is wide variation in the type of controllers, the data suggests that the increase in dual-class
IPOs is in large part driven by founders' ability to dictate the governance of IPO firms.
    More formally, we hypothesize that one determinant of dual-class structures is the relative
bargaining power of investors versus founders (Goshen and Hamdani, 2015). When founders
have greater bargaining power­for example, due to greater availability of investment capital
or hot industry markets­they are more likely to be able to negotiate for greater control
rights at the time of IPO, and thus, the firm is more likely to adopt a dual-class structure.
This theory is particularly appropriate for explaining the controlling power of dominant
founders in software companies, such as Facebook and Snap. As argued by Goshen and
Hamdani (2015), such founders place high value on the ability to pursue their visions. A
strong bargaining position allows founders to raise capital without losing control over the
firm, despite the potential agency costs associated with such control.
    To test the bargaining hypothesis, we construct two proxies for the founders' relative
bargaining power at the time the firm goes public, predicated in the notion that increased
capital availability and outside options for the founder provide increased bargaining power
vis-`
    a-vis investors, such as institutional investors. The first is simply the amount of late-stage
VC investment at the industry level in the year before the IPO (Goshen and Hamdani, 2015).
We focus on late-stage investment because it captures the outside option for a company
considering a public offering. The second is the amount of dry powder in the industry,
defined as the amount of funds raised, but not yet invested, by VC firms. This captures the
amount of funding available for investment, rather than the amount invested. Both proxies
reflect the notion that when private financing is readily available, it serves as an alternative
to going public (Ewens and Farre-Mensa, 2020). Moreover, greater amounts of available


                                                3
funding lead to "money chasing deals," which in turn leads to greater competition among
venture capitalists for deals and to a rise in valuations in the private market. The greater
availability of funding thus has a direct effect on the bargaining position of the founders
at the IPO stage, allowing them to negotiate for greater control rights in a public offering
relative to what might be available in a tighter financing environment.
    Consistent with our hypothesis, we show that these proxies for bargaining power are
positively related to the wedge between founders' voting and economic rights. In contrast, the
bargaining power proxies are not positively correlated with the wedges of other controllers,
particularly those of non-founder directors and officers and parent or holding companies.
This further supports the hypothesis that founder control is driven by founders' bargaining
power. All our specifications include industry fixed effects, such that the estimates of the
coefficients on VC industry financing measures and industry dry powder are derived from
changes in the availability of financing across time. Interestingly, we find no significant
relationship in the full sample period between VC backing and the wedge of founders. Thus,
VC firms do not appear, on average, to be averse to founders' voting rights exceeding their
economic rights. Moreover, we find that firms with higher levels of innovation, as measured
by the value of their patents (Kogan et al., 2017) are associated with higher levels of founder
control. This is consistent with the notion that visionary founders often produce innovative
technologies. Finally, we find that foreign firms, primarily those based in China, are much
more likely to be controlled by founders and have a larger wedge between founders' voting
and economic rights.
    Our results are robust to a variety of alternative specifications. First, the patterns we
document remain substantially the same when we include additional controls for several
proxies for "hot" public markets, such as industry returns or the average under-pricing of
recent IPOs in the industry. Second, the results are robust when evaluating subsamples of
the data that exclude or include only certain types of IPOs, such as VC-backed IPOs. In
particular, the results are qualitatively similar when we exclude firms in "cloud industries,"
which are industries, such as software, that heavily rely on cloud computing technology for
data management (Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf, 2018). Thus, our findings are not
limited to software firms such as Facebook and Snap.
    Third, we provide ample evidence that dual-class structures tend to be determined at
the IPO stage. In particular, in examining the certificates of incorporation of a sample of 56
large startups from the Private Capital Research Institute, we find that dual-class structures
were created prior to the IPO negotiation process in about 80 percent of these firms. In


                                              4
addition, using data from Ewens and Malenko (2020), we find that pre-IPO board control of
VC-backed firms does not predict control at the IPO stage. This supports the notion that
the availability of VC financing in the year prior to the IPO affects founders' bargaining
power for control rights at the IPO.
    Fourth, to address the concern that VC industry financing may be correlated with other
factors that may have contributed to increasing the bargaining power of insiders, we develop
an instrumental variable for VC financing at the industry level. This shift-share instrument
is based on regional shocks in VC financing, where the size of the shock depends on the share
of each industry in VC investment in each region. The results suggest that, if anything, the
effect of VC financing on the probability of dual-class stock is slightly stronger, and they are
robust to excluding firms located in entrepreneurial states, particularly California.
    We then turn to explore the historical trends in dual-class firm offerings. We show that
historically, founder-controlled dual-class IPOs were less likely to be VC-backed firms, but
have become increasingly so in recent years. Second, we show a similar trend in firms that
belong to Cloud industries. The introduction of cloud computing in 2006 led to a signifi-
cant reduction in costs of experimentation, business formation and scaling for software and
web-based ventures (Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf, 2018). As a result, such startups
became less reliant on VC funding for startup, thus increasing the relative bargaining power
of their founders vis-`
                      a-vis their investors. Using a difference-in-differences analysis around
the introduction of cloud computing, we show that firms in Cloud industries became more
likely to adopt dual-class structures that give greater control to founders following the in-
troduction of cloud computing, particularly for VC-backed IPOs. This finding is consistent
with anecdotal evidence that VC firms have become more deferential to entrepreneurs in
the software industry (Lublin and Ante, 2012; Alden, 2014; Winkler and Farrell, 2018; Ku-
por, 2012; Alon-Beck, 2019), and that due to technological changes, software companies now
have more options for reaching scale and going public without raising significant funding
from VC firms.2 Our results are consistent with a diminution in the governance role of VC
firms over time that reflects such founders' more powerful bargaining position in the wake
of this technological shock. Moreover, we find that the greater propensity of foreign firms
(primarily from China) to give founders greater decision-making power is driven by firms in
Cloud industries and in more recent periods. This finding is explained by various regulatory
restrictions on companies that have prevented founder-controlled firms from listing on the
   2
    Take one recent example, Veeva, an online customer relationship and content management company,
which received only $7 million in VC investment but was valued at $4.4 billion shortly after its IPO in 2013.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, Veeva has a dual-class stock structure (Schubarth, 2013).


                                                     5
Hong Kong or Chinese stock exchanges.
    While many firms go public with a dual-class structure, these structures do not necessarily
persist indefinitely. We document the adoption of "sunset" provisions in IPOs of dual-class
firms. Sunset provisions specify the circumstances under which the wedge between voting
and economic rights ends, typically through the conversion of the dual-class structure into a
single-class one with no superior voting rights. The recent debate over sunsets has focused
on "time sunsets," which provide that the conversion into a single-class firm occurs at a pre-
determined time, such as five years after the IPO. While some commentators have suggested
that time sunsets are more effective since agency costs at dual-class firms increase with firm
age (Bebchuk and Kastiel, 2017), others have questioned their efficacy, claiming time sunsets
induce moral hazard (Fisch and Solomon, 2019; Sharfman, 2019). We find that time sunsets
are more likely to be included in VC-backed IPOs of dual-class firms, and less so in other
IPOs. However, despite a growing trend of dual-class firms adopting such provisions, this
trend is substantially weaker for founder-controlled firms due to the increase in founders'
bargaining power over time.
    Finally, our construction of different "wedges" for founders, VC firms, PE firms, directors
and officers, and public shareholders allows us to provide new insights into how dual-class
structures relate to IPO firm valuation. We find that the wedge for the founders is positively
related to Tobin's Q and price-to-book ratio, while no such relationship exists for other
controller types. While valuation measures increase with the founder's wedge, they decrease
with the square of the founder's wedge. This suggests that while investors are willing to
assign a higher value to a firm driven by a founder's control or vision, they remain skeptical
of IPOs where the wedge is extreme; when founders' voting rights far exceed their economic
rights, concerns over high agency costs dampen valuation premiums.
    Our article makes a number of contributions to the literature. First, our study contributes
to the literature exploring dual-class stock structures. We provide the first detailed explo-
ration of the nature and incidence of different types of controllers, and propose new measures
for examining the wedges between cash flows and control. Unlike prior datasets, our data
allows a nuanced analysis that incorporates the underlying economic motivations of different
controllers and an accurate measure of the agency costs faced by public shareholders.
    In particular, our findings add to the literature's understanding of the determinants
of dual-class structures, which remains relatively unexplored (Adams and Ferreira, 2009).
A number of theoretical studies discuss the tradeoffs between agency costs, reputational
incentives, and the benefit of locking controlling shareholders into the firm's long-term per-


                                              6
formance and reputation (Grossman and Hart, 1986; Hansmann, 1988; Choi, 2018). Early
empirical studies suggested that dual-class structures enable controlling shareholders to re-
tain control without having to bear excessive cash-flow risk (DeAngelo and DeAngelo, 1985).
The first comprehensive empirical study of dual-class firms, Gompers et al. (2009), suggests
that dual-class structures are more prevalent in the presence of private benefits for corporate
insiders. Specifically, Gompers et al. (2009) find that dual-class stocks are more likely in the
media industry and in eponymous companies. More recently, Iliev and Lowry (2020) explore
the relationship between information asymmetries, proxied by variables such as R&D, and
dual-class structure, and find no connections. To the best of our knowledge, our article is the
first to identify the effect of founder bargaining power as well as valuable innovating activity
on the choice of dual-class structure in IPOs.
    Our article is also related to research that studies the effect of dual-class structure on
performance. Several studies have found that a higher wedge between director and officer
voting rights and cash flow rights is associated with lower firm value (Jarrell and Poulsen,
1988; Claessens et al., 2002; Lemmon and Lins, 2003; Smart et al., 2008; Gompers et al.,
2009) and managerial extraction of private benefits (Smart et al., 2008; Masulis et al., 2009).
Conversely, other studies find no significant association with shareholder value or even find a
positive effect (Partch, 1987; Cornett and Vetsuypens, 1989; Dimitrov and Jain, 2006). Smart
and Zutter (2003) find that dual-class IPOs are less likely to be under-priced. Consistent
with their finding, recent studies suggest that dual-class stock firms exhibit higher valuations
around the time of the IPO, although they also find lower valuations when these firms
become mature companies (Cremers et al., 2018; Kim and Michaely, 2019). Our new data
on the different types of dual-class firms allows us to analyze more concretely which types
of control structures are associated with higher valuations. Specifically, we relate findings
in Cremers et al. (2018) and Kim and Michaely (2019) to founders' control by showing that
IPO valuation generally increases with the size of the founders' wedge between economic and
voting rights. However, valuations do not increase when such a wedge is extremely large, nor
with the wedge of other controllers, such as parent companies. These results with respect to
shareholder value are an important illustration of why we should think of dual-class firms as a
collection of very different control structures, rather than a monolithic corporate governance
arrangement as in the prior literature.
    Second, our paper adds another dimension to the large body of literature on the gover-
nance role of VC firms. VC firms monitor their portfolio companies through board repre-
sentation (Lerner, 1995) and by acquiring information through staged financing (Gompers,


                                               7
1995). Kaplan and Stromberg (2003) document that VCs negotiate control rights at the
time of their investment and put monitoring and advisory systems in place. Hellmann and
Puri (2002) indicate that VCs play a role in the professionalization of startups, including
the hiring of outside CEOs (see also Broughman and Fried (2020)). Two studies focus di-
rectly on VC firms' impact on IPO firms (Baker and Gompers, 2003; Hochberg, 2012). Both
show that VC-backed IPO firms tend to have more independent boards. Hochberg (2012)
also shows that VC-backed firms tend to have lower earning management and more positive
reactions to the adoption of anti-takeover devices. These findings support the hypothesis
that governance is the result of a bargaining process between investors and insiders. Our
article extends these studies by focusing on how changes in the relative bargaining power
of founders and VCs have affected the most extreme entrenchment device, the dual-class
stock structure. Moreover, we not only identify the impact of VC financing at the firm and
industry levels, but also document the changes in VC firms' attitudes towards governance
over time (Ewens et al., 2018; Ewens and Malenko, 2020).
    Third, we contribute to the recent literature exploring the growth in private capital
markets that has resulted in companies staying private longer (Gao et al., 2013; Doidge
et al., 2018; Ewens and Farre-Mensa, 2020). As shown by Ewens and Farre-Mensa (2020),
regulatory changes that resulted in greater availability of private financing contributed to a
decrease in the number of public firms. Whereas Ewens and Farre-Mensa (2020) focus on
private equity investment, we focus on VC firms, which are the main source of funding for
entrepreneurial firms, especially for many of the recent high-tech IPOs, such as Facebook
and Snap. Our results suggest that the increase in availability of late-stage capital leads to
increased bargaining power for founders vis-`a-vis investors at the IPO, leading to an increase
in dual-class stock structures in IPO firms. In this sense, our study is related to Lehn et al.
(1990), who explore the substitutability of private ownership in which there is no wedge
between voting rights and cash-flow rights and dual-class stock structures that keep control
in the hands of insiders. Specifically, we show that an increase in the private capital that
gives entrepreneurial firms greater financing options from VC firms increase the power of
entrepreneurial firm insiders to maintain their control even after the firm becomes public.
    Finally, we contribute more broadly to the literature on governance of IPO firms. Much
of the literature focuses on adoption of anti-takeover devices. Several studies have high-
lighted the prevalence of anti-takeover provisions in the governance of IPO firms (Daines
and Klausner, 2001; Karpoff and Field, 2002; Iliev and Lowry, 2020). For example, Daines
and Klausner (2001) find that anti-takeover devices are used to protect managers when


                                              8
takeovers are more likely, and Karpoff and Field (2002) find that managers tend to deploy
defenses when their compensation is high and shareholder oversight is weak. Similarly, Field
and Lowry (2017) show that after the IPO, mutual funds tend to vote against directors of
dual-class stock firms, but not those of firms with classified boards.3 However, with few
exceptions (Baker and Gompers, 2003; Hochberg, 2012), this literature has not emphasized
the impact of founder bargaining power on governance at the IPO stage. Thus, we comple-
ment recent studies of controversial IPO governance provisions (Field and Lowry, 2017) by
providing a market-based explanation for the rise of dual-class stock.4


                           II.      Conceptual Framework
    We begin with a conceptual framework for the empirical analysis. We lay out a simple
model that illustrates how the availability of VC funding and the resulting higher valuations
in the private markets may affect the likelihood of a dual-class structure in an IPO listing.
The intuition is that when founders value control over their companies, higher valuations
in the private market provide better outside options and make it less advantageous to go
public unless the founders have superior voting rights enshrined in the structure of the public
firm. Second, we discuss why we might expect to see more dual-class firms in specific IPOs,
particularly cloud industries, VC-backed IPOs, and foreign firms. Third, we discuss measures
for capturing the innovating activity of dual-class firms.


A.    Dual-class Structures and Founder Bargaining Power
   We assume that the founder values both private benefits from control and cashflow or
economic rights from dividends. Therefore, the value of the firm to the founder is VE = A+B ,
where the first term represents the value of operational control over the company, and the
second the sum of economic rights from all the outstanding shares. A VC investor does not
value the founder's control over the company as much as the founder does, so the value of
the firm to the VC investor under founder control is VV C = A + B , where A < A.
   3
     Institutional shareholders have consistently expressed strong opposition to dual-class structures. For
example, on October 2, 2012 the Council of Institutional Investors sent letters to the New York Stock
Exchange and Nasdaq requesting them to prohibit dual-class stocks in their listing standards. See https:
//www.cii.org/dualclass_stock
   4
     In this respect, our study is related to other studies that explore market explanations for the prevalence
of governance mechanisms, especially in the context of executive compensation (e.g., Cremers and Grinstein
(2013); Peters and Wagner (2014); Jenter and Kanaan (2015)).



                                                      9
    We assume that the firm needs to raise I amount of investment, and the firm may seek to
raise this amount from a VC investor or in an IPO. To raise this amount from the VC firm,
                                                    I
the founder must relinquish voting power, v = A+      B
                                                        . The public shareholders are typically
passive, and thus, they place greater value on founder control. Thus, VP U B = A  ~ + B , where
A~  (A, A]. In the IPO, the founder will relinquish voting power, v = I . Because A < A      ~,
                                                                         ~+B
                                                                         A
the founder relinquishes more voting power to the VCs than to public shareholders, and thus
v > v.
    So far, we have only considered a single-class IPO. In order to retain control, the founder
may own shares with superior voting rights. Let µ  1 represent the number of votes per
share owned by the founder. For example, if the founder owns "Class B" supervoting stock
that entitles her to five votes per share, µ = 5. Let also p  [0, 1] represent the probability
that the IPO is successful in attracting a sufficient number of investors. In this setting, the
founder decides to go public rather than raise funds from VC investors if:

                        µ (1 - v ) ~
                  p                  A + (1 - v ) B   > (1 - v ) A + (1 - v ) B.           (1)
                      v + µ (1 - v )

This expression demonstrates a few simple insights. The firm is more likely to go public if
v is higher or v is lower, or when the valuation by the public investor (A~) is higher, and the
valuation by the VC firm (A) is lower. Also, a higher µ also makes it more likely that the
firm will go public. Thus, if public shareholders are willing to buy shares when the founder
has superior voting rights, the founder will be more inclined to go public.
    We first examine the firm's incentives when there is high competition among VC firms,
and thus more money chasing deals. This means that the valuations by VC firms will tend
to be higher, and therefore, A will be higher. We assume for expositional clarity that A = A ~,
and therefore, v = v . The condition in equation 1 simplifies to the following:

                                    µpA
                                               > A + (1 - p) B.                            (2)
                                v + µ (1 - v )
    Suppose that µ = 1. Then, the inequality becomes pA > A + B (1 - p). This means that
the firm chooses to remain private because p  1. Accordingly, for the firm to do an IPO
it must be that µ > 1, as the left-hand side is increasing in µ. That is, the firm will only
                                                                       I
go public if the founder receives superior voting rights. Using v = A+   B
                                                                           , we can re-write
equation 2:




                                               10
                               (A + B ) µpA
                                                > A + (1 - p) B.                           (3)
                             I + µ (A + B - I )
    As expected, the benefit from going public (i.e., the right-hand side) is increasing in µ
because the founder prefers to maintain control. Moreover, the derivative in µ is increasing
in A. That is, a greater wedge becomes more likely at the IPO stage when valuations in the
private market are increasing, presumably due to greater competition among VC firms for
investments.
    PREDICTION: The more VC financing is available (such that firms' valuations are
higher), the more likely firms that go public are to adopt a dual-class structure whereby
the founder gets superior voting rights.
    We note that higher public valuations by public investors have a different effect than
higher private market valuations. The reason is that if A ~ is higher but A stays fixed, then
the public investors will demand a smaller share percentage; that is, v will be smaller. Note
that as discussed above, higher VC valuations are associated­by assumption­with higher
valuations by public investors, as otherwise firms are unlikely to go public. The rationale is
that an increase in demand by VC firms for a stake in a firm serves as a signal to presumably
less informed public investors about the quality of the firm and pushes public valuations
higher. Importantly, however, the driver for these increased public valuations is the increase
in private capital caused by greater VC firm involvement with entrepreneurial startups, as
opposed to (or perhaps in addition to) an independent rise in public valuation.


B.   Different Types of IPOs
    The bargaining hypothesis also implies that the incidence of dual-class structures will be
higher in industries where the bargaining power of VC firms is weaker. We hypothesize that
the likelihood of dual-class structures is higher in industries that have become more capital
efficient, in the sense that their dependence on external financing is lower. As recently shown
by Ewens et al. (2018), several technological shocks have decreased the costs of starting
new businesses of certain types, and thus made it less advantageous for VC firms to invest
much capital and effort in monitoring startups' governance in early stages of financing.
They identify the advent of Amazon's Web Services ("AWS") in early 2006 as the defining
moment that lowered the initial costs of starting a business in the software- and service-
related industries. Cloud computing reduced the need for startups to make large fixed
investments in the early stages of the firm, when the probability of success is still low.


                                              11
As a result, VC firms invest smaller amounts in startups and dedicate fewer resources to
monitoring their governance. Accordingly, those startups that end up succeeding in the first
stage, such as Dropbox and Snap, are widely coveted by many VC firms who seek a bite at
the apple. This increases the bargaining power of the founders of successful startups and
allows them to maintain their control for the rest of the life of the firm. Thus, it is perhaps
unsurprising that software firms have chosen to adopt dual-class structures at the IPO.
    Moreover, there is evidence that technological shocks not only reduced the costs of doing
business at the startup stage, but also at later stages of the lives of entrepreneurial firms.
Specifically, startups tend to use cloud computing several years after the initial stages of
financing. Most of the large software and service companies, including Dropbox, Snap,
and others, have based a significant portion of their business on cloud infrastructure even
after the IPO. Thus, the reduced costs of doing business may also affect firms' need for
capital not only at the early financing stages, but also in the pre-IPO stage, when the firm
chooses its governance structure. When VCs compete to invest in a successful startup, they
may have to allow the founder to retain control after the IPO. In fact, some startups in
the software industry accomplish IPOs with dual-class stock without even tapping into VC
funding (Schubarth, 2013). Accordingly, we expect a higher rate of dual-class structures and
founder control in IPOs of firms that benefited from cloud computing, even for VC-backed
IPOs.
    Another key factor behind the rise of founder-controlled dual-class IPOs is the growing
number of listings by foreign-based firms in the United States, primarily Chinese firms. The
percentage of U.S. IPOs represented by China-based firms has gone from about 5 percent in
2005 to almost 20 percent in 2019 (Ritter, 2020). Chinese tech "unicorns" such as Baidu and
Alibaba decided not to list on Chinese stock exchanges, either because the exchanges were
unsophisticated or because they had strict profitability requirements (Fried and Schoenfeld,
2020). Furthermore, firms listing in China could not opt for a dual-class structure till 2019.
The Shanghai Stock exchange eventually had to allow dual-class structures to "stem an
exodus of technology firms seeking listings overseas" (Bloomberg, 2019). Previous literature
has shown that East Asian and Chinese founders are more committed to controlling their
firms, with their voting rights often exceeding economic rights (Claessens, Djankov, and
Lang, 2000; Hout and Michael, 2014). Therefore, for a Chinese founder who values control
over her company, American exchanges' openness to dual-class structures is a factor that
would weigh in favor of listing in the United States.
    While Chinese firms constitute about 4 percent of all the IPOs in our sample, they


                                              12
represent 15.31 percent of dual-class firms, and 26 percent of dual-class firms controlled by
founders. 36.38 percent of American dual-class firms are founder-controlled, compared to
73 percent of Chinese dual-class companies. The growing share of China-based IPO firms,
as well as their tendency to be founder-dominated, is one of the reasons we see a rise in
founder control over dual-class companies after 2005. Furthermore, a large proportion of
these China-based firms are in Cloud industries, so their founders have likely seen their
bargaining position relative to VC investors increase. In this sense, the rise of foreign­and
especially Chinese­IPOs in U.S. markets is consistent with the hypothesis about bargaining
between the founder and VC investors.


C.     Dual-class Structure and Innovation
    Although this is not our study's main line of inquiry, another possible justification for
dual-class firms is that they allow founders to pursue a vision that is embedded in innovative
technology (Goshen and Hamdani, 2015).5
    Accordingly, we evaluate whether dual-class firms, particularly founder-controlled firms,
are associated with the filing of more valuable patents prior to the IPO (Kogan et al.,
2017). We look specifically at the five-year period prior to the IPO, which reflects the
average time for consideration of applications for patents. As discussed below, we find that
innovation proxied by the value of patents is positively associated with the probability of
dual-class structures, consistent with the notion that more innovative firms may put dual-
class structures in place at the time of IPO in order to protect their ability to continue to
engage in innovative activity.
   5
     One possible proxy for innovation is the firms' investment in R&D. However, existing studies find no
relationship between R&D and the probability of dual-class stock (Iliev and Lowry, 2020), and as we show
below, our results confirm this. There are reasons to question whether R&D is a good proxy for innovation,
however (Balasubramanian and Sivadasan, 2011). First, R&D data does not provide a specific breakdown
of expenditures on the activities that led to the patented innovation. It is the number of successful patents
that matters, not expenditure on failed projects. Second, a large fraction of firms in the data report zero or
little R&D expenditure, making patenting data a more reliable basis for measuring innovation. Third, the
relevant R&D expenditures may have been made long before the IPO and might not be publicly available to
researchers, and therefore data on R&D when the firm becomes public does not reflect the firm's investment
in innovation.




                                                     13
                                III.       Data and Sample
A.     IPO Data
    The full sample of IPO firms is the set of IPOs from 1994-2019 that are included in
the SDC Thomson Reuters database and on Jay Ritter's website.6 The SDC data includes
general variables representing IPO characteristics such as the IPO offer price, while the data
from Jay Ritter includes data on the year each IPO company was founded. We follow the
process in Lowry et al. (2017) to fill out and verify all relevant identifiers, such as gvkey, cik,
and permno.7 We exclude unit offerings, IPOs with an offer price of less than five dollars,
and closed-end funds. We include only firms listed on major stock exchanges, namely the
New York Stock Exchange, Nasdaq, and AMEX, and firms that are included in the CRSP
database. We merge this dataset with financial data in Compustat from the fiscal year that
preceded each IPO.
    We classify IPOs by four variables: (1) V C - backed is an indicator variable that equals
one if a firm was financed by VC firms prior to the IPO; (2) F oreign is an indicator variable
that equals one if a firm is based outside the United States; (3) CloudIndustry is an indicator
variable that equals one if a firm belongs to a Cloud industry; and (4) M edia, which is an
indicator variable that equals one if a firm belongs to one of the following SIC industry codes:
2710-11, 2720-21, 2730-31, 2840-2849, 3660-69, 4800-99, 7810, 7812, and 7820.8
    As discussed above, Cloud industries are industries that became more capitally efficient
as a result of the introduction of cloud computing. To create the Cloud Industry variable,
we follow a similar procedure to Ewens et al. (2018) by searching for keywords, such as
software, service, and web, in the companies' business descriptions for all firms in both the
VentureXpert dataset and the full SDC IPO dataset. Each set of keywords is associated with
one of the twenty-seven industry classifications as described in Table A1 in Ewens et al. (2018)
based on the Venture Source database classification.9 Cloud industries include Business
   6
      See https://site.warrington.ufl.edu/ritter/ipo-data/. We thank Professor Ritter for making
the data available on his website.
    7
      We thank Professor Michelle Lowry for making the online data appendix available on her website. See
https://sites.google.com/site/michelleblowry/ipo-review-chapter.
    8
      Note that our definition of media companies is slightly broader than that used in Gompers et al. (2009),
which does not include 2840-49, 4800-99, or 3660-69. Our definition includes "communications" companies,
which allow businesses and individuals to communicate via audio, radio, video, and other methods. We
use this definition because it includes the companies which are subject to the cross-ownership regulations
of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and at least historically some firms adopted dual-class
structures to comply with these regulations.
    9
      We thank Professor Ewens for his help with the description of treated industry segments in Venture
Source and for sharing relevant data on the methodology for creating a mapping from Venture Source to


                                                     14
support services, Consumer information services, Financial institutions and services, Media
and content, Medical software and information services, Retailers, Software, and Travel and
leisure. We then create a mapping from two-digit SIC codes to the twenty-seven industries,
based on the largest number of keywords in the business description of each firm that belongs
to each two-digit SIC industry. This allows us to classify each two-digit SIC code as either
a "Cloud" industry or a "Non-Cloud" industry.10


B.    Dual-class IPOs
    To code the data on dual-class structure, we merge the IPO sample with data on dual-
class stock from several existing sources: (1) data on dual-class listings from 1994-2002 from
Gompers et al. (2009);11 (2) data on dual-class IPOs available on Jay Ritter's website; and
(3) data collected by the Council of Institutional Investors.12 We extend this data on dual-
class firms by using the DirectEdgar software and CapitalIQ to identify candidate firms that
may have adopted dual-class stock structures.13 We manually review the registration state-
ments and the first proxy statements after the IPO of the candidate firms. We remove from
the sample dual-class IPOs where the dual-class structure is adopted for tax and regulatory
reasons. Tax-driven IPOs include "Up-C" IPOs, which simply exist to allow pre-IPO own-
ers to claim passthrough tax treatment which lowers their tax liability. Regulation-driven
dual-class firms include media companies, where the dual-class structure was formed to com-
ply with the regulation by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) that limits the
percentage of voting stock individuals can own across media companies. The final sample
includes 5,760 IPOs of which 614 are dual-class firms, comprising 10.66 percent of the total
sample.
    Figure 1 presents a summary of IPO trends, broken down by type. We use three-year
rolling percentages. As can be seen in the figure, there has been a steady increase in the
proportion of IPO firms that are dual-class since 2008, and a particularly steep uptick be-
ginning in 2016. The percentage of VC-backed IPOs and IPOs in the Cloud industries is
other industry classifications.
  10
     The following two-digit SIC codes are classified as treated: 23, 27, 31, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60,
61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 67, 70, 73, 78, 79, 82, 87, and 93.
  11
     See https://faculty.som.yale.edu/andrewmetrick/data/. We thank Professor Andrew Metrick for
making this data available on his website.
  12
     See https://www.cii.org/dualclass_stock
  13
     We use various key word expressions to identify candidate firms, such as "class B" and "voting rights"
and ("five votes" or "ten votes" or "fifteen votes" or "twenty votes" or "twenty five votes" or "thirty votes"
or "5 votes" or "10 votes" or "15 votes" or "20 votes" or "25 votes" or "30 votes").



                                                       15
relatively stable (with the exception of the dot-com bubble period). There has been a large
increase in the percentage of foreign-based IPOs since 2003, and a gradual decrease in the
percentage of media companies.
    Figure 2 further splits IPOs into Cloud and non-Cloud industries. As shown in Panel
A, most of the historical increase in dual-class firms stems from Cloud industries, where the
percentage of dual-class IPOs in 2017-2019 exceeds 50 percent. We observe even stronger
trends when limiting the sample to VC-backed IPOs (Panel B) and foreign firms (Panel C),
with dual-class firms exceeding a staggering 50 and 60 percent of IPOs respectively.


C.    A Taxonomy of Dual-class Firms by Controllers
    To identify controllers in our sample firms, we collect detailed data from firm proxy state-
ments. A major contribution of our study is to show that not all dual-class stock structures
are the same. Whereas previous research treats dual-class IPOs as a binary classification
(i.e., an IPO firm either has or does not have a dual-class structure), we demonstrate the
existence of a wide range of dual-class structures­some entrenching founders, others giving
a holding company or private equity firm control, and so on.
    We classify control over dual-class stock firms based on where voting power and opera-
tional control of the company are situated. For example, if one shareholder has more than
double the voting power of any other, and is also the chairperson of the board, he or she
is clearly the controller. One common class of controller is the firm founder. Most firms
identify their founders by name in their registration or proxy statements. We double-check
the histories of each IPO firm using Factiva and internet research to make sure we do not
miss any founder who is not identified as such in the SEC filings. Founders, however, are not
the only class of controllers, nor are they the majority class: in fact, a majority of dual-class
firms are controlled by non-founder agents.
    First, dual-class stock firms may be controlled by parent or holding corporations. For
example, when the fast food chain Chipotle went public in 2006, it was not controlled by
Steve Ells, its founder, but by a subsidiary of McDonald's. McDonald's owned most of the
supervoting shares and had control of 87 percent of the voting rights, with a 22 percent
wedge. McDonald's had financially supported Chipotle, leasing out office and restaurant
space as well as providing insurance, software and tax assistance.14 Second, investors in the
firm often serve as controllers, and often, a VC firm or a private equity ("PE") firm may
 14
   See                  https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1058090/000104746906005769/
a2169737zdef14a.htm


                                               16
control the firm in the IPO, possibly due to a desire to influence the business in the first
years in which the firm is public.15 To make sure we are not identifying a VC investor as PE
(or vice versa), we scan the regulatory filings, VentureXpert, SDC, and the news media to
determine the role played by the investor. In some cases, control may also be shared between
the founder and a VC firm.16 Control may also be maintained by directors and officers who
are not the founders. For example, Skysat Communications Network, which went public
in 1994, was controlled by directors and officers who were not founders of the company.17
Other categories include family control, control by investors which are not VC or PE firms,
and in a few cases, there is no clear controller.18
    A primary measure of interest for a dual-class firm is the "wedge" between voting and
economic rights for key economic actors within the firm. While prior literature computes
the wedge solely for directors and officers, regardless of the actual structure in place, we
compute this wedge separately for founders, VC firms, PE firms, non-founder directors and
officers, and public investors. Note that the wedge for any of these agents can be positive
even if they are not the controllers. For example, the founder may have a positive wedge
even if a VC controls the firm.19
    By calculating different wedges for different agents, we allow for a more accurate mea-
sure of the motivations for different types of dual-class firms than prior literature, which
follows Gompers et al. (2009), and focused exclusively on the wedge for directors and offi-
cers. Measuring the wedge solely for directors and officers has a number of drawbacks. First,
it camouflages the extent to which founders (rather than other insiders) control the organi-
zation. For example, in some firms, such as Dropbox, some founders were also directors and
officers at the IPO, but the wedge of the other directors was actually negative.20 Moreover,
  15
      These firms will typically sell their shares after a few years, and the firm then converts into a single-class
firm. We do not discuss conversions in this article.
   16
      This situation arises when the founder and VC have approximately equal voting rights and operational
control, and/or the VC is in charge at the time of the IPO but exits the company soon after, leaving the
founder in charge. For example, Edison Schools, a company that went public in 1999, was controlled by a
consortium of VC firms. However, by 2002, they had exited the company, and the founder was in charge.
We code such companies as controlled by "Founders and VC."
   17
      Skysat's directors and officers owned a majority of the supervoting Class B shares, and had 42 percent
of the total voting power in the company, with a 22 percent wedge.
   18
      For example, Waddell & Reed Financial Inc. had widely dispersed ownership with no clear controller.
In fact, the largest holder of the supervoting Class B shares was an institutional investor (T. Rowe Price).
See https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1052100/0001047469-99-010633.txt
   19
      For example, Datadog, which went public in 2019, was controlled by the VC firms Index Ven-
tures and ICONIQ Strategic Partners. However, the two founders, Olivier Pomel and Alexis Le-Quoc,
had a large positive wedge of 15 percent. See https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1561550/
000119312520119035/d914423ddef14a.htm
   20
      The founders, Andrew Houston and Arash Ferdowsi, had a 24.5 percent wedge, while the non-founder

                                                        17
as stated above, some firms, such as Skysat, may actually be controlled by directors who are
not the founders. The determinants of the wedge of founders and other insiders likely differ
because the founders are those who typically place a high value on their vision for the firm.
Second, this measure can be entirely misleading when the controllers are not directors or
officers, and dual-class structures exist for reasons other than to entrench management. As
an example, consider the case of Weider Nutrition International, which went public in 1997.
The parent company, Weider Health and Fitness, owned all the supervoting Class B stock,
which gave it ten votes per share. Accordingly, the holding company was the controller,
wielding more than 98 percent of the aggregate voting power. The controller wedge for the
holding company was 31 percent. If we had defined the wedge only for the directors and
officers, however (in accordance with prior literature), we would have computed a negative
wedge of -3.4 percent, since the directors do not hold any Class B stock.
    Importantly, we also compute the wedge for public shareholders. Note that this wedge is
typically negative, because public shareholders' voting rights are typically lower than their
economic rights.21 We define "public" investors as those without prior contractual or business
relations with the company. Accordingly, institutional and retail investors are classified as
public investors, whereas a party that had a business relationship or personnel interlock with
the company is not.22 This public shareholder wedge ("public wedge") is a direct measure
of the firm's agency costs, as it captures the extent to which public shareholders relinquish
voting power to other agents.
    Figure 3 shows the variety in dual-class structures by type of controller. The largest
group is founder-controlled dual-class firms (including those where control is shared with a
VC firm) that constitute 4.9 percent of all IPOs (including single-class firms). The second
largest group is dual-class firms controlled by a parent or holding company, with 2.3 percent
of all IPOs. All the other dual-class companies controlled by a private equity firm, directors
and officers (who are not the founders), or a family, constitute 1 percent or less of total
IPOs. In Panels B through E, we split the sample into different types of IPOs. While the
percentage of founder-controlled dual-class firms is similar in VC-backed and non-VC-backed
directors and officers had a small negative wedge. See https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/
1467623/000114036119006800/nc10000579x1_def14a.htm
   21
      However, this is not always the case. For example, Validus Holdings went public in 2009 with the
controllers, a PE consortium, holding all the nonvoting Class B shares. The public only owned Class A
shares, which had one vote per share, so their wedge was positive. See https://www.sec.gov/Archives/
edgar/data/1348259/000095012309009473/x76143dmdefm14a.htm
   22
      For example, we exclude Urknall Inc. from the definition of "public" for the Canaan, Inc. IPO, because
it is controlled by Xiangfu Liu, a cofounder of Canaan who subsequently left the company. See https://
www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1780652/000156459020016788/can-20f_20191231.htm (p. 85-86).


                                                    18
IPOs, the percentage of company-controlled dual-class IPOs is much smaller for VC-backed
IPO firms. The percentage of founder-controlled dual-class firms is higher among foreign-
based firms (14.8 percent) as compared to US-based firms (3.6 percent), and among firms in
Cloud industries (6.9 percent) as compared to firms in other industries (3.0 percent). There
is a higher percentage of dual-class firms, both founder and company controlled, in the media
industry. However, as noted above, media IPOs have largely disappeared in recent years.


D.      Sunsets
    For each dual-class IPO firm, we further examine SEC filings to identify "sunsets," i.e.
clauses in the firm's organizational documents that cause the firm's stock to convert into one
class, without any differential voting rights, at a prespecified time or event. There are four
types of sunset provisions in the sample: time sunsets, ownership sunsets, transfer sunsets,
and sunsets triggered by other events. Each firm may have one or more than one type of
sunset provision.
    Time sunsets cause the elimination of dual-class at a pre-specified point in time. For
example, when Groupon went public in 2011, its prospectus specified that "no shares of
common stock will be issued or outstanding until five years after the completion of this
offering, at which time all outstanding shares of Class A common stock and Class B common
stock will automatically convert into shares of common stock."23
    Ownership sunsets cause supervoting shares to convert into shares with just one vote when
the controller owns less than a prespecified percentage of the company's total outstanding
shares, or if the number of supervoting shares falls below a prespecified percentage of the
total number of outstanding shares. For example, in the 2004 IPO of Texas Roadhouse, all
the shares convert into single-class with one vote per share if the shares owned by the founder
represent less than 20.0 percent of the total number of both the superior voting shares and
the other common shares.24 The rationale is that the controller loses her superior voting
rights if her economic interest is too low.
    Transfer sunsets cause any supervoting shares that are sold to entities other than a list
of transferees explicitly listed in the registration statement (typically other founders and
controllers) to convert into non-supervoting shares. In Google's 2005 IPO, its registration
statement provided that any supervoting Class B shares would convert into Class A shares
upon sale, except for transfers between Larry Page and Sergey Brin (the company's co-
 23
      See urlhttps://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1490281/000104746911008854/a2205238zs-1a.htm
 24
      See urlhttps://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1289460/000104746904030247/a2137984zs-1a.htm


                                                 19
founders), or transfers made for estate planning and tax purposes.25
   Finally, we coded "other" event sunsets. These typically mandate the conversion of
supervoting shares upon a founder's death or disability. Workday's 2013 IPO provided for
the conversion of supervoting shares nine months after the last of the cofounders had died.26
We created separate indicator variables for each of these subcategories of event sunsets.


E.      VC Funding Measures
    We source data on VC investments at the year-industry level from VentureXpert. To
capture of the volume of VC funding in the industry, which serves as our proxy for the
relative balance of investor versus founder bargaining power, we construct two measures,
each measured at the year level. First, V C Ind. F inancing denotes the total amount of VC
investment (in $ billions) in companies that belong to each industry based on two-digit SIC
codes. In calculating the amounts of VC investments we include only investments classi-
fied as "later stage," "expansion," or "buyout/acquisition" in VentureXpert. The reason is
that early-stage investment or seed capital are unlikely to improve the bargaining power of
founders at the pre-IPO stage.
    Second, Dry P owder denotes the total dollar amount (in billions) of capital available for
investment by VC funds that invest primarily in each industry. Because VentureXpert does
not include the amount of money invested by each fund in each company financing round,
We follow Hochberg et al. (2015) and Barrot (2016), and compute an imputed amount by
weighting the total VC round amount by the average amount each VC fund invests in each
round. The amount of available capital is the amount of capital raised by each VC fund minus
the total amount of capital it invested after the fund was created (in $ billions). We allocate
VC funds to industries (based on two-digit SIC codes) based on the industries in which they
made the largest number of investments in a given year. We then sum across industry-funds
to compute the total amount of dry powder for each year-industry. To account for outliers,
we winsorize all three measures at the 1% level.
    Figure 4 presents the trends in total VC investments (Panel A). VC financing has in-
creased considerably from 2006, primarily in companies in Cloud industries. We observe
similar trends in total VC late-stage investments (Panel B), and dry powder (Panel C).
 25
      See urlhttps://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1288776/000119312504142742/ds1a.htm
 26
      See urlhttps://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1327811/000119312512420693/d385110ds1a.htm




                                                 20
F.     Firm Characteristics, Financials and Intellectual Property
    We construct a number of additional variables to capture an IPO firm's characteristics
and financials. Age is the difference between the year of the IPO and the year the company
was founded. Eponymous is an indicator equal to one if a firm's name at the IPO includes
a person's name. The rationale is that if the company bears a founder's name, such naming
might reveal a personal stake in the business and thus the desire to maintain control. For
observations from 1994-2002, we use the variable from Gompers et al. (2009),27 and for the
rest of the sample, we manually review firm names. IP O P roceeds is the proceeds in $
millions raised in the IPO. Assets is the book value of assets in $ millions. Leverage is
long-term debt divided by book value of assets. Cash is the ratio of cash and short-term
investments to total book assets. ROA is return on assets calculated as operating income
after depreciation divided by book assets in the previous year. R&D is the ratio of research
and development expenditures over total book assets (normalized to zero if missing), and
M issing R&D is an indicator equal to one if R&D is missing. Of course, R&D may be
a poor measure of firms' innovation. Accordingly, we construct an additional measure,
P atents, which is the real value of the patents in $ millions filed by an IPO firm in the
five-year period prior to the IPO using the data in Kogan et al. (2017).28
    Table I presents the summary statistics. In columns 1-4, we show the data for single-class
firms; in columns 5-9, the data on founder-controlled dual-class firms (including those where
control is shared with a VC firm); and in column 10-14, the data for other dual-class firms.
As shown in Panel A, the age of founder-controlled dual-class firms at IPO is lower than for
single-class firms, but other dual-class firms are much older. The proceeds of all types of dual-
class firms are larger, but those not controlled by a founder have substantially more assets.
All types of dual-class firms have higher return on assets (ROA). Interestingly, the value of
patents for founder-controlled firms is substantially larger than the value for other types of
firms (although the number of patents produced by both groups is similar). Arguably, the
value of the patents captures the innovative nature of founder-controlled firms. However,
dual-class firms spend less on R&D as compared to other firms. Finally, founder-controlled
firms have higher Tobin's Q and price-to-book ratio at the IPO, but other dual-class firms
have a lower Tobin's Q and statistically indistinguishable price-to-book ratio, suggesting that
the market assigns a higher value to dual-class firms that are founder-driven.
  27
    We thank Professor Andrew Metrick for sharing these data with us.
  28
    We use five years as the cutoff because this is the average time before a patent application is approved
or dismissed.



                                                    21
    In Panel B, we look at IPO type. Founder-controlled firms are just as likely to be backed
by VCs as single-class firms, but other kinds of dual-class firms are less likely to be VC-
backed, in large part because when the controller is a corporation or a PE firm, VCs are not
needed for the firm to raise capital. Founder-controlled firms, and to a lesser extent other
dual-class firms, are especially prevalent among foreign-based firms and in Cloud industries.
Finally, a large percentage of dual-class IPOs where the controller is not a founder involve a
spin-off (36 percent). These typically involve a corporation that lists a subsidiary on a stock
exchange, and may wish to maintain control after the IPO.
    Panel C presents the main dependent variables we will employ in our analysis. The
average public wedge in the sample is -17.2 percent, but is larger in founder-controlled firms
(-22.7 percent) as compared to other dual-class firms (-12.7 percent). As expected, the
founder wedge is high for founder-controlled IPOs (25.5 percent), and so is the wedge of
directors and officers, since the founders tend to serve as directors or officers. Similarly, the
wedge for corporations is much higher in non-founder-controlled IPOs (7.9 percent), which
are mostly controlled by parent or holding corporations, and other wedges are all smaller.
    In Panel D, we show data on sunsets. Time sunsets are relatively rare and are adopted in
only about 8 percent of dual-class firms. Ownership sunsets are adopted in about 25 percent
of dual-class firms. Transfer sunsets are more frequent, particularly in founder-controlled
firms.
    Finally, in Panel E, we show the descriptive statistics for the proxies for founders' bargain-
ing position (VC Ind. Financing and Ind. Dry Powder). These measures are all substantially
larger for founder-controlled firms than for the single-class firms and other dual-class firms.
This is consistent with the notion that market conditions that give founders the leverage to
negotiate for control relate, at least in part, to IPO governance and structure.


      IV.       The Determinants of Dual-Class Structure
    We now turn to examine the determinants of different types of dual-class structures. We
start with an analysis of the factors that predict a dual-class structure and the different types
of controllers that use dual-class structures. We estimate a regression model of the form:

            Controlleri,t = V CIj,t-1 + V C - Backedi + Xi,t-1 + j + µt + i                   (4)

where Controlleri,t is an indicator variable that equals one if firm i has adopted a particular
type of dual-class structure at the IPO in year t. We first examine specifications where

                                               22
the dependent variable is Dual - Class, which is an indicator variable that equals one if a
firm has a dual-class structure at the IPO. We are particularly interested in specific types
of dual-class controllers: F ounder Control, which is an indicator variable that equals one if
the controller is the founder; N F Dual, which equals one for dual-class firms not controlled
by the founder; N F D&O Control, which is an indicator variable for control by directors
and officers who are not founders; and Co. Control, which is control by a holding or parent
company.
    The key variable of interest for exploring the role of founder bargaining power in deter-
mining dual-class structures at the IPO is V CIj,t , which is one of the two measures of VC
financing for industry j in year t: (a) V C Ind. F inancing , which is the dollar amount of
venture capital financing (in billions) provided to companies (excluding early-stage invest-
ments) in the industry j to which firm i belongs in year t - 1, i.e., the year before the IPO;
and (b) Ind. Dry P owder, which is the total dollar amount (in billions) of capital available
for investment by funds that invest primarily in industry j in year t - 1.
    Another variable of interest is V C - Backedi , which is an indicator variable that equals
one if the firm received funding from a VC firm prior to the IPO. Prior literature argues
that VC firms have incentives to design optimal governance systems for their portfolio firms
when those firms go public in order to preserve the value of their investments (Baker and
Gompers, 2003; Hochberg, 2012). We thus might expect VC-backed firms to be less likely
to adopt dual-class structures at the time of IPO.
    Xi refers to a set of firm-level controls, which include Spin - of f , an indicator variable
equal to one if the IPO involves an offering of a subsidiary corporation. Although our main
variable of interest is at the industry-year level, we include industry fixed effects based on
two-digit SIC codes, j . This ensures that the identification of the main coefficient of interest,
 , comes from changes in VC financing or dry powder at the industry level over time, and
not from general industry characteristics. We also include µt , which are year fixed effects to
account for annual trends. Finally, the i is a firm-specific error term.
    The results from the regression model in Equation (4) are in Table II. In columns 1-5,
the proxy for the bargaining power of founders is V C Ind. F inancing . The greater the bar-
gaining power of the founder, the more likely an IPO firm is to be dual-class. As expected,
we obtain a similar result when the dependent variable is founder control, F ounder Control.
On the other hand, the coefficient on V C Ind. F inancing is not significant when the de-
pendent variable is N F Dual (column 3), N F D&O Control (column 4), or Co. Control
(column 5). The estimates are economically significant: a one standard deviation increase


                                               23
in V C Ind. F inancing (equivalent to $5.62 billion) is associated with about 3.1 percentage
points higher probability of founder control, relative to the unconditional mean of 4.9 per-
cent of the firms in the sample that are founder-controlled. We obtain similar findings in
columns 6-10, where we use Dry P owder as a proxy for founders' bargaining power. A one
standard deviation increase in Ind. Dry P owder (equivalent to $30.34 billion) is associated
with about 2.9 percentage points greater probability of founder control. The estimates in
both specifications are consistent with the hypothesis that the availability of VC financing
increases the bargaining power of founders, rather than that of other potential controllers.
    Other differences between founder control and control by other agents, such as non-
founder directors or holding companies, also emerge from the analysis. The coefficient on
V C - Backed is not statistically significant when we examine the probability of dual-class
structure or founder control, belying the notion that VCs may prevent dual-class structures
at the time of IPO. Note, however, that the coefficient on V C - Backed is negative when ex-
amining dual-class firms where the controller is not the founder, and this association appears
to be driven by the inclusion of dual-class firms controlled by a parent or holding company in
our sample. This may be because VCs are unlikely to invest in firms which are controlled by
a large corporation, rather than because VCs dislike entrenchment via dual-class structures.
As expected, we find that dual-class firms controlled by a corporations are more likely to
involve a spin-off, whereas spin-offs are negatively associated with founder control. Dual-
class structure may be used by corporations to maintain control over subsidiaries after the
issuance of stocks to the public, likely for strategic reasons.
    The estimates from the models also suggest that the value of patents is higher in founder-
controlled firms as compared to single-class firms and other dual-class firms. This hints at the
possibility that part of the motivation for founder control is to pursue a particular founder-
specific vision which is grounded in innovative technology. In contrast, the coefficient on
P ositive R&D is negative, suggesting that the innovativeness of these firms may not be
reflected in investment on research and development at the time of the IPO. Moreover, as
expected, founder-controlled firms tend to belong to Cloud industries, are more likely to be
foreign firms, and tend to be younger firms.
    Next, we evaluate whether the size of the wedge between economic and voting rights is
related to the founders' bargaining power at the time of IPO. We estimate similar models to
those in Table II, substituting the size of the wedge as the dependent variable:

             W edgei,t = V CIj,t-1 + V C - Backedi + Xi,t-1 + j + µt + i ,                  (5)


                                              24
where W edgei,t is the size of the wedge at the IPO in year t. We examine the following
wedges: the wedge of the public shareholders (P ublic W edge), the wedge of the founders
(F ounder W edge), the wedge of directors and officers (D&O W edge), the wedge for directors
and officers who are not founders (N F D&O W edge), and finally the wedge of parent or
holding companies (Co. W edge).
    The results are presented in Table III. As shown in columns (1) and (6), public sharehold-
ers have a lower wedge when founders have greater bargaining power. On the other hand,
as expected, the F ounder W edge increases when VC industry financing is more available: a
one standard deviation increase in V C Ind. F inancing is associated with a 1.12 percentage
point lower public wedge for each IPO and a 1.37 percent higher founder wedge. Likewise,
a one standard deviation increase in Dry P owder is associated with a 1.00 percentage point
lower public wedge for each IPO and a 0.80 percentage point higher founder wedge. This
is an economically meaningful result given that only about 10 percent of IPO firms in the
sample have dual-class structures.
    Interestingly, as shown in column (3), the magnitude of the association with the D&O
W edge is slightly higher, suggesting that insiders other than founders may also have greater
bargaining power when VC financing is more available (recall that the D&O W edge mea-
sures the wedge for all directors and officers, which would typically include any founder).
Consistent with this, in column (4) we find that N F D&O W edge is likewise associated with
V C Ind. F inancing (and the magnitude of about 0.05 reflects roughly the difference between
the coefficients in columns 2 and 3). However, in light of the findings in Table II where VC
financing does not predict directors' and officers' control, this association likely reflects the
higher wedge of some insiders that are affiliated with the founders in firms controlled by the
founders.
    Unsurprisingly, we find no evidence of a statistically significant relationship between
Co.W edge and V C Ind.F inancing ; presumably, there is no negotiation for financing between
VC firms and parent or holding companies. On the other hand, these firms are nonetheless
dual-class firms where public shareholders may have inferior voting rights. These results are
qualitatively the same when we use Ind. Dry P owder as a proxy for VCs' bargaining power.
    The coefficients on other variables are generally in line with the findings in Table II.
Importantly, V C - Backed is not significantly associated with F ounder W edge and is neg-
atively related to Co. W edge; Spin - of f is positively associated with Co. W edge and
is negatively associated with F ounder W edge; and the value of patents is positively re-
lated to F ounder W edge. Note that the value of patents is also positively associated with


                                               25
D&O W edge but not with N F D&O W edge, which means that the positive association is
driven by the wedge of founders, not that of other directors and officers.
    The results are qualitatively the same when employing univariate specifications that only
include the measure of VC bargaining power as shown in Table A.1 and Table A.2.
    A potential concern with our analysis is that VC funding or available capital at the
industry level does not only capture the bargaining power of VC firms vis-`        a-vis founders.
Rather, it could proxy for industry conditions in which there is a high or low demand for
certain stocks. In these circumstances, the demand for stocks offered at the IPO may be so
high that insiders can sell to outsiders stocks with restricted voting rights at relatively high
prices. To address this concern, we run the same regressions, but add three proxies for "hot
public markets." These measures are: (1) Ind. Returns: the 12-month industry portfolio
returns in the month prior to the IPO and winsorized at the 1% level; (2) Ind. U nder -
pricing : The average under-pricing of all IPOs that belong to each industry in year t - 1.
This is essentially the average first-day returns on all industry IPOs in the year prior to the
IPO; (3) Ind. Avg. P roceeds: The average proceeds of all IPOs in each industry in year
t - 1. All variables are based on the Fama-French 48 Industry classification. We also add
controls for V C F inancing or Dry P owder, which are the total amount of VC financing or
dry powder in year t - 1.
    Moreover, it is possible that dual-class structures are adopted more frequently in response
to industry merger waves. As is well-known, dual-class structures serve as an anti-takeover
device because they make it virtually impossible for outsiders to acquire control. To address
this possibility, we add two more variables: (1) Ind. M &A N um., which is the natural log
of the number of merger transactions completed in the industry in year t - 1; and (2) Ind.
M &A V alue, which is the natural log of the number of merger transactions completed in
the industry in year t - 1. Both measures are based on two-digit SIC codes.
    The results are presented in Table IV. We observe little statistically significant correlation
between the public market measures and our measures of dual-class structures, regardless of
the specification. Industry returns and total dry powder are significantly related to measures
of founder control, but not to dual-class structure or to the public wedge, which arguably
best captures the agency cost for the public shareholder. More strikingly, industry under-
pricing is negatively associated with dual-class and founder control and founder wedge, and
positively related to public wedge. This corroborates the notion that controllers may tend
to do IPOs with dual-class structures when market conditions enable issuers to price their
stocks at higher valuations. Interestingly, we also find no evidence that dual-class structures


                                               26
are adopted as a response to industry merger waves. This result contrasts with earlier studies
that find that dual-class structures are adopted as a response to takeover activity (Daines
and Klausner, 2001).
    Importantly, even when adding these additional controls, the coefficients on V C Ind.
F inancing and Ind. Dry P owder are largely the same as those reported in Table II and
Table III. These results are consistent with the notion that dual-class structures are not
simply the result of high demand for IPO stocks. Rather, they appear to be directly related
to the availability of private capital at the firm and industry level, and the relative bargaining
power of founders and VC investors. This is consistent with both our conceptual model,
which suggests that valuations by VC firms push IPO valuations upwards, and the idea that
a dual-class structure is a substitute for private ownership (Lehn et al., 1990).


A.    Different Types of IPOs
   Our analysis up to now has included the full sample of IPO firms. Next, we explore
whether our findings are driven by a particular subsample of the data, such as VC-backed
IPOs and Cloud industries, that are known to produce many founder-driven businesses.
We re-run our main specifications on different subsamples: VC-backed IPO versus IPOs
not backed by VCs, firms in Cloud industries versus firms in other industries, and US firms
versus foreign-based firms. Table V presents the estimates from our models. Panel A includes
regressions where the dependent variable is either Dual - Class or F ounder - Control, and
Panel B reports results from specifications where the dependent variable is the P ublicW edge
or F ounder W edge. Each panel also shows results from regressions where we use either
V C Ind. F inancing or Ind. Dry P owder as a proxy for VC bargaining power.
   As can be seen from the table, the relationships observed in Table II hold more generally
across multiple subsamples. In particular, even in dual-class IPOs that are not backed by
VCs, and in IPOs that are not in Cloud industries, we observe that in most specifications,
greater industry VC capital is associated with a higher likelihood of dual-class and founder
control, a more negative public wedge, and a higher founder wedge. The results also hold
when we restrict the sample of firms to a smaller sample of 625 foreign firms, particularly
when the dependent variable is Ind. Dry P owder. Overall, the analysis suggests that the
patterns uncovered in the full sample do not appear to be driven solely by a particular
segment of IPO firms.




                                               27
B.   VC-backed IPOs
    To further explore the bargaining hypothesis, we focus on VC-backed IPOs. Bargain-
ing between founders and insiders and investors over structure at the IPO is likely to be
particularly acute in IPO firms with existing VC investors. Accordingly, we next conduct
more detailed analysis in the sample of VC-backed IPOs. The underlying assumption is that
governance is part of the terms of the investment, and may be determined by the bargaining
position of the VC firm and the entrepreneur.
    The focus on the sample of VC-backed IPO firms allows us to obtain additional proxies
for VCs' bargaining positions. We merge the sample of VC-backed IPOs with firm-level
data from VentureXpert. Because there is no common identifier for the IPO data and
VentureXpert, we do the matching based on firm names. This matching process results in a
sample of 1,802 VC-backed IPOs (out of 2,025 VC-backed IPOs in the full sample) for which
information on the VC firms that invested in the firm pre-IPO can be obtained.
    Using the data from VentureXpert, we construct a number of variables that may relate
to VC and founder bargaining power and therefore affect dual-class structures. V C Rounds
is the number of VC financing rounds a firm undergoes prior to the IPO. In each round of
financing, VC firms tend to negotiate for control through contractual rights and the appoint-
ment of board members (Kaplan and Stromberg, 2001, 2003; Ewens and Malenko, 2020).
V C F irms is the number of VC firms that provided financing to the firm. When the founder
negotiates with multiple VCs, she may be better able to maintain control over the firm as
compared to a situation when only one VC is ready to fund the firm. Moreover, coordination
problems between VC firms may also lead to better negotiation outcomes for the founder.
V C F irmAge is the maximum age at the time of the IPO of the VC firms that supported the
IPO. The assumption is that more mature VC firms have better reputations (Barrot, 2016),
and may as a result have more bargaining power vis-`    a-vis the founder. V C F irm Size is
the amount of funds in $ millions raised by the largest VC firm prior to the IPO. Typically,
funds that have raised large sums of money do so because they have better past performance
and better reputations, and thus may have greater ability to negotiate control terms.
    Table VI presents estimates of models similar to those in Equation (4) and Equation (5)
for the sample of VC-backed IPOs. As before, all measures of VC industry-wide invest-
ment are positively related to the probability of dual-class IPOs, founder-controlled IPOs,
a larger-magnitude (negative) public wedge and a higher founder wedge. A one standard
deviation increase in V C Ind. F inancing (equivalent to $6.29 billion) is associated with a
2.78 percentage point and 1.84 percentage point higher probability of dual-class structure


                                             28
and founder control. These figures are economically meaningful given that the percentage of
dual-class and founder-controlled firms in this sample are only 6.45 percent and 3.91 percent,
respectively.
    Additionally, we observe a significant relationship between the number of VC rounds
the firm has had pre-IPO and dual-class structure at the IPO. Having one additional round
of VC financing prior to the IPO is associated with a -0.8 percentage point probability of
founder control. Likewise, a one standard deviation increase in VC rounds (3.1) is associated
with a 0.56 percentage point higher public wedge and a lower founder wedge. The other VC-
related variables all have the expected signs, but they are not statistically significant in most
specifications. For example, higher VC firm age and larger VC firm size are (insignificantly)
negatively related to the probability of founder control.


C.   Bargaining Power Prior to the IPO
    Our study is focused on governance at the IPO stage. It is well-known that firms re-
evaluate their governance structures at the IPO. Thus, often, the dual-class structure is
determined at the IPO together with all other governance provisions, including the state of
incorporation, board structure, and anti-takeover devices. However, it is also possible that in
some cases, a dual-class structure is created earlier, either when the firm is founded or during
VC investment rounds when the founders negotiate control rights with the VC investors.
    We conduct numerous qualitative and quantitative analyses to explore this issue. First,
we conducted several interviews with partners at law firms that advise entrepreneurial star-
tups. Based on our conversations, it appears rare for dual-class structures to be created
before the IPO. Founders' bargaining power may affect VCs' board seats or their contrac-
tual rights, but does not typically result in a wedge between the shareholders' economic and
voting rights.
    Second, we obtain a sample of 56 certificates of incorporation of large VC-backed dual-
class firms before the IPO from the Private Capital Research Institute. The selection is
random except that it relates to large, high-profile startups that ultimately became public,
such as Dropbox, Facebook, Google, Lyft, and Zoom. This is a sample of firms where a dual-
class structure is more likely to be created before the IPO stage because many VC firms may
be looking to invest in these companies, creating competition that favors founder negotiating
power, and where the founders may wish to maintain their control. In a sample of 56 firms,
we find that the dual-class structure was created before the IPO negotiation period in only
13 firms (23.2 percent). On average, the dual-class structure was created 6.3 years prior

                                               29
to the IPO for these 13 firms. In one of these 13 firms, both classes of common stock were
entitled to one vote per share before the IPO, and therefore the wedge was zero. Importantly,
these 13 firms were established on average 15.5 years before their IPO, indicating that the
dual-class structure was adopted only in the last third of their lives as private firms. Next,
43 firms (76.8 percent) in our sample adopted dual-class form about nine months before
their IPO (i.e., 278.4 days), indicating that most of the sample firms choose dual-class stock
structure within the IPO negotiation period.
    Third, we merge our data to data on pre-IPO board structure from Ewens and Malenko
(2020), who document the extent to which founders or VC firms control the board in a
sample of startups that obtained financing through Regulation D. The merged data include
a sample of 233 VC-backed IPOs, 28 of which are dual-class firms. Out of the 28 dual-class
firms, 13 are controlled by the founders at the IPO, nine are controlled by VC firms, and six
are jointly controlled by founders and VC firms. Somewhat paradoxically, we find that VC
investors controlled the boards of 62 percent of the founder-controlled dual-class firms prior
to the IPO compared to 44 percent of VC-controlled dual-class firms, and 43 percent of the
VC-backed IPOs of firms with a single class of stocks. This suggests that founder control
through the dual-class structure is not likely to result from founders' power in rounds before
the IPO.
    Finally, in unreported tests, we examine whether bargaining power when the firm receives
its first VC financing round is likely to increase the probability of a dual-class structure. We
repeat the analysis presented in Table VI, but control for the amount of aggregate VC
financing invested in startups located in the state where each firm is headquartered in the
year the firm receives its first early-stage VC financing round (or alternatively, the year of
the first financing round). We focus on VC financing where the startup is located because
when the firm is still in relatively early stages, VC financing at the state level is likely to
affect entrepreneurs' bargaining power. We also repeat this analysis, using the value of
the assets of state and local pension funds weighted by the fraction of state officials on
their board of trustees as in Hochberg and Rauh (2013); Ewens and Farre-Mensa (2020);
Gonz´  alez-Uribe (2020) as an instrument for the VC financing at the state level. Across all
of these analyses, we find no evidence of a relationship between VC financing at the state
level and the probability of dual-class structure.
    Overall, the above analyses suggest that historical bargaining power in years before the
IPO does not appear to predict dual-class structures at the IPO stage in the same manner
that proxies for contemporaneous founder bargaining power do.


                                              30
D.   Instrumental Variable Analysis
    The controls for hot public markets discussed above suggest that the measures of ven-
ture capital financing are not merely a reflection of broader correlated economic conditions.
Nevertheless, we further address the concern that our proxies for founder bargaining power
that are based on high levels of available VC financing are driven by overall economic condi-
tions by employing an instrumental variable analysis. As an instrument for industry venture
capital financing, we construct a measure for supply-shifters in the amount of VC financing
at the industry level, using changes to VC investment at the regional level. The rationale
for the instrument is that historical shocks to the regional supply of VC investment could
increase investment flows to specific industries, but are unlikely to be correlated with firms'
governance structures at the IPO level. This instrument is in the spirit of shift-share IVs,
which have been used in many studies in various fields of economics.
    Our instrument (denoted IVj,t ) is based on local shifts in the amounts of VC financing
weighted by the share of a given industry in local activity. Accordingly,

                                              R
                                    IVj,t =         zj,r,t-5 gr,t                          (6)
                                              r=1


where zj,r,t-5 is the industry j share of VC financing provided to companies located in region
r in period t - 5, and gr,t is the change in VC financing in region r from period t - 5 to t.
For the purpose of computing gr,t , we measure VC financing in region r on a five-year rolling
basis. The classification into regions is based on the location of each firm that receives VC
financing in the VentureXpert database. We divide the US into nine regions based on the U.S.
Census region classification: New England, the Middle Atlantic, the South Atlantic, East
South Central, West South Central, East North Central, West North Central, the Mountain
region, and West Pacific. We measure financing at the regional level rather than state level
(a) to mitigate the potential concerns that the industry shifts are driven predominantly by
one state, primarily California, and (b) to account for shocks that affect neighboring states.
    The results are depicted in Table VII. Consistent with the main results, the coefficient on
V C Ind. F inancing is significantly positive in the full sample (columns 1-4). The F-statistic
is at least 78 in all specifications, and thus the instrument strongly predicts the endogenous
variable. We note that the magnitudes in the instrumental variable analysis are very similar
to the equivalent coefficients in Table II and Table III.
    To further address the concern that the results are driven by shocks to financing in


                                               31
entrepreneurial states, we run the same regressions, but omit all firms located in California,
Massachusetts, and New York. The results are in columns 5-8. Interestingly, the results for
founder control and wedge are even stronger than in the specifications that include all IPOs.
For example, a one standard deviation increase in V C Ind. F inancing is associated with
about 5.65 percent higher probability of founder control.


                            V.      Trends Over Time
A.    Descriptive Findings
    The above analysis shows that the increase in founders' bargaining power is associated
with an increase in the probability of dual-class structures, particularly for firms controlled
by founders. While this association persists in different subsamples, such as non-VC-backed
IPOs and non-Cloud industries, the large increase in dual-class firms in recent years may
nonetheless be driven primarily by specific types of IPOs. As discussed above, three possible
trends may be contributing to the rise of dual-class stocks. First, VC firms may have become
more tolerant of founders' control, in large part because founders have stronger bargaining
power and VC monitoring has been on the decline. Second, firms in Cloud industries now
require less capital due to the introduction of Amazon Cloud computing, and therefore the
bargaining power of VCs that seek to invest in these firms has eroded. Finally, there has
been a gradual increase in IPOs of foreign-based firms, and these firms tend to be founder-
controlled. Indeed, as shown in Figure 2, there has been an ongoing increase in the percentage
of dual-class firms among VC-backed IPOs and foreign firms, and these increases are mostly
due to firms that belong to Cloud industries.
    To further explore these trends, we document changes over time by the type of controller
in dual-class structures in some detail. In Figure 5 through Figure 8, we split the sample into
IPOs that occurred in 2005 or before and those that took place in 2006 to 2019. As can be
seen from Panel A of Figure 5, much of the increase in dual-class firms is due to three groups
of controllers: founders, VC firms, or founders and VC firms controlling the firm together.
The likelihood of founder control in IPO firms has approximately doubled, despite the fact
that VCs rarely held controlling stakes in IPO firms prior to 2006. We emphasize however
that in virtually all VC-controlled firms (whether or not the control is joint with the founder),
the founders' wedge is positive. Clearly, in some firms, VCs manage to maintain control and
to balance the founders' interest. Presumably, the VCs seek to continue to monitor the firm
and the founder after the IPO, but only until the VC unloads its stake within a year or so

                                               32
of the IPO, after which the founder alone controls the firm via dual-class structure.
    In Panel C, we observe that the increase in founder-controlled dual-class structures is
extreme and dramatic among foreign firms (from 3.39 percent to 22.36 percent of all foreign
IPOs). The increase in founder control among US firms is actually much smaller (from 3.26
percent to 4.34 percent of all US IPOs). Foreign and US IPOs also experienced an increase in
VC-controlled dual-class firms, though among foreign firms, control tends to be shared with
the founder. Foreign IPOs also experienced some increase in company-controlled dual-class
firms.
    Next, in Panel D, we show that in Cloud industries, there has been a dramatic increase in
founder-controlled IPOs (from 3.26 percent to 14.29 percent) as well as VC-controlled IPOs
(from 0.02 percent to 3.27 percent). Interestingly, in non-Cloud industries, founder control
actually decreased and VC control slightly increased.
    Finally, in Panel E, we show that the probability of dual-class structure, and founder
control in particular, has declined in media firms. This is partly because the number of
media IPOs in the latter period has been very small (see Figure 1). Additionally, we note
that there have been relatively small changes in other categories, such as control by parent
and holding companies, and they remain mostly stable in these various subsamples (the only
exception consists of foreign firms, where there has been some increase since 2006).
    Figure 6 further splits IPOs into multiple groups and periods. Panel A shows trends in
Cloud industries and Panel B shows trends for other firms. In Panel A1, we observe that the
trend upward in founder and VC control in VC-backed IPOs over time is more substantial
than that in the non-VC-backed group. In Panel B1 on the other hand, there is no similar
trend. Interestingly, in VC-backed firms in non-Cloud industries, the main increase is in VC-
controlled firms. In Panel A2, we see again the dramatic increase in founder control among
foreign firms (more than 30 percent of foreign IPOs in Cloud industries) as well as VC and
company control. There is a lower but sizable trend in founder and VC control among US
firms. As shown in Panel B2, there is an increase in founder control in foreign IPOs even
in non-Cloud industries, though much smaller than in Cloud industries. Interestingly, in
non-Cloud US firms, there is actually a decline in founder control and an increase in VC
control.
    Next, we evaluate trends in the size of the main types of wedges among dual-class firms
only. The results are presented graphically in Figure 7. In Panel A, we observe that there
has been an increase in the average founders' wedge, which seems to drive the increase in
the average wedge of directors and officers, since founders typically also serve on boards of


                                             33
directors. There is also an increase in the magnitude of the average public wedge (here for
ease of exposition we multiply our standard definition of wedge (voting rights minus economic
rights) by -1, since the public wedge is typically negative). We observe similar trends in most
groups, although the upward trend in founder wedge is particularly strong for VC-backed
IPOs, foreign firms and firms in Cloud industries. Among media firms, again, we observe a
decline in founders' wedge, confirming the notion that media firms are no longer a predictor
of dual-class firms as in older sample periods (Gompers et al., 2009).
    Finally, in Figure 8, we again split firms into Cloud and non-Cloud industries and into
subgroups. The trends in wedge size in Cloud industries are quite similar to those in non-
Cloud industries, though for some sub-groups, we observe slightly stronger trends toward
greater founder wedge (and therefore also the wedge of directors and officers). For example,
the average founder wedge in VC-backed or foreign Cloud firms increased to over 20 percent
in 2016-2019, whereas the average for the VC-backed or foreign non-Cloud firm is about 15
percent in the same period.


B.   Difference-in Differences Analysis
    We explore these patterns more formally using a difference-in-differences regression anal-
ysis surrounding the introduction of cloud computing. To the specifications outlined in
Equation (4) and Equation (5), we add P ost - 2005, a variable that equals one if the IPO's
year is 2006 or later, following the introduction of the cloud, and interaction terms between
P ost - 2005 and each of V C - backed, Cloud Ind. and F oreign. In additional specifications,
we create a triple-difference-in-differences design by interacting V C - backed with Cloud Ind
and P ost - 2005, and F oreign with Cloud Ind and P ost - 2005.
    The results are presented in Table VIII. As shown in column 1, VC-backed IPOs post-
2005 were 10 percent more likely to be dual-class than other IPOs. Interestingly, prior to
2006, VC-backed IPOs were about 4.19 percent less likely to have a dual-class structure.
Column (2) suggests that some of this post-2005 effect is due to Cloud industries, although
the triple interaction on V C - backed with Cloud Ind and P ost - 2005 is not statistically
significant. In column (3), we observe similar trends for founder control; that is, a negative
association with V C - backed before 2006, and a positive association post-2005. However,
as can be seen in column (4), this trend is mostly due to Cloud industries ­ VC-backed
IPO firms in a Cloud industry are almost 10 percentage points more likely to be controlled
by founders. We observe similar estimates when the dependent variable is public wedge
(columns (5)-(6)) or founder wedge (columns (7)-(8)), except that here the decline in public

                                              34
wedge for VC-backed IPOs in the Cloud industry post-2005 (column (6)), which amounts to
1.92 percent, is statistically significant. Likewise, the same coefficient for founder wedge is
1.65 percent. These results are consistent with the view that VC firms have become much
more amenable over the years to founders maintaining control of their portfolio companies,
particularly in the software and services industries.
    We observe similar trends with respect to foreign firms. The interactions with P ost - 2005
are all economically and statistically significant and point to the rise of dual-class structure
and founder control post-2005. Moreover, the triple interactions are also strong, and show
that the rise of dual-class structures among foreign firms is in large part due to firms in the
Cloud industries. Strikingly, foreign firms in Cloud industries are 17.8 percent more likely
to be controlled by founders post-2005 (column (4)).
    Likewise, as hypothesized, Cloud industries experienced an increase in dual-class struc-
tures and founder control post-2005. The triple-difference-in-differences analysis, however,
suggests that the rise in founder control post-2005 is driven by VC-backed IPOs and foreign
firms (columns (4) and (8)).
    Finally, we note that as expected, there has been a decrease in dual-class firms among
media firms post-2005.


C.   Discussion
    Overall, the estimates presented above are consistent with the hypothesis that the bar-
gaining power of VC firms vis-` a-vis founders and insiders has declined, particularly in Cloud
industries and foreign firms, and that, as a result, we observe more dual-class and founder-
controlled firms in recent years.
    Our findings may also be consistent with a different hypothesis. It is possible that
following the successful Google IPO in 2004, VC firms changed their attitudes toward dual-
class stocks and formed the view that they are not harmful to shareholder value. This is
consistent with recent findings that in the years after the IPO, dual-class firms outperform
non-dual-class firms (Cremers et al., 2018; Kim and Michaely, 2019). Because VC firms
typically sell or distribute their equity stakes after the lock-up period, the aversion toward
dual-class structure may have waned in recent years. We cannot entirely rule out this
hypothesis, but it is not mutually exclusive with the bargaining hypothesis that we advance
in this article. It may well be that both factors have contributed to the dramatic rise in
dual-class IPOs.
    However, we find further support for the bargaining power hypothesis by exploring

                                              35
whether the introduction of cloud computing led to a decrease in the ongoing costs of doing
business for more mature startups approaching the IPO stage. That is, we seek to examine
whether the costs of running a business have become lower not only for early-stage startups
(as shown by Ewens et al. (2018)), but also for firms at the IPO stage. Thus, we construct
two variables that capture the costs of doing business: Costs of Goods defined as the costs
of goods divided by sales in the fiscal year prior to the IPO, and General Expenses defined
as selling, general and administrative expenses divided by sales in the fiscal year prior to
the IPO.29 We then employ a difference-in-differences analysis to examine whether these
costs have decreased in our sample for treated firms after 2005 and the introduction of cloud
computing.
    The results in Table IX provide evidence that there has been a substantial decrease after
2005 in both cost measures. This decrease is economically meaningful: the mean of the
Costs of Goods variable is 0.61, while the marginal effect for treated firms post-2005 ranges
from -0.070 to -0.082. The mean General Expenses is 0.48, and the effect on treated firms
after 2005 is between -0.06 and -0.13. The estimates suggest that the ongoing capital needs
of treated firms have generally declined since the introduction of cloud computing, and that,
therefore, their success has likely become less dependent on obtaining funding from VC firms.
Overall, our results are consistent with the notion that the change in VCs' attitudes toward
dual-class structures may be at least partly the result of their weaker bargaining position
following technological changes that reduced entrepreneurs' costs of doing business.


                                  VI.        Sunset Provisions
    While an IPO firm may have a dual-class structure in place at the time it goes public,
such structures need not be permanent, and often have pre-determined end points, or "sunset
provisions." Sunsets specify circumstances under which the superior and inferior voting
shares convert into a common class of common stock, and the dual-class structure ceases to
exist. As discussed in Section III.D, we identify four type of sunset provisions: time sunsets,
ownership sunsets, transfer sunsets and other sunsets.
    There has been a vigorous policy debate over the need for sunsets to prevent insiders
in dual-class firms from controlling the companies in perpetuity. The debate has focused
mainly on time sunsets that terminate the dual-class structure after a specified period (e.g.,
ten years). On one hand, such sunsets address the concern that the vision and skills of con-
 29
      To mitigate the effect of outliers on our analysis, we omit firms with sales that are lower than $5 million.


                                                        36
trollers will dissipate over time (Bebchuk and Kastiel, 2017). On the other hand, it is likely
impossible to predict at the time of the IPO when founders' skill and motivation will decline.
Accordingly, some highlight the advantages of ownership sunsets that essentially convert the
firm into a single class firm when the controller' economic interest falls below a certain
threshold (Fisch and Solomon, 2019; Sharfman, 2019). The disadvantage of this approach,
however, is that it does not guarantee that the controllers' power will be terminated.
    In Figure 9 we show by controller the percentage of dual-class firms that adopt each
type of sunset provision. As shown in Panel A, time sunsets are relatively rare in founder-
controlled firms. Thus, it is possible that founders resist provisions that take away their
control after a few years. On the other hand, when control is shared with a VC firm, 40
percent of firms adopt such sunsets. Adoption rates are even higher when a VC firm has
exclusive control of the firm. This is consistent with the idea that adoption of time sunsets
is the product of negotiation between founders and VC firms, and demonstrates VCs' role
in monitoring insiders.
    As shown in Panel B, ownership sunsets are adopted more frequently across different types
of controllers. But we observe a similar pattern of adoption in founder or VC-controlled firms.
Adoption rates in founder-controlled firms are relatively low, but are higher when control is
shared with a VC firm, and even higher in firms controlled exclusively a VC firm.
    Transfer sunsets as shown in Panel C are frequent in founder-controlled firms with more
than 60 percent adopting them, likely because when founders transfer their interests, the
justification for a dual-class structure to preserve founder visions is weak. Interestingly, in
Panel D, we do not observe a high percentage of sunsets that terminate dual-class structures
in other events that include events such as the death or disability of the founders. But again,
the percentage of these sunsets is higher when a VC firm has control of the firm.
    In Figure 10, we explore trends over time by comparing dual-class firms exclusively
controlled by founders to all other dual-class firms. First, we observe that there is an overall
trend towards adopting all types of sunset provisions. The trend is similar in founder-
controlled firms and other firms, with one notable exception. The increase in the percentage
of time sunsets is much smaller in founder-controlled firms than in other firms. Thus, the
increase in founders' bargaining power may permit them to resist time sunsets, despite a
growing expectation that dual-class firms will adopt them.
    We hypothesize that when a founder's bargaining position is stronger, the firm is less likely
to adopt sunsets. As in Section V.B, we use a difference-in-differences analysis by exploiting
the introduction of cloud computing as a shock to founders' bargaining power. To make the


                                               37
interpretation of the coefficients easier, we interact F ounder - control with P ost - 2005 and
N on - Cloud, an indicator equal to one if the firm does not belong to a Cloud industry.
In this way, the coefficient of interest is the interaction between F ounder - control and
P ost - 2005.
    The results are presented in Table X. As shown in column 1, founder control is associated
with a 16.2 percent lower likelihood of time sunsets and a 17.6 lower likelihood of adopting
ownership sunsets. This suggests that founders' bargaining power permits them to avoid
sunsets that curb their control. Moreover, if the IPO is VC-backed it is 6.6 percent more
likely to have a time sunset, but not other sunsets. Overall, our findings regarding sunsets
further reinforce our hypothesis that the changing bargaining relationship between founders
and VCs affects the prevalence of dual-class structures.


                          VII.       Shareholder Value
    Our last set of analyses examine the association of different types of wedges to IPO
valuations. We use two principal measures. The first is Tobin's Q, defined as market value
of equity plus book value of assets minus book value of equity divided by book value of
assets. Book equity is defined as in (Fama and French, 1992), market value of equity is
defined as the fiscal year end close price times the number of shares outstanding as of the
first fiscal year following the IPO, and book assets is defined as the most recent book assets
following the IPO date. The second is the price-to-book ratio, defined as the ratio of the
market value of equity divided by book equity as of the first fiscal year end following the
IPO. We winsorize both measures at the 2.5 percent level.
    Table XI presents the results from regressions where Tobin's Q is the dependent variable.
In column (1), we estimate a model that relates the size of the founder's wedge to Tobin's
Q, including industry (two-digit SIC code) and year fixed effects. In column (2), we add
the squared founder's wedge to allow for a possible non-linear relationship with Tobin's Q.
In column (3), we substitute the fixed effects with industry-year fixed effects to account for
possible industry-year shocks (e.g., industry business cycle). In column (4), we add three
more wedges, (i) public wedge, (ii) directors and officers (D&O) wedge, and (iii) company
wedge. Finally, in column (5), we add firm-level control variables, including the logarithm of
the company age, the logarithm of the total assets, the logarithm of the economic value of the
patents filed for by the IPO firm before the IPO (in $ millions), firm's leverage, cash-to-total
assets ratio and two indicators for whether the firm has positive or missing R&D expenses.


                                              38
Table XII presents results from identical specifications, except that the dependent variable
is price-to-book ratio.
     Overall, the estimates indicate a robust positive relationship between the founder's wedge
and Tobin's Q. For example, based on the estimates in column (3), a one standard deviation
increase in the founder's wedge (7.09 percent) is associated with a 10.6 percent increase
in Tobin's Q. We emphasize however that the increase in Q is at a decreasing rate, as
the coefficient on the squared founder's wedge is negative. Based on column (3), if the
wedge exceeds 52.6 percent, the association between the founder's wedge and Tobin's Q is
negative. We find qualitatively similar results when the dependent variable is price-to-book
ratio (although the estimates are less statistically significant in column 5). Based on column
(3), a one standard deviation increase in the founder's wedge is associated with a 8.73 percent
higher price-to-book ratio.
     These estimates are consistent with the notion that the IPO value of founder-controlled
firms is higher than that of other firms. Public investors seem to place a high value on the
visions and commitment of founders to the firm. When founders have extreme control and
little economic interest, however, the market may be concerned that the founder has limited
incentives to exert efforts. Interestingly, we do not find any statistically significant associ-
ations with other wedges that are robust across specifications. In particular, the wedge of
public shareholders is not significantly correlated with shareholder value in any specification.
These results cast doubt on the notion that the market views dual-class firm structures on
average as imposing agency costs (Lund, 2019).


                                VIII.        Conclusion
    Although many studies have evaluated the consequences of dual-class structures for firm
performance, few studies have carefully examined the determinants of these structures and
the size of the wedge between insiders' voting power and cashflow rights. Understanding the
factors that predict dual-class structures is increasingly important in light of the dramatic rise
in dual-class IPOs and the general concerns that these structures present agency problems
for investors.
    Our paper is the first to explore the different types of dual-class firms in a large sample
of over 5,000 IPOs between 1994-2019. Founders control many of them, but others are
controlled by corporations, investment firms or families. We demonstrate that the rise of
dual-class structures is mainly due to founder-controlled firms in the software and services


                                               39
industries and foreign-based firms. We show that the main factor that predicts dual-class
structures and a greater wedge is the amount of available private financing for startups.
The more outside opportunities the founders have, the greater their bargaining power when
raising capital. Therefore, they are better able to retain control of the firm after the IPO. We
also document a decrease in VC firms' aversion to dual-class structures and attribute it­at
least in part­to the reduction in the costs of doing business due to technological advances in
the software and service industries. This finding is consistent with the idea that when there
is a lower need for financing, founders are less likely to relinquish their power to VC firms
(Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf, 2018; Ewens and Malenko, 2020).
    Our study has important implications for understanding the evolving nature of public
markets. The literature to date has shown that increases in private financing have led to a
decrease in the number of firms in public markets, and therefore more concentrated ownership
in the economy as a whole (Ewens and Farre-Mensa, 2020). We further show that greater
private financing may also cause public markets themselves to change by allowing founders
to retain greater power to pursue their visions, without keeping an economic stake in the
firm.
    Our findings provide critical input for evaluating policy proposals that affect the nature
of public and private markets. They suggest that policies to liberalize private markets by
loosening the restrictions on selling and trading in private securities (SEC, 2019) may not
only make public issuances less desirable, but may also increase the likelihood that the firms
that do ultimately go public will be controlled by their founders. While our analysis suggests
that public markets attach higher valuations to founder-controlled firms as compared to
other IPO firms, the broader ramifications of a growing number of controlled public firms in
a shrinking public market require further analysis.
    Finally, the realization that dual-class stock refers to an array of ownership arrangements,
ranging from control by a visionary founder to a holding company or a family, should lead to
a rethinking of corporate governance research on the effects of dual-class structures. As our
results on innovation and valuations demonstrate, the type of controller and wedge between
economic and voting rights may be associated with different outcomes.




                                              40
                                 REFERENCES
Adams, Ren´
          ee B., and Daniel Ferreira, 2009, Women in the boardroom and their impact on
 governance and performance, Journal of Financial Economics 94, 291­309.
Alden, William, 2014, Venture capitalists coddle entrepreneurs as royalty, The New York
  Times.
Alon-Beck, Anat, 2019, The new unicorn investors-disruptors or distractors?, Working paper
  .
Baker, Malcolm, and Paul A Gompers, 2003, The determinants of board structure at the
  initial public offering, Journal of Law and Economics 46, 569­598.
Balasubramanian, Natarajan, and Jagadeesh Sivadasan, 2011, What happens when firms
  patent? new evidence from u.s. economic census data, Review of Economics and Statistics
  93, 126­146.
Barrot, Jean-No¨el, 2016, Investor horizon and the life cycle of innovative firms: Evidence
  from venture capital, Management Science 63, 3021­3043.
Barry, Christopher B, Chris J Muscarella, John W Peavy III, and Michael R Vetsuypens,
  1990, The role of venture capital in the creation of public companies: Evidence from the
  going-public process, Journal of Financial Economics 27, 447­471.
Bebchuk, Lucian A, and Kobi Kastiel, 2017, The untenable case for perpetual dual-class
  stock, Virginia Law Review 103, 585.
Black, Bernard S, and Ronald J Gilson, 1998, Venture capital and the structure of capital
  markets: banks versus stock markets, Journal of Financial Economics 47, 243­277.
Bloomberg, 2019, China approves first dual-class ipo in bid to lure tech firms .
Broughman, Brian J, and Jesse M Fried, 2020, Do founders control start-up firms that go
  public?, Harvard Business Law Review 10, 49­86.
Catan, Emiliano M., 2019, The insignificance of clear-day poison pills, Journal of Legal
  Studies 48, 1­44.
Choi, Albert H., 2018, Concentrated ownership and long-term shareholder value, Harvard
 Business Law Review 8, 53­99.
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, Joseph Fan, and Larry Lang, 2002, Disentangling the
  incentive and entrenchment effects of large shareholdings, Journal of Finance 57, 2741­
  2771.
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Larry Lang, 2000, The separation of ownership and
  control in east asian corporations, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 81­112.

                                             41
Cornett, Marcia Millon, and Michael R Vetsuypens, 1989, Voting rights and shareholder
  wealth the issuance of limited voting common stock, Managerial and Decision Economics
  10, 175­188.

Cremers, K.J. Martijn, and Yaniv Grinstein, 2013, Does the market for ceo talent explain
  controversial ceo pay practices?, Review of Finance 18, 921­960.

Cremers, K.J. Martijn, Beni Lauterbach, and Anete Pajuste, 2018, The life-cycle of dual
  class firm valuation, European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI)-Finance Working
  Paper .

Cremers, K.J. Martijn, Lubomir P. Litov, and Simone M. Sepe, 2017, Staggered boards and
  long-term firm value, revisited, Journal of Financial Economics 126, 422­444.

Daines, Robert, and Michael Klausner, 2001, Do ipo charters maximize firm value? anti-
 takeover protection in ipos, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 17, 83­120.

de Fontenay, Elisabeth, 2017, The deregulation of private capital and the decline of the
  public company, Hastings Law Journal 68, 445.

DeAngelo, Harry, and Linda DeAngelo, 1985, Managerial ownership of voting rights: A study
  of public corporations with dual classes of common stock, Journal of Financial Economics
  14, 33­69.

Dimitrov, Valentin, and Prem C Jain, 2006, Recapitalization of one class of common stock
  into dual-class: Growth and long-run stock returns, Journal of Corporate Finance 12,
  342­366.

Doidge, Craig, Kathleen M Kahle, G Andrew Karolyi, and Ren´  e M Stulz, 2018, Eclipse of
 the public corporation or eclipse of the public markets?, Journal of Applied Corporate
 Finance 30, 8­16.

Ewens, Michael, and Joan Farre-Mensa, 2020, The deregulation of the private equity markets
 and the decline in IPOs, Review of Financial Studies 33, 5463­5509.

Ewens, Michael, and Nadya Malenko, 2020, Board dynamics over the startup lifecycle, Work-
 ing paper .

Ewens, Michael, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2018, Cost of experimentation
 and the evolution of venture capital, Journal of Financial Economics 128, 422­442.

Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
  Journal of Finance 47, 427­465.

Field, Laura Casares, and Gordon Hanka, 2001, The expiration of ipo share lockups, the
  Journal of Finance 56, 471­500.


                                           42
Field, Laura Casares, and Michelle Lowry, 2017, Bucking the trend: Why do ipos choose
  controversial governance structures and why do investors let them, Working paper .

Fisch, Jill, and Steven Davidoff Solomon, 2019, The problem of sunsets, Boston University
  Law Review 99, 1057.

Fried, Jesse M., and Matthew Schoenfeld, 2020, The risky business of investing in chinese
  tech firms, Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Law and Governance .

Gao, Xiaohui, Jay R. Ritter, and Zhongyan Zhu, 2013, Where have all the IPOs gone?,
 Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 48, 1663­1692.

Gompers, Paul A., 1995, Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture capital,
 Journal of Finance 50, 1461­1489.

Gompers, Paul A, Joy Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, 2009, Extreme governance: An analysis
 of dual-class firms in the united states, The Review of Financial Studies 23, 1051­1088.

Gonz´
    alez-Uribe, Juanita, 2020, Exchanges of innovation resources inside venture capital
 portfolios, Journal of Financial Economics 135, 144­168.

Goshen, Zohar, and Assaf Hamdani, 2015, Corporate control and idiosyncratic vision, Yale
 Law Journal 125, 560.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart, 1986, The costs and benefits of ownership: A
  theory of vertical and lateral integration, Journal of Political Economy 94, 691­719.

Hansmann, Henry, 1988, Ownership of the firm, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organiza-
  tion 4, 267­304.

Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri, 2002, Venture capital and the professionalization of
  start-up firms: Empirical evidence, Journal of Finance 57, 169­197.

Hochberg, Yael V., 2012, Venture capital and corporate governance in the newly public firm,
 Review of Finance 16, 429­480.

Hochberg, Yael V., Laura A. Lindsey, and Mark M. Westerfield, 2015, Resource accumulation
 through economic ties: Evidence from venture capital, Journal of Financial Economics
 118, 245­267.

Hochberg, Yael V, and Joshua D Rauh, 2013, Local overweighting and underperformance:
 Evidence from limited partner private equity investments, The Review of Financial Studies
 26, 403­451.

Hout, Thomas, and David Michael, 2014, A chinese approach to management, Harvard
  Business Review 92, 103­107.



                                            43
Iliev, Peter, and Michelle Lowry, 2020, Venturing beyond the ipo: Financing of newly public
   firms by pre-ipo investors, Journal of Finance 75, 1527­1577.
Jarrell, Gregg A, and Annette B Poulsen, 1988, Dual-class recapitalizations as antitakeover
  mechanisms: The recent evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 20, 129­152.
Jenter, Dirk, and Fadi Kanaan, 2015, Ceo turnover and relative performance evaluation,
  Journal of Finance 70, 2155­2184.
Kaplan, Steven N, Frederic Martel, and Per Stromberg, 2007, How do legal differences and
 experience affect financial contracts, Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 273­311.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Stromberg, 2001, Venture capitals as principals: Contracting,
 screening, and monitoring, American Economic Review 91, 426­430.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Stromberg, 2003, Financial contracting theory meets the real
 world: An empirical analysis of venture capital contracts, Review of Economic Studies 70,
 281­315.
Karpoff, Jonathan, and Laura Field, 2002, Takeover defenses of ipo firms, Journal of Finance
 5, 1857­1889.
Kim, Hyunseob, and Roni Michaely, 2019, Sticking around too long? dynamics of the benefits
  of dual-class voting, European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI)-Finance Working
  Paper 19­09.
Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Noah Stoffman, 2017, Technological
 innovation, resource allocation, and growth, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132,
 665­712.
Kupor, Scott, 2012, Sorry calpers, dual class shares are a founder's best friend, Forbes.
Lehn, Kenneth, Jeffry Netter, and Annette Poulsen, 1990, Consolidating corporate control:
  Dual-class recapitalizations versus leveraged buyouts, Journal of Financial Economics 27,
  557­580.
Lemmon, Michael L, and Karl V Lins, 2003, Ownership structure, corporate governance, and
  firm value: Evidence from the east asian financial crisis, Journal of Finance 58, 1445­1468.
Lerner, Josh, 1995, Venture capitalists and the oversight of private firms, Journal of Finance
  50, 301­0318.
Lowry, Michelle, Roni Michaely, and Ekaterina Volkova, 2017, Initial public offerings: A
  synthesis of the literature and directions for future research, Foundations and Trends R in
  Finance 11, 154­320.
Lublin, Joann S, and Spencer E. Ante, 2012, A fight in silicon valley: Founders push for
  control, The Wall Street Journal.

                                             44
Lund, Dorothy, 2019, Nonvoting shares and efficient corporate governance, Stan. L. Rev. 71,
  687.

Masulis, Ronald W, Cong Wang, and Fei Xie, 2009, Agency problems at dual-class compa-
 nies, Journal of Finance 64, 1697­1727.

Partch, M Megan, 1987, The creation of a class of limited voting common stock and share-
  holder wealth, Journal of Financial Economics 18, 313­339.

Peters, Florian S, and Alexander F Wagner, 2014, The executive turnover risk premium,
  The Journal of Finance 69, 1529­1563.

Ritter, Jay R., 2020, Initial public offerings: Foreign companies going public in the u.s.,
  1980-2019 .

Schubarth, Cromwell, 2013, Ipo rocket veeva: From $7m investment to $4.4b company,
  Silicon Valley Business Journal.

SEC, 2019, Concept release on harmonization of securities offering exemptions, securities act
  release no. 10649, https://www.sec.gov/rules/concept/2019/33-10649.pdf.

Sharfman, Bernard S, 2019, The undesirability of mandatory time-based sunsets in dual
  class share structures: A reply to bebchuk and kastiel, S. Cal. L. Rev. Postscript 93, 1.

Smart, Scott B, Ramabhadran S Thirumalai, and Chad J Zutter, 2008, What's in a vote? the
  short-and long-run impact of dual-class equity on ipo firm values, Journal of Accounting
  and Economics 45, 94­115.

Smart, Scott B, and Chad J Zutter, 2003, Control as a motivation for underpricing: a
  comparison of dual and single-class ipos, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 85­110.

Winkler, Rolfe, and Maureen Farrell, 2018, In founder-friendly era, star tech entrepreneurs
 grab power, huge pay, The Wall Street Journal.




                                             45
              60
              40
             %
              20
              0




                   1995                2000         2005           2010      2015      2020

                          Dual-Class          VC-Backed        Cloud Ind.   Foreign   Media




Figure 1. Trends in Initial Public Offerings. This figure shows the three-year rolling
average percentage of different types of Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) out of the total number
of IPOs in 1994-2019, including (a) Dual-class IPOs, (b) IPOs of VC-backed firms, (c) IPOs
of firms that belong to Cloud Industries, (d) Foreign-based firms, and (e) Media companies.
All categories of IPOs are described in the Appendix.




                                                          46
                                         Panel A: All IPOs




                 40
              %
                 20
                 0




                        1995         2000        2005         2010        2015         2020



                                    Panel B: VC-Backed IPOs
                 40
              %
                 20
                 0




                        1995         2000        2005         2010        2015         2020



                                      Panel C: Foreign IPOs
              40 60
              %
                 20
                 0




                        1995         2000        2005         2010        2015         2020




Figure 2.       Trends in the Probability of Dual-Class IPOs by Industry. This figure shows the
three-year rolling average percentage of Dual-class IPOs out of the total number of IPOs (Panel A), the
total number of VC-Backed IPOs (Panel B) and the total number of Foreign-based IPOs (Panel C). In each
panel, we split the sample into IPOs of firms that belong to Cloud industries and IPOs of firms that do not
belong to such industries.
                                                    47
                                          Panel A: All IPOs




Figure 3. The Percentage of Dual-Class IPOs by Controller. This figure shows the percentage of
dual-class IPOs by the type of controller. Types of controllers include: Founder, Founder and Venture Capital
Firm, Venture Capital Firm, Private Equity Firm, Directors & Officers who are not founders, a Company
which is a parent or holding company, a Family business, or other type of investors or no controller. Panel A
includes all IPOs, Panel B divides IPOs into IPOs of VC-backed firms, and non-VC-backed firms. Panel C
divides IPOs into firms located in the United States and firms located elsewhere. Panel D divides IPOs into
firms that belong to Cloud industries and those in other industries. Panel E divides IPOs into non-media
firms and media firms.

                                                     48
Figure 4.      Trends in VC Investment. This figure shows the amount of VC investment (Panel A),
Late-stage VC Investment (Panel B) and Dry Powder (Panel C) in $ billions before and after 2005. In each
panel, we split these amounts into funds associated with Cloud industries and non-Cloud industries.




                                                  49
                                        Panel A: All IPOs




Figure 5. Trends in Dual-Class IPOs by Controller. This figure shows the percentage of dual-class
IPOs by the type of controller by comparing IPOs in 1994-2005 to IPOs in 2006-2019. Types of controllers
include: Founder, Founder and Venture Capital Firm, Venture Capital Firm, Private Equity Firm, Directors
& Officers who are not founders, a Company which is a parent or holding company, a Family business,
or other type of investors or no controller. Panel A includes all IPOs, Panel B divides IPOs into IPOs of
VC-backed firms, and non-VC-backed firms. Panel C divides IPOs into firms located in the United States
and firms located elsewhere. Panel D divides IPOs into firms that belong to Cloud industries and those in
other industries. Panel E divides IPOs into non-media firms and media firms.

                                                   50
                              Panel A: Trends in Cloud Industries




                           Panel B: Trends in Non-Cloud Industries




Figure 6.       Trends in Dual-Class IPOs by Controller and Industry. This figure compares the
percentage of dual-class IPOs by the type of controller in 1994-2005 to that in 2006-2019. Types of controllers
include: Founder, Founder and Venture Capital Firm, Venture Capital Firm, Private Equity Firm, Directors
& Officers who are not founders, a Company which is a parent or holding company, a Family business, or
other type of investors or no controller. Panel A includes all IPOs of firms in Cloud Industries, and Panel B
includes all IPOs of firms in other industries. Each Panel divides IPOs into IPOs of VC-backed firms, and
non-VC-backed firms and firms located in the United States and firms located elsewhere.




                                                      51
                                          Panel A: All IPOs




Figure 7.     The Size of Different Types of Wedges in Dual-Class IPOs. This figure shows the
wedge between voting rights and economic rights in percentages for different types of wedges: (1) Founder:
the wedge of the founder, (2) Directors & Officers: the wedge of the directors and officers, (3) Company: the
wedge of a parent or holding company, and (4) Public: the wedge held by the public shareholders multiplied
by (-1) because typically this wedge is negative (that is, the voting rights are smaller than the economic
rights).

                                                     52
                              Panel A: Trends in Cloud Industries




                          Panel B: Trends in Non-Cloud Industries




Figure 8.     Trends in Different Types of Wedges by Industry. This figure compares the average
wedges between voting rights and economic rights in percentages for different types of wedges in 1994-2005 to
those in 2006-2019. Different types of wedges include: (1) Founder: the wedge of the founder, (2) Directors
& Officers: the wedge of the directors and officers, (3) Company: the wedge of a parent or holding company,
and (4) Public: the wedge held by the public shareholders multiplied by (-1) because typically this wedge is
negative (that is, the voting rights are smaller than the economic rights).




                                                     53
                                         Panel A: Time Sunsets


          50
          40
          30
       %
          20
          10
          0




                                      Panel B: Ownership Sunsets
            60
            40
         %
            20
            0




                                       Panel C: Transfer Sunsets
            80
            60
          %
         40 20
            0




                                         Panel D: Other Sunsets
            30
            20
         %
            10
            0




Figure 9.      The Percentage of Different Types of Sunsets by Controller. This figure shows the
percentage of dual-class IPOs that have different types of sunsets by the type of controller. Types of sunset
provisions include: Time Sunsets (Panel A), Ownership Sunsets (Panel B), Transfer Sunsets (Panel C) and
Other Sunsets (Panel D). Types of controllers include: Founder, Founder and Venture Capital Firm, Venture
Capital Firm, Private Equity Firm, Directors & Officers who are not founders, a Company which is a parent
or holding company, a Family business, or other types of investors or no controller.

                                                     54
                                          Panel A: Time Sunsets
          20
       10 15
        %
          5
          0




                       05




                                     19




                                                               05




                                                                               19
                       -




                                      -




                                                               -




                                                                                -
                    94




                                   06




                                                            94




                                                                             06
                                     Panel B: Ownership Sunsets
           40
         20 30
          %
           10
           0




                           5




                                         9




                                                                   5




                                                                                   9
                        -0




                                      -1




                                                                -0




                                                                                -1
                      94




                                    06




                                                              94




                                                                              06
                                       Panel C: Transfer Sunsets
           80
         40 60
          %
           20
           0




                           5




                                         9




                                                                   5




                                                                                   9
                        -0




                                      -1




                                                                -0




                                                                                -1
                      94




                                    06




                                                              94




                                                                              06



                                          Panel D: Other Sunsets
           20
         10 15
          %
           5
           0




                           5




                                          9




                                                                   5




                                                                                    9
                        -0




                                      -1




                                                                -0




                                                                                -1
                      94




                                    06




                                                              94




                                                                              06




Figure 10.      The Percentage of Different Types of Sunsets over Time by Founder Control.
This figure shows the percentage of dual-class IPOs that have different types of sunsets, comparing IPOs in
1994-2005 to IPOs in 2006-2019. Each Panel divides dual-class IPOs into IPOs that are controlled solely
by the founders and other dual-class IPOs. Types of sunset provisions include: Time Sunsets (Panel A),
Ownership Sunsets (Panel B), Transfer Sunsets (Panel C) and Other Sunsets (Panel D).




                                                    55
                                                                          Table I

                                                   Summary Statistics of IPOs 1994-2019
                                         Single Class IPOs             Founder-Controlled Dual-Class IPOs                    Other Dual-Class IPOs
                                 Obs     Mean       SD     Med.    Obs    Mean      SD       Med.      t-stat      Obs    Mean       SD     Med.       t-stat
      Variable                    (1)     (2)       (3)     (4)    (5)     (6)      (7)       (8)     (6) - (2)    (10)   (11)      (12)      (13)   (11) - (2)
                                                                                Panel A: Firm Characteristics
      Age                        5,084 14.87      20.89       8    277     11.36      10.99      8      -2.772     324     28.98   35.24    12         11.19
      IPO Proceeds               5,087 123.33     509.03    53.5   278    308.54     1172.03   100.35    5.344     324     385.19 1228.71 131.95      7.910
      Eponymous                  5,078  .08         .27       0    274      .12        .32       0       2.003     323       .14    .34      0         3.362
      Assets ($ mil)             4,868 459.96    1734.13   37.65   262    423.75     1285.49   126.45   -0.333     300    1870.43 3706.13 330.67       12.45
      ROA                        4,764  -.23        .75      .03   258      -.05       .48      .06      3.877     297      -.07     .55    .04        3.707
      Leverage                   4,853  .24         .34      .08   262       .2        .31      .04     -1.671     299       .26      .3    .13        1.086
      Cash                       4,864  .27         .29      .14   262      .29        .26      .22      1.220     300       .16    .21     .06       -6.412
      Patents (#)                5,089 5.16        67.63      0    278      5.62      36.89      0       0.111     324      8.76   69.36     0         0.927
      Patents ($ mil)            5,089 45.45     812.63       0    278    193.29     2482.17     0       2.470     324     69.44   424.63    0         0.527
      R&D                        5,089  .19         .43       0    278      .08         .2       0      -4.350     324       .06    .19      0        -5.375
      Missing RD                 5,089  .41         .49       0    278      .47         .5       0       2.174     324        .6     .49     1        6.850
      Tobin's Q                  4,610 3.42        2.84     2.49   272     3.84        3.07      2.71    2.238     292      3.11    2.77   2.01       -1.786
      Price-to-Book Ratio        4,610 4.78        4.67     3.28   272     5.85        5.42      3.89    3.440     292      5.04    5.19   3.23       0.915
                                                                                        Panel B: IPO Type
56




      VC-backed                  5,089    .42      .49      0      278     .42          .49       0     0.0955     324     .23      .42       0       -6.874
      Foreign-based              5,089     .1       .3      0      278     .35          .48       0      12.93     324     .14      .35       0       2.096
      Cloud Industry             5,089    .48       .5      0      278     .69          .46       1      6.954     324     .54       .5       1       2.172
      Media company              5,089    .06      .24      0      265     3.82        3.04     2.71     3.555     324     .15      .36       0       5.804
      Spin-offs                  5,089    .16      .36      0      265     5.8         5.37     3.85    -5.038     324     .36      .48       0       9.511
                                                                                  Panel C: The Size of the Wedge
      Public Wedge                 -       -        -        -     278    -22.68      17.22    -22.02       -      324    -12.66   17.25    -10.72       -
      Founder Wedge                -       -        -        -     278    25.49        19.3     23.33       -      324      .82    5.92       0          -
      D&O Wedge                    -       -        -        -     278    25.89        18.2      24.5       -      324     6.42    13.57      0          -
      Non-Founder D&O Wedge        -       -        -        -     278      .9        10.95      -.05       -      324     5.86    12.97      0          -
      Company Wedge                -       -        -        -     278       0          0          0        -      324     7.85    13.04      0          -
                                                                                         Panel D: Sunsets
      Time Sunsets                 -       -        -        -     278     .09         .29        0         -      324     .08      .28       0          -
      Ownership Sunsets            -       -        -        -     278     .25         .43        0         -      324     .24      .43       0          -
      Transfer Sunsets             -       -        -        -     278     .62         .49        1         -      324     .49       .5       0          -
      Other Sunsets                -       -        -        -     278     .15         .36        0         -      324     .11      .31       0          -
                                                                             Panel E: Venture Capital Financing
      VC Ind. Financing          5,089 2.72         5.28     .63    278   6.19     8.78     .96    10.21     324     3.19     6.43     .34      1.530
      Dry Powder                 5,089 18.15       29.84     4.07   278 31.94      40.96   3.12    7.338     324    17.32    31.13     1.36    -0.483
     This table provides descriptive statistics for all the IPOs in our sample, from 1994 to 2019. The left panel presents data for single-class firms,
     the middle panel for dual-class firms controlled by the founder, and the right panel for dual-class firms not controlled by the founder. All firm
     financials are winsorized at the 1% level except for Tobin's Q and Price-to-Book ratio, which are winsorized at 2.5%. Variables that are not
     defined herein are described in the Appendix.
                                                                       Table II

                                      The Determinants of Controllers in Dual-Class IPOs
                                  Ind. Capital = VC Industry Financing                                   Ind. Capital = Ind. Dry Powder
                        Dual-Class    Founder    NF Dual NF D&O                Co.       Dual-Class       Founder      NF Dual NF D&O              Co.
                              (1)            (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)             (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)
       Ind. Capital      0.00709 0.00557              0.00153    0.000204 0.000229 0.00119 0.000965 0.000227 0.0000766 0.000144
                            (5.44)         (5.24)       (1.58)     (0.86)       (0.38)      (5.20)          (5.82)       (1.31)      (1.47)      (1.20)
       VC-backed           -0.0101        0.00355     -0.0136    -0.00318 -0.0216          -0.0104         0.00327     -0.0136     -0.00325 -0.0217
                           (-1.00)         (0.50)      (-1.72)     (-1.22)     (-4.50)     (-1.03)          (0.46)      (-1.72)     (-1.25)      (-4.52)
       Cloud Ind.         0.180          0.0966       0.0833      0.00561      0.0555     0.187            0.102       0.0846       0.00604     0.0563
                            (2.97)         (2.59)       (2.12)     (0.75)       (1.81)      (2.95)          (2.63)       (2.12)      (0.80)      (1.85)
       Foreign            0.0841         0.0826       0.00153     0.00110      0.00289    0.0842         0.0826        0.00163     0.001000     0.00264
                            (5.32)         (6.38)       (0.14)     (0.30)       (0.39)      (5.33)          (6.39)       (0.15)      (0.27)      (0.36)
                                                                                                  
       Media               0.0501          0.0130      0.0372     0.00826      0.0196      0.0499           0.0128      0.0372      0.00822      0.0195
                            (1.79)         (0.88)       (1.51)     (0.95)       (1.05)      (1.78)          (0.87)       (1.51)      (0.94)      (1.05)
       Eponymous           0.0275        0.0296       -0.00206   -0.00250      0.00162     0.0268         0.0290       -0.00221    -0.00254     0.00156
                            (1.61)         (2.49)      (-0.15)     (-0.49)      (0.18)      (1.57)          (2.44)      (-0.16)     (-0.50)      (0.18)
       Log(Age)           -0.00677     -0.00989       0.00312     0.00118     -0.00154    -0.00685      -0.00992       0.00307      0.00121    -0.00144
                           (-1.24)        (-3.04)       (0.67)     (0.66)      (-0.55)     (-1.25)          (-3.05)      (0.66)      (0.68)      (-0.51)
       Log(Assets)        0.0390        0.00868 0.0303            0.00165    0.0139       0.0393        0.00890 0.0304              0.00162    0.0139
57




                           (10.92)         (3.90)      (10.03)     (1.47)       (6.33)     (11.02)          (3.98)      (10.07)      (1.45)      (6.34)
       Patents ($ Mil)     0.00567      0.00593 -0.000255 0.00113             -0.00180     0.00556       0.00584      -0.000284     0.00113    -0.00178
                            (1.63)         (2.45)      (-0.09)     (0.99)      (-0.97)      (1.60)          (2.43)      (-0.10)      (0.99)      (-0.96)
       ROA               -0.0198          0.00448    -0.0243 -0.00365 -0.0118 -0.0208                      0.00367    -0.0245 -0.00367 -0.0118
                           (-3.36)         (1.16)      (-5.29)     (-1.88)     (-3.37)     (-3.54)          (0.95)      (-5.34)     (-1.90)      (-3.37)
       Leverage          -0.0390         -0.00486    -0.0342 0.000630 -0.0396 -0.0401                     -0.00571    -0.0344 0.000613 -0.0396
                           (-3.24)        (-0.58)      (-3.67)     (0.16)      (-6.40)     (-3.33)          (-0.68)     (-3.70)      (0.16)      (-6.40)
       Cash                0.00774         0.0180      -0.0102    0.00160      -0.0144     0.00714          0.0174      -0.0103     0.00149     -0.0146
                            (0.41)         (1.36)      (-0.70)     (0.32)      (-1.31)      (0.38)          (1.32)      (-0.70)      (0.30)      (-1.33)
       Positive R&D        -0.0198       -0.0314       0.0116     0.00501     0.00730      -0.0211        -0.0324       0.0113      0.00496     0.00723
                           (-0.89)        (-1.96)       (0.72)     (0.73)       (0.67)     (-0.96)          (-2.03)      (0.70)      (0.72)      (0.66)
       Missing R&D         0.00191        -0.0206      0.0225     0.00650     -0.00151    0.000147         -0.0220      0.0222      0.00646    -0.00154
                            (0.09)        (-1.34)       (1.50)     (0.89)      (-0.17)      (0.01)          (-1.43)      (1.48)      (0.88)      (-0.17)
       Spinoff            -0.00648      -0.0534 0.0469 -0.00228 0.0436                    -0.00757       -0.0542      0.0466       -0.00226 0.0437
                           (-0.52)        (-8.25)       (4.08)     (-0.63)      (4.99)     (-0.61)          (-8.37)      (4.06)     (-0.63)      (4.99)
       Adj. R2              0.130          0.110       0.0859      0.0272      0.0608       0.128            0.108      0.0856      0.0274       0.0610
       N                    5,294          5,294        5,294       5,294       5,294       5,294            5,294       5,294       5,294        5,294
     This table presents the results of a linear probability model where the dependent variable is an indicator that equals 1 if an IPO has: dual-class
     stock in columns (1) and (6), a founder-controlled dual-class structure in columns (2) and (7), a dual-class structure not controlled by a founder
     in columns (3) and (8), a dual-class structure controlled by non-founder directors and officers in columns (4) and (9), and a dual-class structure
     controlled by a parent or holding company in columns (5) and (10). All specifications include year and two-digit SIC industry fixed effects.
     All variables are described in the Appendix. All standard errors are robust. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
     Columns (1) through (5) use VC Industry Financing as a proxy for VC investments, while columns (6) through (10) use Industry Dry Powder.
                                                                    Table III

                   The Determinants of the Wedge between Voting Rights and Economic Rights
                              Ind. Capital = VC Industry Financing                              Ind. Capital = Ind. Dry Powder
                         Public   Founder    D&O     NF D&O        Co.              Public       Founder      D&O     NF D&O          Co.
                           (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)         (9)         (10)
      Ind. Capital      -0.199      0.197       0.244      0.0504      -0.00258    -0.0328      0.0265      0.0350     0.0105       0.00101
                          (-5.38)     (4.92)      (5.80)     (2.78)      (-0.19)      (-5.19)     (4.72)      (5.72)     (3.23)      (0.34)
      VC-backed            0.264      0.0498     0.0941     0.0586     -0.403          0.272      0.0501     0.0915     0.0537     -0.405
                          (1.01)      (0.22)      (0.37)     (0.38)      (-3.25)      (1.04)      (0.22)      (0.36)     (0.35)      (-3.25)
      Cloud Ind.         -3.836      3.204       3.620        0.432      1.019       -4.025      3.359       3.823        0.492      1.024
                          (-2.40)     (2.15)      (2.14)     (0.90)      (1.75)       (-2.41)     (2.14)      (2.13)     (1.01)      (1.77)
      Foreign           -1.090      2.726       2.455        -0.250     -0.0274     -1.095       2.745      2.474        -0.255     -0.0310
                          (-2.77)     (6.03)      (5.17)    (-0.98)      (-0.16)      (-2.78)     (6.01)      (5.17)    (-1.00)      (-0.18)
      Media               -0.888    -0.00933       0.518      0.521      0.0952       -0.882    -0.00981       0.516      0.518      0.0941
                          (-1.39)     (-0.02)     (0.86)     (1.05)      (0.28)       (-1.38)     (-0.03)     (0.86)     (1.04)      (0.27)
      Eponymous          -1.076       0.756      1.145        0.324     -0.0411      -1.056       0.738      1.122        0.318     -0.0414
                          (-2.12)     (1.81)      (2.41)     (1.40)      (-0.24)      (-2.08)     (1.76)      (2.36)     (1.37)      (-0.25)
      Log(Age)            0.286     -0.398       -0.242      0.164      -0.116        0.289     -0.407       -0.251      0.165      -0.114
                          (1.87)      (-3.32)    (-1.71)     (1.69)      (-1.82)      (1.89)      (-3.37)    (-1.76)     (1.70)      (-1.79)
      Log(Assets)       -0.603      0.300       0.366       0.0786      0.249       -0.613       0.314      0.381       0.0792      0.247
58




                          (-6.42)     (3.53)      (4.10)     (1.75)      (5.76)       (-6.49)     (3.66)      (4.24)     (1.76)      (5.76)
      Patents ($ Mil)     -0.117     0.202       0.212      0.00313     -0.0418       -0.113     0.198       0.207      0.00270     -0.0415
                          (-1.31)     (3.04)      (2.54)     (0.07)      (-1.09)      (-1.28)     (3.00)      (2.49)     (0.06)      (-1.08)
      ROA                  0.133      0.0690     0.0536    -0.00646    -0.251          0.162      0.0386     0.0164     -0.0134    -0.250
                          (0.99)      (0.60)      (0.39)    (-0.08)      (-2.93)      (1.21)      (0.33)      (0.12)    (-0.17)      (-2.92)
      Leverage             0.354       0.212       0.106   0.000826    -0.825          0.384       0.179      0.0669   -0.00623    -0.824
                          (1.03)      (0.70)      (0.33)     (0.00)      (-5.69)      (1.12)      (0.59)      (0.21)    (-0.04)      (-5.69)
      Cash                0.0937       0.118     0.0109      -0.150    -0.602          0.109       0.116     0.00373     -0.159    -0.605
                          (0.21)      (0.26)      (0.02)    (-0.53)      (-2.70)      (0.25)      (0.26)      (0.01)    (-0.57)      (-2.72)
      Positive R&D         0.223      -0.750      -0.946     -0.133      0.0675        0.261      -0.785      -0.991     -0.143      0.0676
                          (0.37)      (-1.35)    (-1.54)    (-0.43)      (0.25)       (0.44)      (-1.42)    (-1.62)    (-0.46)      (0.25)
      Missing R&D         0.0393      -0.433      -0.395     0.0824      -0.168       0.0888      -0.483      -0.457     0.0704      -0.167
                          (0.07)      (-0.82)    (-0.68)     (0.28)      (-0.78)      (0.16)      (-0.92)    (-0.79)     (0.24)      (-0.78)
      Spinoff           0.771       -1.621      -1.795       -0.237     0.739       0.802       -1.659      -1.839       -0.242     0.741
                          (2.68)      (-8.42)    (-7.31)    (-1.30)      (3.96)       (2.79)      (-8.57)    (-7.47)    (-1.34)      (3.96)
       Adj. R2            0.0851       0.100       0.104     0.0163      0.0362       0.0827      0.0954     0.0979     0.0164       0.0362
       N                   5,294       5,294       5,294     5,294        5,294        5,294       5,294      5,294       5,294       5,294
     This table presents the results of a linear regression model where the dependent variable is the size of the "Wedge" between voting and
     economic rights for various agents within the firm, as expressed in percentage points. The dependent variable is the wedge for public
     shareholders in columns (1) and (6), founders in columns (2) and (7), all directors and officers in columns (3) and (8), non-founder
     directors and officers in columns (4) and (9), and parent or holding company in columns (5) and (10). All specifications include year and
     two-digit SIC industry fixed effects. All variables are described in the Appendix. All standard errors are robust. ***, **, and * denote
     significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels. Columns (1) through (5) use VC Industry Financing as a proxy for VC investments, while
     columns (6) through (10) use Industry Dry Powder.
                                                              Table IV

                      The Determinants of the Wedge - Controlling for "Hot Markets"
                                           Capital = VC Financing                           Capital = Ind. Dry Powder
                                       Controller              Wedge                     Controller               Wedge
                             Dual-Class      Founder     Public     Founder    Dual-Class      Founder      Public     Founder
                                 (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)            (6)         (7)         (8)
       Ind. Returns            0.0190       0.0274        -0.216    0.569        0.0167       0.0255         -0.138      0.462
                                (1.37)         (2.89)    (-0.64)    (2.07)        (1.22)         (2.73)     (-0.42)      (1.73)
       Ind. Under-pricing      -0.0467       -0.0528    2.336      -1.893        -0.0150        -0.0246      1.375       -0.871
                               (-1.46)        (-2.35)     (2.97)    (-2.48)      (-0.49)        (-1.16)      (1.88)     (-1.25)
       Ind. Avg. Proceeds    0.0000466      0.0000323   -0.00109   0.000410    0.0000467      0.0000322    -0.00110    0.000484
                                (1.21)         (1.23)    (-1.24)    (0.69)        (1.23)         (1.24)     (-1.27)      (0.79)
       Ind. M&A Num.          -0.00451        -0.0163     0.226     -0.419      0.000873        -0.0122     0.0228      -0.0684
                               (-0.20)        (-0.92)     (0.43)    (-0.93)       (0.04)        (-0.68)      (0.04)     (-0.15)
59




       Ind. M&A Value         -0.00292       -0.00121    -0.0618     0.160      -0.00420       -0.00220     -0.0141     0.0799
                               (-0.34)        (-0.21)    (-0.28)    (0.85)       (-0.49)        (-0.40)     (-0.06)      (0.43)
       Capital                -0.00374       -0.00243     0.120     -0.141       0.00212        0.00115     -0.0704     0.0868
                               (-1.09)        (-0.81)     (1.18)    (-1.20)       (0.75)         (0.47)     (-0.84)      (0.91)
       Ind. Capital          0.00755        0.00674     -0.226     0.232       0.00117        0.00107     -0.0332      0.0276
                                (4.87)         (5.26)    (-5.35)    (5.07)        (4.22)         (5.31)     (-4.62)      (4.38)
       Controls                  Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes
       Adj. R  2                0.137          0.111     0.0869        0.102      0.134           0.108     0.0830        0.0947
       N                        4,895          4,895      4,895        4,895      4,895           4,895      4,895        4,895
     Columns (1)-(2) and (5)-(6) present the results of a linear probability model where the dependent variable is an indicator
     that equals 1 if an IPO has: dual-class stock in columns (1) and (5), and a founder-controlled dual-class structure in columns
     (2) and (6). Columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) presents the results of a linear regression model where the dependent variable is
     the size of the "Wedge" between voting and economic rights for various agents within the firm, as expressed in percentage
     points. The dependent variable is the wedge for public shareholders in columns (3) and (7), and founders in columns (4) and
     (8). All specifications include year and two-digit SIC industry fixed effects. Financial Controls include ROA, Leverage, Cash,
     Positive R&D, and Missing R&D. All variables are described in the Appendix. All standard errors are robust. ***, **, and
     * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels. Columns (1) through (4) use VC Industry Financing as a proxy for VC
     investments, while columns (5) through (8) use Industry Dry Powder.
                                                                               Table V

                                                                Different Types of IPOs
                                                                             Panel A: The Determinants of the Controller
                                                       Dual Class                                                              Founder Control
                             VC       Non-VC        Cloud     Non-Cloud      US         Foreign       VC         Non-VC       Cloud     Non-Cloud        US          Foreign
                             (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)        (10)          (11)          (12)
      VC Ind. Financing   0.00693     0.00711      0.00824     0.0217     0.00573        0.00454   0.00553       0.00437     0.00629    0.0167       0.00432         0.00335
                             (4.32)     (3.35)       (4.98)     (2.57)       (4.36)       (0.90)     (3.89)        (2.88)      (4.59)     (2.88)       (4.35)         (0.77)
      Adj. R2                0.180      0.0977        0.166     0.0986       0.0989       0.284       0.169        0.0755       0.162     0.0388       0.0509          0.246
      N                      2,200       3,217        2,683      2,734       4,792         625        2,200         3,217       2,683      2,734        4,792           625
      Ind. Dry Powder     0.000906    0.00129     0.000940    0.00265     0.000840 0.00225 0.000784 0.000833                0.000790    0.00205     0.000714        0.00175
                             (2.99)     (3.56)       (3.20)     (3.26)       (3.64)       (2.75)     (3.36)        (3.46)      (3.63)     (4.17)       (4.37)         (3.01)
      Adj. R2                0.174      0.0973        0.160     0.0987       0.0968       0.290       0.163        0.0755       0.156     0.0385       0.0492          0.251
      N                      2,200       3,217        2,683      2,734       4,792         625        2,200         3,217       2,702      2,782        4,857           627
                                                                                Panel B: The Determinants of the Wedge
                                                      Public Wedge                                                             Founder Wedge
                             VC       Non-VC        Cloud     Non-Cloud      US         Foreign       VC         Non-VC       Cloud     Non-Cloud   United States    Foreign
60




                             (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)        (10)          (11)          (12)
      VC Ind. Financing    -0.215      -0.146      -0.224       -0.137     -0.177      -0.0731     0.190         0.176       0.212       0.350       0.0952         0.402
                            (-4.35)     (-2.88)     (-4.86)    (-0.67)      (-4.54)     (-0.62)      (3.61)       (2.85)      (4.11)      (2.53)       (3.53)        (2.12)
      Adj. R2                0.147      0.0667       0.107     0.0727       0.0661       0.184       0.158        0.0619      0.143      0.0258       0.0343         0.263
      N                      2200        3217        2683        2734        4792         625         2200         3217        2683        2734         4792          625
      Ind. Dry Powder     -0.0286     -0.0275     -0.0271     -0.0465     -0.0259     -0.0451      0.0236       0.0241       0.0191     0.0494       0.0145         0.0409
                            (-3.51)     (-2.92)     (-3.38)    (-2.23)      (-3.87)     (-2.71)      (3.21)       (2.79)      (2.52)      (3.67)       (2.73)        (2.21)
      Adj. R2                0.138      0.0666       0.101     0.0738       0.0633       0.187       0.151        0.0593      0.137      0.0267       0.0330         0.254
      N                      2,200       3,217       2,683      2,734        4,792        625        2,200         3,217      2,683       2,734        4,792          625
     Panel A presents the results of a linear probability model where the dependent variable is an indicator that equals 1 if an IPO has: dual-class stock
     in columns (1) through (6), and a founder-controlled dual-class structure in columns (7) through (12). We analyze this linear probability model
     separately for VC and Non-VC backed firms (columns (1)-(2) and (7)-(8)), Cloud and Non-Cloud Industry firms (columns (3)-(4) and (9)-(10)),
     and U.S. and Foreign firms (columns (5)-(6) and (11)-(12)). The first three rows use VC Industry Financing as a proxy for VC investments, while
     the next three rows use Industry Dry Powder. Panel B presents the results of a linear regression model where the dependent variable is the size of
     the "Wedge" between voting and economic rights for various agents within the firm, as expressed in percentage points. The dependent variable is
     the wedge for public shareholders in columns (1) through (6), and founders in columns (7) through (12). We analyze this linear regression model
     separately for VC and Non-VC backed firms (columns (1)-(2) and (7)-(8)), Cloud and Non-Cloud Industry firms (columns (3)-(4) and (9)-(10)),
     and U.S. and Foreign firms (columns (5)-(6) and (11)-(12)). The first three rows use VC Industry Financing as a proxy for VC investments, while
     the next three rows use Industry Dry Powder. All specifications in this table include year and two-digit SIC industry fixed effects. All variables are
     described in the Appendix. All standard errors are robust. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
                                                              Table VI

                 VC-Backed IPOs - The Determinants of the Controller and Wedge
                                   Capital = Ind. VC Financing                           Capital = Ind. Dry Powder
                                  Controller              Wedge                        Controller              Wedge
                        Dual-Class      Founder       Public     Founder    Dual-Class       Founder      Public     Founder
                            (1)            (2)          (3)        (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)         (8)
                                                                                                                  
      Ind. Capital      0.00442         0.00293      -0.142       0.107      0.000625        0.000448    -0.0195      0.0144
                           (2.55)         (2.10)       (-2.91)     (2.16)       (1.85)          (1.82)     (-2.22)     (1.86)
      VC Rounds         -0.00578       -0.00795      0.180       -0.182      -0.00573       -0.00792      0.178      -0.180
                           (-2.24)       (-4.36)       (2.88)     (-3.21)      (-2.23)         (-4.34)     (2.88)     (-3.20)
      VC Firms (#)       0.000649       0.00205       -0.0526     0.0336      0.000713       0.00208      -0.0547     0.0353
                           (0.44)         (2.14)       (-1.51)     (1.23)       (0.48)          (2.17)     (-1.57)     (1.27)
      VC Firm Age        -0.0230        -0.00661       0.512       -0.216     -0.0226         -0.00641     0.500       -0.207
                           (-2.10)       (-0.83)       (1.78)     (-1.03)      (-2.07)         (-0.80)     (1.74)     (-0.99)
      VC Firm Size      -0.000536       -0.00486      0.00890     -0.0752    -0.000934        -0.00513     0.0217     -0.0848
                           (-0.12)       (-1.23)       (0.09)     (-0.83)      (-0.21)         (-1.29)     (0.22)     (-0.94)
      Cloud Ind.          -0.0788       -0.0776         1.476      -0.823      -0.0732        -0.0739       1.291      -0.683
                           (-1.72)       (-2.03)       (1.38)     (-1.08)      (-1.59)         (-1.92)     (1.21)     (-0.89)
61




      Foreign            0.0603         0.0764         -0.561     1.744       0.0601         0.0762        -0.556     1.740
                           (2.23)         (2.92)       (-0.94)     (2.19)       (2.22)          (2.91)     (-0.94)     (2.17)
      Eponymous          -0.00783         0.0253       -1.264       0.698      -0.0105         0.0236      -1.176       0.631
                           (-0.21)        (0.82)       (-1.07)     (0.84)      (-0.28)          (0.77)     (-0.99)     (0.75)
      Log(Age)            0.00585        0.00411       -0.383       0.322      0.00578         0.00409     -0.380       0.320
                           (0.60)         (0.57)       (-1.65)     (1.56)       (0.59)          (0.57)     (-1.64)     (1.55)
      Log(Assets)        0.0507         0.0295       -1.034      0.948        0.0510         0.0297      -1.046      0.957
                           (6.52)         (4.73)       (-4.76)     (4.12)       (6.56)          (4.78)     (-4.86)     (4.15)
      Patents ($ Mil)    0.0102         0.0110        -0.281     0.300        0.0102         0.0111       -0.283     0.301
                           (2.39)         (2.83)       (-2.21)     (2.87)       (2.41)          (2.85)     (-2.23)     (2.89)
       Adj. R2              0.159          0.151        0.134      0.122        0.156           0.149       0.131      0.119
       N                    1,819          1,819        1,819      1,819        1,819           1,819       1,819      1,819
     This table only analyzes firms that are VC-backed. Columns (1)-(2) and (5)-(6) present the results of a linear probability
     model where the dependent variable is an indicator that equals 1 if an IPO has: dual-class stock in columns (1) and (5),
     and a founder-controlled dual-class structure in columns (2) and (6). Columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) presents the results of
     a linear regression model where the dependent variable is the size of the "Wedge" between voting and economic rights
     for various agents within the firm, as expressed in percentage points. The dependent variable is the wedge for public
     shareholders in columns (3) and (7), and founders in columns (4) and (8). All specifications include year and two-digit SIC
     industry fixed effects. All variables are described in the Appendix. Columns (1) through (4) use VC Industry Financing
     as a proxy for VC investments, while columns (5) through (8) use Industry Dry Powder. All standard errors are robust.
     ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
                                                                     Table VII

                     The Determinants of the Controller and Wedge - Instrumental Variable

                                                       All IPOs                                      Excl. CA, NY and MA
                                         Controller                      Wedge                   Controller            Wedge
                               Dual-Class       Founder           Public    Founder     Dual-Class     Founder       Public     Founder
                                   (1)                (2)          (3)           (4)       (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)
                                                                                                                             
      VC Ind. Financing         0.00717        0.00899         -0.304       0.381        0.00764       0.0116         -0.300     0.607
                                   (1.90)         (3.33)         (-3.03)      (3.74)      (1.27)         (2.59)       (-1.92)     (3.31)
      VC-backed                  -0.00993        0.00743          0.238       0.0845    -0.00147        0.00940        0.221       0.202
                                  (-1.10)         (1.14)         (1.02)       (0.41)     (-0.12)         (1.02)        (0.72)     (0.65)
      Cloud Ind.                 0.171          0.0878         -3.366       2.803        0.221          0.107        -4.416      3.997
                                   (3.77)         (3.49)         (-2.98)      (2.91)      (2.56)         (2.36)       (-2.07)     (2.30)
      Foreign                   0.0826          0.0828          -0.994      2.615       0.0811         0.0720        -0.988      1.890
                                   (5.24)         (6.42)         (-2.49)      (5.88)      (4.92)         (5.57)       (-2.46)     (4.41)
      Eponymous                   0.0270        0.0276          -1.034        0.720      0.0387         0.0256        -1.063       0.895
62




                                   (1.61)         (2.35)         (-2.08)      (1.74)      (1.82)         (1.76)       (-1.65)     (1.52)
      Log(Age)                  -0.00863       -0.0108           0.244      -0.343      -0.00885      -0.0133          0.217    -0.470
                                  (-1.65)        (-3.44)         (1.70)       (-3.01)    (-1.37)        (-3.43)        (1.21)     (-3.00)
      Log(Assets)               0.0337         0.00699         -0.516       0.239       0.0331        0.00678       -0.525       0.240
                                  (10.88)         (3.75)         (-6.62)      (3.53)      (9.14)         (2.97)       (-6.01)     (2.72)
      Patents ($ Mil)           0.00607        0.00573           -0.119      0.185       0.00214        0.00341      -0.0275      0.157
                                   (1.83)         (2.48)         (-1.41)      (2.90)      (0.47)         (1.13)       (-0.27)     (1.68)
      F -statistic                 153.0          153.0           153.0        153.0      78.81          78.81         78.81       78.81
      Adj. R2                      0.121         0.0985          0.0797       0.0868      0.134          0.118        0.0909       0.108
      N                            5,383          5,383           5,383        5,383      3,360          3,360         3,360       3,360
     Columns (1)-(2) and (5)-(6) present the results of an instrumental variables analysis where the dependent variable is an indicator that
     equals 1 if an IPO has: dual-class stock in columns (1) and (5), and a founder-controlled dual-class structure in columns (2) and (6).
     Columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) presents the results of an instrumental variables analysis where the dependent variable is the size of the
     "Wedge" between voting and economic rights for various agents within the firm, as expressed in percentage points. The dependent
     variable is the wedge for public shareholders in columns (3) and (7), and founders in columns (4) and (8). All specifications include
     year and two-digit SIC industry fixed effects. All variables are described in the Appendix. Columns (1) through (4) examine all IPO
     firms between 1994 to 2019, while columns (5) through (8) exclude firms headquartered in California, New York, and Massachusetts.
     All standard errors are robust. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
                                                               Table VIII

                 The Determinants of the Controller and Wedge - Trends Over Time
                                                            Controller                                             Wedge
                                           Dual-Class                     Founder                   Public                   Founder
                                          (1)         (2)           (3)             (4)       (5)            (6)           (7)         (8)
      VC-backed                        -0.0419     -0.0362       -0.0179         -0.0141   1.061         0.820         -0.411       -0.162
                                         (-3.87)     (-2.50)       (-2.59)       (-1.49)     (3.72)        (2.20)       (-2.06)    (-0.65)
      VC-backed post-2005              0.1000      0.0816        0.0775         0.0294     -2.717       -1.744        1.706        0.788
                                          (5.38)      (3.96)        (5.32)        (2.17)     (-5.44)      (-3.42)       (3.37)      (1.96)
      Cloud Ind.                        0.158       0.163        0.0756        0.0856       -3.314       -3.531        2.630       2.882
                                          (3.17)      (3.10)        (2.78)        (2.80)     (-2.46)      (-2.47)       (2.20)      (2.21)
      Cloud Ind. post-2005              0.109      0.0574        0.0836        -0.000962   -2.313          -0.877     2.187        -0.0655
                                          (5.79)      (2.25)        (5.90)       (-0.06)     (-4.70)      (-1.40)       (4.61)     (-0.12)
      Foreign                           -0.0316     -0.0487       -0.00539       -0.0152    1.108         1.190         -0.294     -0.597
                                         (-1.70)     (-1.86)       (-0.42)       (-0.88)     (2.43)        (1.65)       (-0.98)    (-1.75)
      Foreign post-2005                 0.208       0.127         0.159         0.0603     -3.988       -2.550        5.529       1.963
                                          (7.15)      (3.49)        (6.80)        (2.37)     (-5.46)      (-2.78)       (6.67)      (2.82)
      Media                             0.0709     0.0664          0.0301        0.0236     -1.405        -1.296         0.452      0.261
                                          (2.41)      (2.26)        (1.87)        (1.48)     (-2.06)      (-1.90)       (1.10)      (0.65)
      Media post-2005                   -0.144     -0.134        -0.0970       -0.0830     3.055        2.834         -2.566      -2.142
                                         (-3.12)     (-2.92)       (-3.32)       (-2.94)     (2.85)        (2.65)       (-3.62)    (-3.20)
      Eponymous                          0.0279      0.0279       0.0289        0.0294      -1.073       -1.082         0.735       0.737
                                          (1.65)      (1.64)        (2.44)        (2.50)     (-2.12)      (-2.13)       (1.76)      (1.77)
63




      Log(Age)                          -0.00601   -0.00603     -0.00962      -0.00974       0.286        0.289       -0.393      -0.394
                                         (-1.11)     (-1.12)       (-2.97)       (-3.03)     (1.89)        (1.90)       (-3.28)    (-3.30)
      Log(Assets)                      0.0391      0.0392       0.00679       0.00675      -0.595       -0.596        0.245       0.248
                                         (10.92)     (10.89)        (3.09)        (3.07)     (-6.36)      (-6.34)       (2.98)      (3.00)
      Patents ($)                        0.00545    0.00492      0.00582       0.00531       -0.110        -0.102     0.200       0.179
                                          (1.57)      (1.41)        (2.43)        (2.21)     (-1.25)      (-1.15)       (3.01)      (2.69)
      VC-backed Cloud Ind.                         -0.00711                     -0.00263                   0.411                    -0.328
                                                     (-0.37)                     (-0.21)                   (0.83)                  (-0.94)
      VC-backed Cloud Ind. post-2005                 0.0325                    0.0932                    -1.915                     1.665
                                                      (0.88)                      (3.26)                  (-1.98)                   (1.72)
      Foreign Cloud Ind.                             0.0353                      0.0203                    -0.187                   0.596
                                                      (0.95)                      (0.78)                  (-0.21)                   (0.97)
      Foreign Cloud Ind. post-2005                   0.145                      0.178                     -2.560                  6.504
                                                      (2.51)                      (3.86)                  (-1.79)                   (4.19)
      Financial Controls                  Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
      Adj. R2                            0.148      0.152       0.123       0.136       0.0933   0.0949      0.108     0.121
      N                                  5,294      5,294       5,294       5,294       5,294     5,294      5,294     5,294
     Columns (1)-(4) present the results of a linear probability model where the dependent variable is an indicator that equals
     1 if an IPO has: dual-class stock in columns (1) and (2), and a founder-controlled dual-class structure in columns (3)
     and (4). Columns (5)-(8) present the results of a linear regression model where the dependent variable is the size of
     the "Wedge" between voting and economic rights for various agents within the firm, as expressed in percentage points.
     The dependent variable is the wedge for public shareholders in columns (5) and (6), and founders in columns (7) and
     (8). All specifications include year and two-digit SIC industry fixed effects. Financial Controls include ROA, Leverage,
     Cash, Positive R&D, and Missing R&D. All variables are described in the Appendix. All standard errors are robust.
     ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
                                           Table IX

           The Costs of Doing Business for IPO firms After 2005
                                   Cost of Goods                         General Expenses
                           (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
Cloud Ind.               0.0883        0.101           0.0712    0.300        0.188        -0.112
                         (1.11)       (1.12)           (0.70)      (2.94)     (2.10)       (-1.03)
Cloud Ind. post-2005   -0.0823      -0.0809         -0.0703      -0.128     -0.0943     -0.0555
                         (-3.41)      (-3.37)          (-3.07)    (-4.19)     (-3.22)      (-2.66)
Eponymous                            -0.00755        -0.00696                -0.00838     0.0194
                                      (-0.52)          (-0.50)                (-0.48)      (1.66)
Log(Age)                            -0.0217          -0.00815               -0.0505     -0.00953
                                      (-3.81)          (-1.53)                (-6.74)      (-1.77)
Log(Assets)                          0.00392         0.0123                 -0.0599     -0.0203
                                      (1.14)           (3.41)                (-13.19)      (-5.17)
Leverage                                           -0.0000130                            0.0104
                                                       (-0.00)                             (2.41)
Cash                                                  0.00455                              0.0101
                                                       (0.25)                              (0.48)
Positive R&D                                          0.208                              0.603
                                                       (5.26)                             (14.05)
Missing R&D                                          -0.210                              0.106
                                                       (-8.96)                             (3.38)
ROA                                                  -0.0464                              -0.0130
                                                       (-2.31)                             (-0.46)
PPE                                                  -0.260                              -0.734
                                                       (-8.68)                            (-15.26)
Patents ($ mil)                                     -0.0944                               -0.0177
                                                       (-3.14)                             (-0.57)
Adj. R2                    0.232         0.232          0.305    0.264       0.315          0.643
N                          4,312         4,301          4,226    3,765       3,757          3,718
This table presents the results of a linear regression model where the dependent variable is Costs
of Goods in columns (1) through (3) and General Expenses in columns (4) through (6). Costs of
Goods and General Expenses are winsorized at the 1% level. All specifications include year and
two-digit SIC industry fixed effects. All variables are described in the Appendix. All standard
errors are robust. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                                64
                                                                Table X

                            The Likelihood of Sunset Provisions in Dual-Class IPOs

                                                    Time Sunset       Ownership Sunset        Transfer Sunset      Other Sunsets
                                                          (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)
     Founder-control post-2005                        -0.162                -0.176                 0.0106              -0.0579
                                                       (-2.22)               (-1.76)               (0.09)              (-0.68)
     Founder-control                                   0.0274                0.0229                 0.115               0.0638
                                                       (0.54)                (0.33)                (1.26)               (0.98)
     Post-2005                                        0.175                 0.364                 0.555                  0.127
                                                       (2.23)                (3.20)                (3.78)               (1.23)
     Founder-control Non-Cloud                        0.00482               -0.0435               -0.0549              -0.0209
                                                       (0.08)                (-0.49)               (-0.46)             (-0.27)
65




     Non-Cloud post-2005                                0.113              -0.309                 -0.302                0.0827
                                                       (1.33)                (-2.64)               (-2.32)              (0.85)
     Founder-control Non-Cloud post-2005              -0.0564               0.403                   0.221               -0.119
                                                       (-0.47)               (2.27)                (1.18)              (-0.83)
     VC-backed                                        0.0660               -0.00516               -0.0615              0.0371
                                                       (2.31)                (-0.12)               (-1.22)              (1.02)
     Log(Age)                                          0.0140               0.0339                -0.0262              0.0243
                                                       (1.29)                (1.77)                (-1.19)              (1.73)
     Adj. R2                                           0.0631                0.0581                0.0786              -0.0135
     N                                                   600                   600                   600                  600
     This table presents the results of a linear regression model where the dependent variable is one of the four types of sunset
     provisions: (1) Time Sunset, (2) Ownership Sunset, (3) Transfer Sunset, and (4) Other Sunset. All specifications include year
     and two-digit SIC industry fixed effects. All variables are described in the Appendix. All standard errors are robust. ***, **,
     and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
                                        Table XI

                       Tobin's Q and the Size of the Wedge

                           (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)
                                                                            
Founder Wedge            0.000842      0.0424        0.0589       0.0741          0.0527
                          (0.18)         (2.87)        (3.63)        (3.44)         (2.65)
(Founder Wedge)2                     -0.000846      -0.00112     -0.00140       -0.00114
                                        (-3.19)       (-3.93)       (-3.41)         (-3.06)
Public Wedge                                                       -0.00311        -0.0102
                                                                    (-0.32)         (-1.20)
(Public Wedge)2                                                   0.0000353       0.000122
                                                                     (0.24)         (0.97)
D&O Wedge                                                           -0.0206        -0.0133
                                                                    (-1.13)         (-0.80)
(D&O Wedge)2                                                       0.000300       0.000151
                                                                     (0.76)         (0.42)
Company Wedge                                                      -0.00437        0.0589
                                                                    (-0.13)         (1.83)
(Company Wedge)2                                                  -0.000110      -0.00165
                                                                    (-0.14)         (-2.19)
Log(Age)                                                                          -0.138
                                                                                    (-3.20)
Log(Assets)                                                                       -0.308
                                                                                   (-11.46)
Patents ($ milllion)                                                              0.347
                                                                                    (9.23)
Leverage                                                                            -0.180
                                                                                    (-1.28)
Cash                                                                              0.813
                                                                                    (4.10)
Positive R&D                                                                       0.424
                                                                                    (2.41)
Missing R&D                                                                         -0.127
                                                                                    (-0.88)
Fixed Effects           Year, Ind.   Year, Ind.     Year-Ind.     Year-Ind.      Year-Ind.
Adj. R2                   0.244          0.246          0.235         0.235          0.321
N                         5,167          5,167          5,167         5,167          5,052
This table presents the results of a linear regression model where the dependent variable is
Tobin's Q (winsorized at the 2.5% level). All specifications include year and two-digit SIC
industry fixed effects. All variables are described in the Appendix. All standard errors are
robust. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                               66
                                       Table XII

            Price-to-Book Ratio and the Size of the Wedge

                            (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)
                                                                           
 Founder Wedge           0.00216       0.0552        0.0695        0.0768      0.0551
                          (0.24)        (2.04)        (2.31)        (1.71)     (1.32)
 (Founder Wedge)2                     -0.00108      -0.00140     -0.00174   -0.00141
                                        (-2.03)       (-2.40)      (-1.94)    (-1.69)
 Public Wedge                                                      -0.0264   -0.0309
                                                                   (-1.53)    (-1.87)
 (Public Wedge)2                                                 0.000442   0.000431
                                                                    (1.60)     (1.63)
 D&O Wedge                                                         -0.0354    -0.0261
                                                                   (-0.94)    (-0.76)
 (D&O Wedge)2                                                    0.000136  -0.0000345
                                                                    (0.15)    (-0.04)
 Company Wedge                                                     0.0296     0.0460
                                                                    (0.44)     (0.72)
 (Company Wedge)2                                                 -0.00193   -0.00227
                                                                   (-1.19)    (-1.51)
 Log(Age)                                                                     -0.140
                                                                              (-1.74)
 Log(Assets)                                                                -0.178
                                                                              (-3.51)
 Patents ($ milllion)                                                        0.515
                                                                               (7.58)
 Leverage                                                                     0.597
                                                                               (2.21)
 Cash                                                                         0.846
                                                                               (2.46)
 Positive R&D                                                                   0.513
                                                                               (1.42)
 Missing R&D                                                                   -0.259
                                                                              (-0.84)
 Fixed Effects          Year, Ind.    Year, Ind.    Year-Ind.    Year-Ind. Year-Ind.
  Adj. R2                   0.167         0.168         0.179      0.180       0.218
  N                         5,167         5,167         5,167      5,167       5,052
This table presents the results of a linear regression model where the dependent variable is
Price-to-Book Ratio (winsorized at the 2.5% level). All specifications include year and two-
digit SIC industry fixed effects. All variables are described in the Appendix. All standard
errors are robust. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                            67
                                                                         Appendix
                                                                Variable Description
Variable              Definition                                                                                                           Source
Age                   The difference between the current year and the year the company was founded                                         Compustat; Jay Ritter's website
Assets                Book value of assets in $ millions                                                                                   Compustat
Cash                  The ratio of cash and short-term investments to total book assets                                                    Compustat
Cloud Ind.            An indicator equal to 1 if a firm belongs to one of the following two-digit SIC codes: 23, 27, 31, 51, 52, 53, 54    Ewens et al. (2018); Compustat
                      56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 67, 70, 73, 78, 79, 82, 87, and 93
Co. Control           An indicator equal to 1 if a parent or holding company controls the firm and has the most voting power               Manual checks
Co. Wedge             The difference between parent or holding company's voting rights and economic rights                                 Manual checks
Cost of Goods         Cost of goods divided by sales                                                                                       Compustat
D&O Wedge             The difference between directors and officers' voting rights and economic rights                                     Manual checks
Dual-class            An indicator equal to 1 if a firm has dual-class stock at the time of its IPO                                        Manual checks; Jay Ritter's website;
                                                                                                                                           Gompers et al. (2009)
Eponymous             An indicator equal to 1 if a firm's name at IPO includes a person's name                                             Manual checks; Gompers et al. (2009)
Founder Control       An indicator equal to 1 if the founder controls the firm and has the most voting power                               Manual checks
Founder Wedge         The difference between founders' voting rights and economic rights                                                   Manucal checks
General Expenses      Selling, general and administrative expense divided by sales                                                         Compustat
Ind. Dry Powder       The amount of funds in $ billions raised by VC firms, but not invested in any company allocated to each              VentureXpert
                      two-digit SIC industry code based on the number of the fund's investment in each industry
Ind. M&A Num.         The natural log of the the number of industry mergers and acquistions in the year prior to the firm's IPO based      SDC
                      on two-digit industry codes
Ind. M&A Value        The natural log of the value of industry mergers and acquistions in the year prior to the firm's IPO based on        SDC
                      two-digit industry codes
Ind. Returns          The annual returns to the industry portfolio in the year prior to the firm's IPO based on the Fama-French 48         Ken French website
                      industry classification
Ind. Under-pricing    The average under-pricing of IPOs in the industry in the year prior to the firm's IPO based on the Fama-French       CRSP; SDC
                      48 industry classification. Under-pricing is the price of the share at the close of the first day of trading minus
                      the offer price at the IPO divided by the offer price at the IPO
Ind. Avg. Proceeds    The average proceeds of IPOs in the industry in the year prior to the firm's IPO based on the Fama-French 48         SDC
                      industry classification
Leverage              The ratio of long-term debt to total book assets                                                                     Compustat
Missing R&D           An indicator equal to 1 if R&D is missing                                                                            Compustat
NF D&O Control        An indicator equal to 1 if a non-founder director or officer controls the firm and has the most voting power         Manual checks
NF D&O Wedge          The difference between non-founder directors and officers' voting rights and economic rights                         Manual checks
NF Dual               An indicator equal to 1 if someone other than a founder controls the firm and has the most voting power              Manual checks
Non-Cloud             An indicator equal to 1 if a firm does not belong to a Cloud Industry                                                Compustat
Other Sunset          Sunset provisions other than Ownership Sunsets, Time Sunsets, or Transfer Sunsets that cause supervoting             Manual checks
                      shares to convert into shares with just one vote on the occurence of a specified event, such as the
                      controller's death or disability
Ownership Sunset      Sunset provisions that cause supervoting shares to convert into shares with just one vote when the                   Manual Checks
                      controller owns less than a prespecified percentage of the company's shares
Patents ($ mil)       The sum of the real economic value of innovation measured as the value of all patents filed by an IPO firm           Kogan et. al (2017)
                      within the five years before the IPO date. The file date is the synthetic file date obtained from the issue
                      date minus 1,017 days
PPE                   Net property, plant and equipment divided by total book assets                                                       Compustat
Price-to-Book Ratio   Market value of equity divided by book equity defined as in Fama & French (1992). Market value of equity             Compustat; CRSP; SDC
                      is defined as the fiscal year end close price times the number of shares outstanding as of the first year
                      following the IPO
Proceeds              Proceeds in $ millions raised in the IPO of the firm                                                                 SDC
Public Wedge          The difference between outside public shareholders' voting rights and economic rights                                Manual checks
R&D                   The ratio of research and development expenditures over total book assets                                            Compustat
ROA                   Return on assets calculated as operating income after depreciation divided by book assets in the previous year       Compustat
Spin-off              An indicator equal to 1 if the IPO involves a spin-off of a subsidiary corporation                                   SDC
Time Sunset           Sunsets provisions that cause the elimination of dual-class at a pre-specified point in time                         Manual Checks
Tobin's Q             Market value of equity plus book value of assets minus book value of equity divided by book value of assets          Compustat; CRSP; SDC
                      Book equity is defined as in Fama & French (1992). Market value of equity is defined as the fiscal year end
                      close price times the number of shares outstanding as of the first fiscal year following the IPO. Book assets is
                      defined as the most recent book assets following the IPO date
Transfer Sunset       Sunsets provisions that cause any supervoting shares that are sold to entities other than a list of transferees      Manual Checks
                      explicitly listed in the registration statement to convert to shares with one vote
VC-backed             An indicator equal to 1 if a firm was funded by a Venture Capital firm prior to the IPO                              SDC
VC Firm Age           The age of the oldest VC firm that provided financing to the firm prior to the IPO                                   VentureXpert
VC Firm Size          The total amount of funds raised by the largest VC firm (in $ millions) that provided financing to the firm prior    VentureXpert
                      to the IPO
VC Firms              The number of VC firms that provided financing to the firm prior to the IPO                                          VentureXpert
VC Ind. Financing     The total amount of late-stage venture capital financing provided to firms in the industry based on two-digit        VentureXpert
                      SIC codes
VC Rounds             The number of rounds of financing by VC firms prior to the IPO                                                       VentureXpert

                                                                                     68
                                                                        Table A.1

                  The Determinants of Controllers in Dual-Class IPOs - Univariate Specifications
                               Ind. Capital = VC Industry Financing                                  Ind. Capital = Ind. Dry Powder
                       Dual-Class Founder NF Dual NF D&O                      Co.      Dual-Class     Founder NF Dual NF D&O                    Co.
                           (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)          (10)
       Ind. Capital    0.00792       0.00629       0.00163     0.000261    0.000303     0.00142       0.00116      0.000256    0.0000890     0.000154
69




                         (5.91)        (5.78)       (1.67)      (1.17)      (0.49)        (6.07)        (6.96)      (1.46)        (1.77)      (1.28)
       Adj. R2           0.0896        0.0876       0.0341      0.0218      0.0188        0.0874        0.0853      0.0338       0.0219       0.0190
       N                  5,691         5,691        5,691       5,691       5,691         5,691         5,691       5,691        5,691        5,691
     This table presents the results of a linear probability model where the dependent variable is an indicator that equals 1 if an IPO has: dual-class
     stock in columns (1) and (6), a founder-controlled dual-class structure in columns (2) and (7), a dual-class structure not controlled by a founder
     in columns (3) and (8), a dual-class structure controlled by non-founder directors and officers in columns (4) and (9), and a dual-class structure
     controlled by a parent or holding company in columns (5) and (10). Columns (1) through (5) use VC Industry Financing as a proxy for VC
     investments, while columns (6) through (10) use Industry Dry Powder. All specifications include year and two-digit SIC industry fixed effects.
     All variables are described in the Appendix. All standard errors are robust. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
                                                                   Table A.2

     The Determinants of the Wedge between Voting Rights and Economic Rights - Univariate Specifications

                             Ind. Capital = VC Industry Financing                            Ind. Capital = Ind. Dry Powder
                        Public Founder      D&O     NF D&O        Co.             Public      Founder     D&O      NF D&O            Co.
                          (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)
       Ind. Capital    -0.209      0.226      0.268      0.0438      -0.00690   -0.0359      0.0327      0.0406      0.00977       0.000702
70




                        (-5.70)     (5.28)     (6.26)     (2.41)      (-0.49)     (-5.73)      (5.72)      (6.61)      (3.06)       (0.24)
        Adj. R2         0.0707      0.0805     0.0835     0.0133      0.0112      0.0679      0.0741      0.0764       0.0135       0.0112
        N                5,691      5,691      5,691      5,691        5,691       5,691       5,691       5,691        5,691        5,691
     This table presents the results of a linear regression model where the dependent variable is the size of the "Wedge" between voting and
     economic rights for various agents within the firm, as expressed in percentage points. The dependent variable is the wedge for public
     shareholders in columns (1) and (6), founders in columns (2) and (7), all directors and officers in columns (3) and (8), non-founder
     directors and officers in columns (4) and (9), and parent or holding company in columns (5) and (10). Columns (1) through (5) use VC
     Industry Financing as a proxy for VC investments, while columns (6) through (10) use Industry Dry Powder. All specifications include
     year and two-digit SIC industry fixed effects. All variables are described in the Appendix. All standard errors are robust. ***, **, and *
     denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
