                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           WEATHER, CLIMATE, AND MIGRATION IN THE UNITED STATES

                                      Jamie T. Mullins
                                     Prashant Bharadwaj

                                     Working Paper 28614
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28614


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




Much thanks to Teevrat Garg and seminar participants at various conferences and seminars for
helpful feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jamie T. Mullins and Prashant Bharadwaj. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Weather, Climate, and Migration in the United States
Jamie T. Mullins and Prashant Bharadwaj
NBER Working Paper No. 28614
March 2021
JEL No. Q0

                                          ABSTRACT

Do people move as a result of temperature shocks? Documenting weather as a push factor for
migration is crucial for informing policy related to climate change and adaptation. This paper
studies the impacts of high-temperature days on out-migration from counties in the US. We find
that outmigration responds to long-term variation in temperatures, but not to the short-term
temperature variations that are commonly leveraged in the literature. We provide evidence
consistent with the idea that the effect of long-term variation in temperature is driven by changes
in expectations regarding future conditions, and specifically climate change.


Jamie T. Mullins
Department of Resource Economics
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Stockbridge Hall
80 Campus Center Way
Amherst, MA 01035
jmullins@umass.edu

Prashant Bharadwaj
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
prbharadwaj@ucsd.edu
1    Introduction
Climate change is expected to impact many aspects of the global socio-economic system,
including the distribution of global populations. Human migration has been widely identified
as both one of the greatest potential problems driven by climate change and also one of the
most promising adaptive mechanisms for those facing increased risks under climate change
(Black et al., 2011; IPCC, 2014; Biden, 2021). There has been substantial research into
the likely impacts of climate change on migration in recent years (see Kaczan and Orgill-
Meyer, 2020 and Cattaneo et al., 2019 for recent reviews), however this work has focused
on migration within and out of developing countries as the populations of these countries
face the gravest risks. There has also been more attention paid to migratory responses to
catastrophic events than the slower-onset effects of climate change such as droughts and
temperature shifts, this is true in both poor and rich countries (Kaczan and Orgill-Meyer,
2020; Laczko et al., 2009). We aim to fill an important gap in the literature with this
investigation by characterizing the responsiveness of internal migration within a developed
country - the United States - to slowly evolving temperature changes, and showing that
such responsiveness is best understood as adaptation to expectations regarding future local
conditions under climate change.
    As a number of recent papers have done, we focus on the distinction between responses to
short- and long-term changes in temperatures as critical to identifying impacts relevant for
thinking about climate change (e.g., Kolstad and Moore, 2020). Through the introduction
of an extension to the Random Utility Model commonly leveraged in the study of migration,
we show that short-term (or transitory) temperature increases are not expected to lead
to substantial outmigration, while longer-term changes in local conditions (or perceptions
thereof) could prompt outmigration, holding constant other adaptation mechanisms. These
predictions stand in contrast to results for other, previously investigated outcomes which do
respond to short-term variations in weather, for example mortality, morbidity, and crop yields
(Desch^enes and Greenstone, 2011; White, 2017; Schlenker and Roberts, 2009). Our empirical
results bear out the predictions of our model, with migration responding to long-term, but
not temporary, temperature variation. We also provide evidence that the active channel for
the identified temperature-responsiveness of migration is changes in expectations regarding
future conditions, and in particular expectations regarding the likely local implications of
climate change. Taken together, our results demonstrate that migration can serve as a
mechanism for adaptation to climate change, and is already actively functioning as such in
the United States.
    Our empicial analysis leverages annual data from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)


                                              2
on county-to-county migration in the United States from 1983-2017 in order to shed light
on whether people move due to weather and climate changes in their origin counties. To
examine short-term "weather" shocks, we estimate a basic model of county-to-county migra-
tion flows with fixed effects for origin-destination pairs and state by year fixed effects. This
specification is derived from a Random Utility Model of migration decisions adapted from
prior work (Beine and Parsons, 2015; Beine et al., 2016). Measures of temperature serve
as the independent variables of interest throughout this paper. As a result of the state by
year fixed effects, the coefficient on temperature in this specification is identified solely from
differential deviations from local mean conditions between counties within the same state
and year. As such, these estimates reflect strictly the "short-run/weather/no-adaptation
response" (Auffhammer, 2018b; Kolstad and Moore, 2020). We find that such short-term
"weather" shocks do not result in any statistically significant or economically meaningful
outmigration.
    We next re-estimate a similar empirical model, again using origin-destination fixed effects,
but now we allow inter-annual (and longer) variation in temperatures to contribute to our
identification, and find substantial and significant effects of extreme temperatures on out-
migration rates. Temperature coefficients estimates from this specification are identified
from both the short-term and the long-term variation and imply economically meaningful
and statistically significant outmigration responses to higher temperatures. In particular,
we find that each additional day with a mean temperature between 80-90 F increases annual
outmigration of households by 0.43% relative to a day with a mean temperature between
60-70 F, while a single additional day >90 F increases yearly outgoing migration flows by
0.96%.
    We provide two additional lines of evidence that these estimates are driven by long-term
variation in temperatures. First, we estimate the main model after filtering the data (both
independent and dependent variables) using high-pass time-series filters which limit consid-
ered variation to frequencies below the specified filter frequencies (Hsiang, 2016). Second,
we undertake a long-differences estimation in which long-term changes ­ over 30 years ­ in
smoothed data (5-year averages of the independent and dependent variables) are used to es-
timate the effects of temperature deviations on migration (Burke and Emerick, 2016). Both
approaches confirm that long-term variation drives the identified migratory-responsiveness
to temperatures.
    We also investigate expectations about future conditions as an important channel for
why long-term variation might affect migratory decisions. First, we estimate a Common
Correlated Effects (CCE) model based on the work of Pesaran (2006) and more specifically
Bertoli et al. (2016) to test how the exclusion of the role of expectations of future conditions


                                                3
impacts estimates of temperature effects on migration. The basis of this approach is the ob-
servation that migration decisions are likely impacted by "the confounding influence exerted
by the future attractiveness of various options in the choice set", and that expectations of
such future attractiveness function as unobserved common factors which are addressable via
CCE methods (Bertoli et al., 2016).
    Our findings when we estimate this CCE-based model suggest that changes in expecta-
tions about the future are driving the migratory responses to temperature that we identify
in our main analyses. Second, we find that high-temperature effects on migration are larger
in areas where belief in global warming is stronger, and that such beliefs in global warm-
ing also respond to previous experiences with high-temperature realizations. Together these
results suggest that expectations of future weather conditions ­ and in particular of the
local effects of climate change ­ are important factors underlying the identified temperature
responsiveness of outmigration.
    While migration due to climate change has been offered as an important adaptation
mechanism, micro evidence on whether people move due to higher temperatures in developed
countries has only become a focus of research very recently. The burgeoning literature in
this area has focused largely on extreme events that cause severe disruptions to the economy
and well-being. For example, Mahajan and Yang (2017) show that people move away from
places that experience devastating hurricanes, Hornbeck (2012) finds that migration was the
primary adaptation mechanism used by those affected by the American Dust Bowl in the late
1930s, and Boustan et al. (2012) study migration responses to natural disasters in the 20th
century. Additionally, there is increasing evidence from developing countries where incomes
are much more closely tied to weather due to a higher reliance on agriculture. For example,
Cai et al. (2016), Cattaneo and Peri (2016), and Beine and Parsons (2015, 2017) all study the
link between temperatures and international migration in multi-country analyses focusing on
developing economies. Bohra-Mishra et al. (2014) find migratory responses to weather shocks
in Indonesia; Mueller et al. (2014) examine the relationship between heat stress and long-
term migration in Pakistan; Marchiori et al. (2012) provide evidence on weather anomalies
and migration in sub-Saharan Africa; and Missirian and Schlenker (2017) provide evidence
on refugee applications increasing as a result of temperature shocks in developing countries.
While such papers are indeed important in identifying a weather-migration connection, it
is also useful to consider how internal migration responds to non-catastrophic sources of
weather and climate variation in contexts where other coping mechanisms might be present
(these can range from direct adaptation mechanisms such as air conditioning to income
smoothing resources such as social safety nets or well-functioning credit markets). We are
also able to shed light on climate expectations as an important channel for why long-term


                                             4
variation matters for migration in out context.
    Such internal migration in the US context provides a unique opportunity to examine
migration decisions which are unconstrained by the policy and administrative barriers which
define international migration flows. This is yet another important avenue by which we
contribute to the extant literature investigating the the likely impact of climate change on
migration using international migratory flows (Beine and Parsons, 2015, 2017; Cai et al.,
2016; Cattaneo and Peri, 2016; Cattaneo et al., 2019). Additionally, migration within the
United States - in the modern era we study - is unlikely to be driven by concerns for survival,
and can instead be characterized as investment or preference-driven migration which is more
likely to be well-characterized as an outcome of an optimization problem rather than driven
by liquidity constraints (as in Bazzi, 2017). Closely related to this paper is the work of
Feng, Oppenheimer, and Schlenker (2012) who examine net-migration flows in the United
States due to changes in crop yields (which in turn are affected by the weather) in the
Corn Belt. While agricultural incomes no doubt play a role in determining push and pull
factors, we show that migratory responsiveness to extreme temperatures are not limited to
agriculturally-dependent areas. Our paper also adds to this knowledge space by focusing on
short-term versus long-term changes in weather and climate, and relates these changes with
perceptions about climate change as a deciding push factor in migration.
    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we describe the data
used for the analyses and the way in which migration as an outcome variable fits into the
temperature-effects literature in economics. Section 3 presents the conceptual model and
introduces an analog to the Permanent Income Hypothesis that will frame the discussion
of our analytical results. These results, as well as the details of the employed empirical
methods, are laid out in Section 4. Section 5 examines heterogeneity and robustness of
our results and presents a descriptive assessment of migratory destination characteristics.
Section 6 concludes.


2     Data and Setting
2.1    Data
In order to examine internal migratory flows within the US, we rely upon annual Statistics
of Income (SOI) data from the Internal Revenue Service of the United States (IRS). By
matching filing addresses from tax returns in sequential years, these data provide directional
county-to-county migratory flows back to the early 1980s. Currently, the IRS provides access



                                              5
to data begining in 1990.1 This is the data, and thus the time period from 1990-2017, which
we use for our main sample. For several analyses - for which longer panels are of particular
value - we leverage additional SOI migration data going back to 1983 as archived and made
available by the University of Michigan ICPSR project.2
    The SOI migration data includes directional, county-to-county flows of three measures
of migration: 1.) filed personal tax returns, 2.) claimed exemptions, and 3.) aggregate
income claimed. The count of returns serves as a proxy for the number of households that
migrate, while the number of claimed exemptions proxies for the number of individuals that
migrate.3 Both these measures are available for all years in the data, while inclusion of
aggregate income begins in 1992.
    Weather conditions, temperatures and precipitation, are merged on to each migratory
flow for both origin and destination counties. Weather data is from NOAA's Global Historical
Climatology Network and assigned to counties based on the inverse distance weighted average
from all monitors within 300km of the centroid of the relevant county. The temperature
measures used in this analysis are annual counts of days with reported mean temperatures
falling in each of eight distinct temperature bins in a given year for a given county. The
bins capture counts of days with mean temperatures in 10-degree Fahrenheit ranges from
30 F to 90 F, with the remaining bins counting days <30 and >90 F. Following the order
of operations laid out in Dell et al. (2014) to maintain variability in temperatures through
the aggregation process, these counts are calculated for each weather monitor in the data
and then aggregated to the county level. Total precipitation and mean daily temperatures
are also calculated for each monitor and aggregated to the county level based on the same
inverse distance weighting procedure. Only data from origin counties in the continental
United States are included in the analytic sample.
    Additional county-year data for controls and supporting analyses was taken from the
Economic Profile by County data product (CAINC30) provided by the Bureau of Economic
Analysis and the Yale Program on Climate Change Communication.4 For the details of our
sample construction and data idiosyncrasies, please see Appendix Section A.2.
    Table 1 summarizes the annual county-to-county migration flows and non-migrant totals
for each of the three IRS SOI outcomes. The table also reports the average annual county-
of-origin temperature conditions in our main sample.
   1
     Data available: https://www.irs.gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-migration-data, accessed Feb. 12, 2021.
   2
     Data available: https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/2937, accessed Feb. 12, 2021.
   3
     See the SOI website for complete information: https://www.irs.gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-migration-
data.
   4
     Available: https://apps.bea.gov/regional/downloadzip.cfm and https://climatecommunication.yale.edu,
respectively. Both accessed Feb. 23, 2021



                                                    6
    The implied total, annual out-migration rates for households, individuals, and income in
the data are 5.04%, 4.39%, and 3.90% respectively. These estimates do not exactly reflect
actual out-migration rates because low county-to-county flows do not appear in the data for
privacy reasons, and we do not account for outflows to international destinations (or U.S.
destinations not included in the sample). Nevertheless, these rates serve as the baselines
against which our estimated marginal effects can be assessed. Straightforward comparison
of these rates to one another suggests that smaller, lower-income households are more likely
to migrate.


2.2    Migration as an outcome
The identification of adaption to weather variation and ultimately warming due to climate
change is typically done via the comparison of dose-response functions of temperature-
impacted outcomes over time or across space (Carleton and Hsiang, 2016). Smaller-magnitude
responses to temperature variation at a given time or place are usually taken to indicate ef-
fective adaptation to high temperatures (e.g., Barreca et al., 2016; Burke and Emerick,
2016).
    Migration decisions are different from most other outcomes of interest in the study of
temperature impacts and climate change adaption as migration potentially represent a direct
measure of adaptive action. Just as the crop switching studied by Hornbeck (2012) or
changes in planting time studied by Kala (2017) represent adaptive responses to different
precipitation patterns (drought and shifting monsoon start, respectively), we study migration
as an "explicit measure" of adaptation to higher realized local temperatures (Carleton and
Hsiang, 2016).
    Kolstad and Moore (2020) separate effects of climate change into two categories: short-
or long-term responses. In this framing, short-term responses are those for which "expecta-
tions, beliefs, and... investments [are] held fixed", while long-term responses to changes in
climate conditions take into account "both expectations and capital investments". Auffham-
mer (2018b) presents a related framing that additionally identifies short-term responses as
those taking place on the intensive margin of activity, while long-term responses occur on
the extensive margin. Hsiang (2016) presents yet another 2-category framing of the effects of
climate as "direct" and "belief" effects, in which direct effects arise directly from the weather
realizations (which are functions of the climate) and belief effects result from "individuals'
beliefs" regarding climate "affect[ing] their decisions and resulting outcomes". In each case,
the first category of effects of climate change can be reasonably proxied - in the absence of
the second category of effects - by the estimated impacts of "unexpected and temporary"


                                               7
weather variation (Kolstad and Moore, 2020).5 We will develop a model that assumes that
climate change impacts on migration (if any) would be the second type of effect of climate
change in each framing, that is a long-term, extensive margin, belief effect. Such effects do
not arise from - and therefore cannot be identified based on - "transient" weather shocks. As
a means of investigating the validity of our modeling assumption, we lay out a working hy-
pothesis that adapts the conclusions of the Permanent Income Hypothesis for amenity flows,
and then undertake an empirical investigation of this hypothesis. Thus, we characterize,
weigh evidence for, and ultimately conclude that migratory responses to high temperature
realizations are in fact responses to perceived long-term (or "permanent") shocks to local
weather conditions arising from anthropogenic climate change. Put another way, migration
is already an active channel for climate change adaptation.


3         Conceptual Model
The aim of this investigation is to characterize the impact that local temperatures have on
internal migration decisions in the United States, and in particular, how the sensitivity of
such migratory responses to temperatures might differ depending on the periodicity - and
thus the underlying source - of the relevant temperature variation. Our empirical context
allows us to observe household decisions which can reasonably be characterized as the out-
comes of individuals weighing the advantages and disadvantages of staying in their current
place of residence versus migrating to another location.6 Our focus will be on how realized
temperatures impact migratory decisions, and whether migration motivating temperature
variation can be thought of as short-term (i.e., weather variation) or long-term (i.e., climate
change).
    Using the notation of the Random Utility Model, in each period, t, individuals beginning
in origin county, j , choose which destination county, k , to live in for the period. Non-
migrators are modeled as selecting k = j , with utility in year t of:

                                            uijjt = Ajt +    ijjt                                         (1)

        For all others, k = j . Such migrators face moving costs, denoted Mjkt , and thus utility:7
    5
      In the terminology of Hsiang (2016), the "marginal treatment comparability assumption... that the
effect of a marginal change in the distribution of weather (relative to expectation) is the same as the effect
of an analogous marginal change in climate" is true for short-term, intensive, and direct effects.
    6
      Our model and derivations are adapted from those of Beine and Parsons (2015) and Beine et al. (2016).
    7
      Those familiar with dynamic choice models will note the silence of this approach with regard to implica-
tions of the present decision on future migration decisions. Consideration of the discounted expected values
of optimal future strategies for staying and migrating can be added to this framework (see Beine et al., 2016,
section 2.b.ii). We consider such an extension in Section 4.3.3.

                                                      8
                                        uijkt = Akt - Mjkt +      ijkt                                    (2)

    In both expressions, Akt represents the utility derived from the amenities of the county
of residence for the period. This term is often referred to as the deterministic component
of the utility, while ijkt is the individual-specific stochastic term. We next assume the
stochastic term follows an iid, type-1 extreme value distribution and apply the results of
McFadden et al. (1973) in taking the ratio of movers to stayers in a given county.8 Taking
natural logs of both sides of the resulting statement yields the following linear relationship -
in expectation - between the natural log of the migration rate (herein, the ratio of migrators
to non-migrators), amenity levels in the origin and destination, and costs associated with
migration. See Appendix Section A.1 or Beine and Parsons (2015) for the details of these
steps.

                                       Njkt
                                  ln           = Akt - Ajt - Mjkt                                         (3)
                                       Njjt

  We now substitute in a generic outcome variable to represent the migration rate and split
amenities into weather and non-weather amenities, Wjt and Njt , respectively.

                                Yjkt = Wkt + Nkt - Wjt - Njt - Mjkt                                       (4)

    One aim of this investigation is the empirical estimation of the relationship between
realized temperatures and the out-migration rate, that is dYjkt /dWjt . The second aim of this
paper is to decompose the response to realized weather into short- and long-term components.
We now think about realized weather - and in particular, the realization of the measures
of specific dimensions of weather - as being a draw from a (potentially joint-) probability
distribution which characterizes the local climate (e.g., Hsiang, 2016; Kolstad and Moore,
2020). Put another way, local weather can be characterized as the sum of the expected value
                                                                        2
of the local climate distribution, Cj , and a stochastic term, jt  (0, j  ), such that we write:
Wjt = Cj + jt . For our setting and interest in temperature then, we assume that climate
is characterized by the first moment (mean) of the weather distribution, and the realized
temperature is simply a draw from that distribution (Auffhammer, 2018b). Rather than
   8
     This distributional assumption, first laid out by McFadden et al. (1973), implies independence of irrele-
vant alternatives, and thus drops consideration of so-called "multilateral resistance" (the idea that changes
in non-origin, non-destination locations impact flows between the origin and destination) from the model.
This has long been standard in both the trade and migration literatures, and we adopt it here under the ba-
sic assumption that factors impacting the origin-destination migration decision, but occuring in non-origin,
non-destination counties, are not correlated with our variables of interest, namely origin-county temperatures
(see: Beine and Parsons, 2015).


                                                      9
assuming local weather distributions - and therefore climates - are fixed, however, we want
to allow for the potential change of expectations regarding local climates, and we therefore
write Wjt = CjT + jt , where T is multi-year period that includes year t.

                          Yjkt = CkT + kt + Nkt - CjT + jt - Njt - Mjkt                                  (5)

     The separation of the weather impacts on out-migration into short- versus long-term can
therefore be thought of as the attribution of any identified out-migration effects between the
random weather variation term, jt , and the long-term changes in local conditions embodied
by variation in CjT .
     An important distinction between this model of temperature responsiveness and those
of other outcomes, is that the above characterizations (in Equations 3-5) are only true in
expectation. This means that the jt and kt terms drop out due to their zero values in
expectation. In practical terms, this implies that random, or short-term, weather variation
should not impact migration rates. If responses to realized weather are observed, the model
implies that such effects would be acting through changes in expectations regarding climatic
conditions, E (CjT ) for origin counties, which in turn impact location choices and migration.
It is important to recognize that this characterization is a direct outgrowth of the assumptions
of our modeling framework,9 though the intuition is also straightforward. When an outcome
is a function of an expectation rather than the realization of a state, the only way that
observed variation can influence the outcome is through changes in the expectation. In
the context of this study, migration decisions depend only on expectations regarding future
amenity flows and conditions, and for temperature, only long-run variation should influence
expectations regarding future conditions. Therefore, only long-run temperature variation
should impact migration. We will spend the rest of the paper empirically investigating the
validity our model's assumptions and implications.
     As made explicit in the model above, we expect climate change to impact migratory deci-
sions, but short-term variation in weather to have no effect. This framing suggests an analogy
to the Permanent Income Hypothesis ("PIH") put forward originally by Friedman (1957).
Just as the standard PIH postulates that changes in consumption patterns are a function
of permanent, but not transitory, changes in income, we hypothesize that our observable
indicator of a permanent change in consumption - namely migration - ought only respond to
   9
    Models of temperature responses of short-term, intensive, and/or direct effects of climate change depend
directly on realized exposure, without expectations. For instance, heat-stroke deaths and corn-yields respond
to temperature exposure, not expectations of conditions as is implicitly assumed in the RUM framework for
migration.




                                                     10
permanent (or perceived permanent), but not transitory, changes in amenity flows.10 Given
the timescale over which climate change might be undone, we equate long-term (in the sense
used by Kolstad and Moore, 2020) and permanent time span descriptors throughout our
discussion. The amenity of interest in this setting is weather, and in particular tempera-
tures, so our working PIH-analog suggests that migration responds to permanent, but not
transitory, changes in temperature.
    Our outcome of interest is behavioral in nature, and as such, estimated effects of tem-
perature variation are informative regarding perceptions of the connection between locally-
unusual temperature realizations and changes in beliefs regarding the underlying long-term
weather distribution (i.e.- climate) rather than the reality of such a link.11
    Just as the PIH has been tested empirically (see Hall, 1978 and many others since), we
will bring our working hypothesis to the data. The evidence for or against our working
hypothesis is of interest for better understanding migratory flows and migration decisions
(Molloy et al., 2011; Cattaneo et al., 2019); the consideration of modes of adaptation to
climate change (Bohra-Mishra et al., 2014; Beine and Parsons, 2015; Cai et al., 2016); how
we think of responses to weather variation in the context of a changing climate (Burke and
Emerick, 2016; Taraz, 2017; Kala, 2017); and untangling responses to short versus long-term
variation in weather outcomes (Dell et al., 2012; Hsiang, 2016; Auffhammer, 2018b; Lemoine,
2018; Kolstad and Moore, 2020).


4     Empirical Framework and Results
Because we cannot separately observe climate and weather variation, our empirical model
builds from Equation 4 with a focus on temperature as our weather-measure of interest. In
order to isolate quasi-random variation in realized-weather, we leverage fine-geographic fixed
effects following the approach laid out by Desch^ enes and Greenstone (2007) and Dell et al.
(2014). In particular, we will use directional county-pair fixed effects - denoted jk - in most
   10
      Migration could conceivably be considered a means of consumption smoothly rather than an indicator
of changes in consumption patterns. This alternative framing would lead to the prediction that migratory
responses would occur in response to short-, but not long-term, shocks, which is not borne out by the data
in the current setting.
   11
      This is again related to the conceptualization, put forward by Hsiang (2016), that weather deviations
have both direct and belief effects. In this setting, we assume (and will test to see) that there is no direct
effect of short-term temperature variation on outmigration. Our working hypothesis therefore implies that
our estimates are driven completely by "belief effects" in Hsiang's framework. In the framework of Kolstad
and Moore (2020), we hypothesize that migration is analogous to a change in "fixed capital investments"
which is a "long-run response" that adjusts "to permanent changes in climate, but... cannot adjust in
response to short-term variation in weather." Finally, in the framing of Auffhammer (2018b), our working
hypothesis states that migration is an "extensive margin adaptation" because it is not "a short-run weather
response, [but] a long-run climate response".


                                                     11
of our regression analyses. These fixed effects absorb all time-constant features of the origin
AND destination counties as well as the relationship between them. We will also control
for location-specific time trends using various functions of time and geography for both the
origin and destination locations. We indicate the general location-specific functions of time
for the origin and destination as fj (t) and fk (t) respectively. We will consider functions
of origin-temperature, f (Wjt ) , and also include a vector of origin-relevant variables, Xjt ,
which will always include (at least) precipitation controls. We can represent this general
form as follows:

                      Yjkt = f (Wjt ) + Xjt µ + jk + fj (t) + fk (t) +   jkt                 (6)

    There are several things worth noting in this general empirical specification. Regressors
for specific, time-varying components of the destination: Nkt and Wkt , are explicitly omitted
due to their endogeneity as outcomes of agent decisions. Non-weather amenities in the origin
location, Njt , are also excluded from the regression to avoid bias from "bad controls", which
arises when variables that could themselves be impacted by the treatment of interest are
included as control variables in a regression analysis (Angrist and Pischke, 2008). Such
"bad controls" are especially likely in the context of temperature effects given that so many
potential control variables may actually vary with weather (Hsiang et al., 2013; Cattaneo
and Peri, 2016).
    Following Barreca et al. (2016), unusual local precipitation in the origin-county is con-
trolled for in all specifications using indicators for county-specific total annual precipitation
above the 75th percentile or under the 25th percentile for the county. These controls are
included in the origin-control vector Xjt .
    For the outcome variable, Yjkt , we opt for the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation
("IHS" hereafter) of the migration rate rather than the natural log because of the many
annual dyadic flows with zero values in the data. Regression estimated marginal effects
on IHS-transformed outcomes can be interpreted approximately as percent changes in the
same way that is common for natural-logarithm-transformed outcome variables. Through a
series of robustness checks, we will also show that the character of the results for our main
specification is unchanged by the use of the migration rate in levels or ln ((1 + Njkt )/Njjt )
as the outcome of interest (see Table A3 for estimates).
    Our empirical specification allows for the consideration of each of the three migration
rates that can be calculated from the IRS data: 1.) Tax Returns; 2.) Exemptions; and
3.) Aggregate Income on filed returns. We will present relevant estimates for each of the
three, but ultimately we focus on tax returns as our main measure of interest given that
returns are the core unit of observation in the IRS data and all three measures are closely

                                               12
correlated. Thus, unless otherwise indicated, the outcome being considered is the inverse
hyperbolic sine of the tax return migration rate defined as the ratio of migrating tax returns
to non-migrating (or staying) tax returns in the relevant year.
    Unless otherwise noted, standard errors are clustered at the level of origin-county, as that
is the level at which temperature variation exists in our data.


4.1    Short-Term, Temporary Shocks
Turning to the empirical investigation of our working hypothesis, we begin with a model
that is linear in temperature and includes granular spatial and temporal fixed effects.

                            Yjkt = Wjt + Xjt µ + jk + Jt +        jkt                         (7)

    This model includes the direction-specific, county-pair fixed effects, jk ; state-by-year
fixed effects for the state-of-origin, Jt (where J indicates the state of county j ); and our
origin-county precipitation controls, Xjt . The granular geographic fixed effects absorb cross-
sectional variation while the year fixed effects absorb inter-annual variation. As a result, the
coefficient on temperature in this specification is identified solely from differential deviations
from local mean conditions between counties within the same state and year. That is, this
specification is identified using only components of jt from Equation 5 and not from any
components of CjT . As such, estimates reflect strictly the "short-run/weather/no-adaptation
response" (Auffhammer, 2018b; Kolstad and Moore, 2020). Under the working hypothesis,
we therefore expect the estimates of  to be small and statistically insignificant. As reported
in Table 2, this is the case across all three measures of migration (returns, exemptions,
and aggregate income). While this model includes state-by-year fixed effects, estimates are
similarly small in magnitude (and insignificant) when year fixed effects (t ) or climate-zone-
by-year fixed effects (CZt ) are used in place of Jt . See Table A1 for relevant estimates using
different geographic-unit-interactions with the year fixed effects and based on a more flexible
specification of temperature. Similar to the estimates in Table 2, coefficients estimates are
generally small and statistically insignificant.


4.2    Main Specification: Including Short- and Long-Term Varia-
       tion
Opening up the variation used for identifying temperature effects, we now present our main
specification:



                                               13
                               B
                      Yjkt =         b Pbjt + Xjt µ + jk + j t + µk t +   jkt              (8)
                               b=1

    In place of the linear temperature measure used previously, we adopt a series of variables
which are counts of days in calendar year t on which county j 's mean temperature fell into
each of eight 10 F-wide bins. Six of these bins cover the temperature range from 30 F to
90 F with the remaining bins counting days <30 F and >90 F. The 60-70 F temperature
bin is the omitted category in our main "seven-bin" analyses for which B = 7. The average
number of days in each bin in each year is reported in Table 1, note that days with mean
temperatures >90 F are quite uncommon on average. We also estimate specifications in
which only two "extreme" temperature bins ­ counts of days <30 F and >80 F ­ are included
(in these cases B = 2). The omitted category in these "two-bin" specifications is days with
mean temperatures between 30-80 F. Estimates for each of the three outcome measures are
presented in Table 3 and graphically in Figure 1. All models include the origin-precipitation
controls and county-pair fixed effects.
    This specification includes origin- and destination-specific linear time trends rather than
year-fixed effects. This allows for (detrended) inter-annual variation in independent variables
to contribute to our identification, and thereby yields temperature coefficient estimates that
are identified from both short- and long-term variation. While this approach potentially
allows for other, time-varying factors to influence estimates, the inclusion of the rich set of
spatial fixed effects and time trends in the specification limits this risk.
    Allowing for both short- and long-term variation to contribute to temperature-coefficient
identification yields significant, positive, and increasing estimates for higher temperatures
across all three migration outcomes. Similar patterns are clearly visible across the three
outcomes, namely high temperatures lead to outmigration. We see also that an increase in
the incidence of cold days (those with a daily average temperature below 30 F) is associated
with reductions in outmigration whether measured in terms of households, individuals, or
earnings. Going forward we will focus on tax returns as the main outcome of interest,
but generally our results are comparable across the other outcome measures. The resulting
coefficient estimates suggest that each additional day with a mean temperature between
80-90 F increases outmigration of households (proxied by tax returns) by 0.43% relative to
a day with a mean temperature between 60-70 F. A day >90 F similarly increases outgoing
migrant flows by 0.96%.
    Given we find no impact from short-term temperature variations on out-migration, and
now have identified significant effects of high-temperatures when both short- and long-term
variation are considered, these estimates suggest that long-term temperature variation im-


                                                 14
pacts outmigration. Thus, we have now presented empirical evidence consistent with both
parts of our working hypothesis. Namely, it appears as though migration - which embodies
the decision to permanently change the amenity flows which one experiences - is not af-
fected by short-term (or transitory) temperature changes, but is impacted by long-term (or
effectively permanent) changes in temperature.


4.3     Exploring Long-Term Variation
Another means by which to separate the impacts of short- and long-term variation in tem-
peratures is through isolation of the frequencies of the variation leveraged in identification.
We have already seen that estimated effects of temperatures identified only with intra-year
variation (with year-fixed effects) - which is the shortest frequency variation in our annual
data - are small and insignificant. We now explore two methods of limiting identifying
variation to lower frequencies and thus, longer time scales.
    First, we will filter the data (both independent and dependent variables) using high-pass
time-series filters which limit considered variation to frequencies below the specified filter
frequencies (Hsiang, 2016). Second, we will undertake a long-differences estimation in which
long-term changes in smoothed data (5-year averages of the independent and dependent
variables) are used to estimate the effects of temperature deviations on migration (Burke
and Emerick, 2016). We use the difference across the longest period over which our data
allow for the comparison of 5 year moving averages, 30 years.
    We follow these analyses up with a series of estimations which illuminate the roles of
expectations and beliefs regarding climate change in the identified effects.

4.3.1   Filtered Analyses

We saw that specifications with year fixed effects ­ which leverage only intra-annual tem-
perature variation ­ yield small and insigniciant estimates of the impacts of temperature on
migration, see Tables 2 and A1. A rough method to reduce temporal limits on the variation
considered would be through expanding the period length of the fixed effects, for instance
imposing 3-year-period or 5-year-period fixed effects. This approach would however, be sen-
sitive to the specific years grouped together (e.g., whether 1990-1992 or 1991-1993 were the
first 3-year-period considered). The application of time series filters is a related, but more
robust approach to limiting identifying variation by interval length (similar to procedures
described by Hsiang, 2016). Figure 2 and Table 4 report estimates from the main, seven-bin
specification based on time-series filtered outcome and temperature variables. Specifically,
a Butterworth high-pass filter is applied at expanding time-horizons. This approach follows


                                              15
the continuum of temporal variation period from the year-fixed effects model to the main
specification by moving from the consideration of only short-term variation to the considera-
tion of all variation for identification. The time-series filters allow us to make this transition
in smaller steps, but the same general story emerges. When only very short-term variation is
used (0-3 year periodicity), we do not see positive effects of high temperatures on migration,
but as variation of lower frequencies (i.e., occurring over longer periods) is allowed through
the filters, and thus used for identification, the estimated effects of high temperatures ap-
proach the main, unfiltered estimates (also reported for comparison). This suggests again
that it is not short-term variation in temperatures that is driving our main results, but
instead low-frequency, longer-term variation.
    It is worth pointing out that even when variation with period length up to 15 years is
analyzed, the full estimates of our main regressions are not realized. This suggests that the
relevant time-interval over which temperature variations should be considered in order to
capture all contributions of temperatures to the migration outcome is longer than 15 years.
The commonly considered 30-year-average definition of climate (e.g., Pachauri et al., 2014)
is therefore consistent with our results.

4.3.2   Long-Differences

As a means of directly estimated the effects of long-term temperature variation, we also
undertake a long-differences estimation of the impacts of temperature on migration. This
approach regresses long-term changes in migration rates onto long-term changes in tempera-
tures to estimate the response of migration to long-term changes in temperature realizations.
Following Burke and Emerick (2016), we examine changes in 5-year averages in temperature
realizations and migration rates across the longest possible time frame in our data, which
is 30-years. It is worth noting that the change in local-climate temperature distributions
due to human-induced climate change has probably not been large enough over this time
frame (1987-2017) to be driving these estimates (Kolstad and Moore, 2020), however, in our
setting (in contrast to settings concerned with direct effects of temperatures such as Burke
and Emerick, 2016) it is perceptions of a shift in the climate distribution that will drive
immigration decisions, and there has certainly been enough time (and media attention) for
expectations of temperatures to have changed.
    Figure 3 reports seven-bin model estimates for 30-year changes in 5-year averages of
temperature­bin counts. Note a "marginal change" in this setting represents an average of
one extra day in a temperature bin over a 5 year period, which is a larger marginal change
than is considered by the rest of our analyses. That said, we see that higher temperatures
are clearly associated with higher out-migration rates.

                                               16
    The marginal shock in this setting embodies a stronger signal of a shift in climate both
because the statistics are 5-year averages (and a change in the five year average is more
informative than the equivalent change observed in a single year) and because these changes
are observed across a thirty-year time period, making inattention much less likely.
    Looking at the long differences results together with the estimates from our main re-
gressions suggests that migration may be driven by the binary perception that one's local
climate distribution has changed rather than by the perceived magnitude of the change. We
see that all hot-temperature bins in the long-differences analysis drive similar out-migration
responses suggesting that perceptions of a local shift in the climate distribution may drive
outmigration. In contrast, our main results show higher out-migration responses associ-
ated with higher temperature bins, suggesting the magnitude of changes in the perception
of long-term temperature changes may be larger when one-year temperature anomalies are
larger.

4.3.3   Expectations as a Channel

Changes perceived to be long-term or permanent necessarily impact expectations of the
future. Our model suggests that temperature shocks can impact migration only through
expectations, and the idea of expectations operating as the active channel underlying our
results is bolstered by the observation that migration provides no amelioration of harm or
protection from experienced temperature shocks in either the past or present.
    To explicitly consider the channel of expectations of future conditions in the conceptual
model, we add a term to the utility functions at the foundation of the RUM model to account
for the discounted expected flow of future utility from a time t location choice,   Vt+1 (k ),
as laid out by Beine et al. (2016) and Bertoli et al. (2016). Equation 2 thus becomes:

                           uijkt = Akt - Mjkt +   Vt+1 (k ) +    ijkt                      (9)

   Following the steps in Section 3 (and detailed in Appendix Section A.1) and the work of
Bertoli et al. (2016) leads us to a version of Equation 3 that additionally includes expected
future utility flows from migrating to county k and staying in county j as follows:

                         Njkt
                    ln          = Akt - Ajt - Mjkt +  [Vt+1 (k ) - Vt+1 (j )]             (10)
                         Njjt
    Estimation of the empirical counterpart to Equation 10 without accounting for expecta-
tions of future conditions ­ as we have done up to this point ­ necessarily rolls any impact of
contemporaneous temperatures acting through expectations into the estimated coefficients


                                               17
on contemporaneous temperatures. What follows is a description of one approach to empir-
ically separate the influence of temperature shocks acting through expectations from effects
coming through other channels.
    One subtle aspect of Equation 10 is that the functions of future amenity flows, Vt+1 (k )
and Vt+1 (j ), depend on expectations of future conditions in all counties in the choice set,
rather than only those in the origin and destination counties. This is because future moves
could be made to other counties beyond the origin and destination of the current move,
and thereby impact future amenity flows.12 Importantly, changes in expectations regarding
future conditions are likely to be correlated across space, and can therefore be viewed as
common, but unobservable, shocks, resulting in a multifactor error structure for the empir-
ical counterpart to Equation 10 of the type described by Pesaran (2006). As laid out by
Bertoli et al. (2016), the Common Correlated Effects (CCE) estimation procedure - which
was first presented by Pesaran (2006) and extended in Chudik and Pesaran (2015) ­ can
therefore remove the "influence exerted by [expectations of] the future" from the estimation
of coefficients on the origin characteristics of interest by treating the Vt+1 (k ) and Vt+1 (j )
terms in Equation 10 as common factors impacting all county-to-county migration flows.13
    If, as we have been assuming, migratory responses to high temperature are driven by
changes in people's perceptions regarding local climate norms, and thus expectations of fu-
ture meteorological conditions in their areas, we should see the impact of high temperatures
shrink or disappear when the influence of expectations is controlled for via the CCE esti-
mation procedure. Figure 4 shows the coefficient estimates from the seven temperature-bin
model based on the CCE specification. We see that the effects of high temperature days on
out-migration disappear when the influence of expectations is removed from consideration.
Taken with the evidence in the previous sections, and the impotence of migration to protect
against past or current temperature shocks, these results suggest that long-term variation
in the realization of high temperatures drives outmigration through alterations in residents'
expectations regarding the future.


4.4     Additional Evidence
Having shown a number of avenues of evidence for our working hypothesis and the inter-
pretation of our main results as embodying long-term, adaptive responses to changes in
temperature, we now present several other pieces of evidence which are consistent with this
framing. As a group, the results of these analyses bolster the evidence already presented for
  12
     This is true unless either agents are totally myopic or face zero migration costs, and even if the assumption
that ijkt follows an iid, type-1 extreme value distribution holds (Bertoli et al., 2016).
  13
     See Appendix Section A.3 for details of our implementation.


                                                       18
the validity of our working hypothesis.
    First, we find that migratory responsiveness to high temperatures increases over time.
Column 1 of Table 5 shows relevant estimates from a model in which we add the interaction
between year and the count of hot days in the two-temperature-bin specification. We see the
coefficient on the interaction is positive and significant, showing that migration responses to
high temperatures have grown in magnitude over the time of our sample. This relationship is
also shown in Figure 5 which reports separate estimates for the effects of hot days by 3 year
period. This general growth in the marginal effects of unusually hot days over time coincides
with the growth in understanding and awareness of climate change across the United States.
This increase in marginal effects is consistent with our working hypothesis if ­ as seems
reasonable ­ understanding and awareness of climate change increases the likelihood that
high temperature realizations are perceived as indicative of long-term changes in local norms
rather than simple anomalies. This connection is visible more directly in the estimates in
column 2 of Table 5 which show that larger migratory responses to hot days are observed
where rates of belief in global warming are higher.
    Related to the above, idiosyncratic weather variation will tend to obscure long-term or
permanent changes in climate. Long-term changes would therefore be harder to discern from
normal weather variation in places in which year-to-year variation in weather was relatively
large. If migration responds to long-term changes in climate, we would expect to see the
strongest responses in locales where such changes are more easily discernible, that is in places
where year-to-year variation in weather is lower on average. By interacting a measure of local
weather variability ­ the mean absolute deviation in yearly days >80 F ­ in the pre-analysis
period (1983-1989) with the count of hot days each year, we find that areas with greater
baseline variability in temperatures respond less strongly to the long-term variation from
which our main estimates are identified. Relevant estimates are presented in column 3 of
Table 5. Similar evidence is visible in Figure 6, where the marginal effect of one additional
hot day falls to zero as the average annual frequency of such hot days during the preanalysis
period increases. One additional hot day is a very small deviation from area norms in places
that regularly see >67 such days, making such days more easily interpretable as transitory
variation rather than informative of long-term (or permanent) shocks to weather.
    Finally, if changes in perceptions of local long-term weather norms are driving migration
in our analysis through changes in expectations about the future, we might expect to find the
same variation would drive changes in stated beliefs about climate change. Figure 7 reports
the regression-estimated relationship between survey-reported belief that global warming is
happening and the incidence of high temperatures in the preceding year. In models with
and without year fixed effects, we see that more hot days, and especially very hot days, are


                                              19
associated with higher rates of reported belief in global warming the following year. Both
migration and belief in global warming respond to long-term variation in the realization of
hot days. This is consistent with a link between our working hypothesis and perceptions of
climate change.
    Our estimates of the effects of short-term and long-term temperature variation, in con-
junction with the additional evidence presented in this and the preceding sections, suggest
that observed internal migratory patterns are consistent with our working hypothesis and
that the perceived permanence of observed temperature changes is related to understanding
and perceptions of anthropogenic climate change. This appears to be the case even if the ac-
tual driving variation in temperatures is arising from low-frequency variation in the climate
system that isn't attributable to humans (Deser et al., 2012; Hawkins and Sutton, 2012).


5     Heterogeneity and Robustness in Main Specification
Proceeding under the assumption that our main estimates represent responses to perceived
local increases in long-term temperatures driven by anthropogenic climate change, we now
investigate the robustness and heterogeneity of these estimates.


5.1    Robustness
Identification in this setting comes from the heavy reliance on fixed effects. County-of-origin
fixed effects narrow the scope of temperature variation which is leveraged for identification to
deviations of temperature from long-term local norms. Such variation is considered random,
leading to estimates which can be interpreted causally. Table A2 reports regression estimates
which build from the simplest specification with a causal interpretation on temperature
coefficients to our main specification which (effectively) includes not only origin-county fixed
effects, but origin-destination pair fixed effects and both origin and destination linear time
trends. Estimates from a specification with origin and destination quadratic time trends are
also presented. Across the table we see highly stable estimates of the impacts of origin-county
temperature shocks on out-migration suggesting the main thrust of our results is remarkably
robust to the details of the specification.
    Our baseline results are also potentially sensitive to the choice of transformation of the
outcome variable and to weighting schemes. Table A3 reports estimates from the main
regression when the untransformed migration rate or the natural log of the "adjusted" (i.e.,
numerator plus one) migration rate are used as alternative outcome variables (columns 1 and
2 respectively). Columns 3 and 4 report estimates from the main regression when regression


                                              20
weights of logged population and population are applied. Finally, Column 5 reports the
results of a Poisson Pseudo-Maximum Likelihood estimation procedure that addresses the
large number of zeros in our data appropriately. Generally, what we see across columns in
Table A3, is that high temperatures are associated with significant outmigration while the
lowest temperatures reduce outmigration. For the specifications where the magnitudes are
directly comparable to our main results, the point estimates are generally quite similar to
our baseline results.


5.2    Heterogeneity
Having established the robustness of our main estimates linking anomalous local tempera-
tures to outmigration, we now consider heterogeneity in these impacts. We begin with a
simple comparison across outcome measures. As noted above and reported in Table 1, the
data used for our analysis imply total annual out-migration rates for households, individuals,
and income of 5.04%, 4.39%, and 3.90% respectively. From Table 3, our estimates imply that
an additional day >90 F increases the likelihood of outmigration of households by 0.048 per-
centage points (5.04*0.0096), of individuals by 0.040 percentage points (4.39*0.0091), and
0.031 percentage points (3.90*0.00793) for income, all relative to a day between 60-70 F.
Given that the same shock (an additional day >90 F) changes the anticipated average mi-
gration rate of households by more than rates for individuals or income, these results suggest
that high temperatures tend to drive out smaller, lower-income households at higher rates.
    Responses to temperature shocks are also not uniform across geographies. Again focusing
only on tax returns, Figure 8 reports coefficients on hot days (>80 F) and cold days (<30 F)
from the two-bin model separately for each of the nine NOAA Climate Regions. Generally,
the pattern of hot days driving outmigration and cold days reducing outmigration holds,
but notably not in the West, Southwest, and Northwest regions.14 The Climate Regions are
quite broad, both in terms of geographic extent and in terms of baseline climates.
    We next break our sample up into ten equal groups based on the average number of
>80 F days each year in the origin county over the pre-analysis period: 1983-1989. Figure
6 presents the estimates of the coefficients on the >80 F temperature bins from the two-
bin model. The presented estimates are from a single regression in which group indicator
variables are interacted with the temperature bins. The estimates reveal fairly consistent
magnitudes of the effects of hot temperatures across areas that tended to have few hot days
in the past. However, as the number of hot days historically seen by a location climbs higher,
the marginal effect of an additional hot day falls to zero. This suggests decreasing marginal
 14
    The West Region covers CA and NV. The Northwest Region includes ID, OR, and WA. The Southwest
Region includes UT, CO, AZ, and NM.


                                               21
effects of hot temperatures, as places that saw the most high-temperature days on average
tend to respond the least to an additional such day. As noted earlier, this suggests that
marginal changes in long-term conditions are less discernible - and therefore less likely to be
acted upon - in locations where such a marginal change is relatively small compared to the
average number of hot days. Additionally, while the act of migration in response to unusual
temperatures perceived as harbingers of future conditions is itself adaptation, the reduced
response to high-temperature days in locations with more such days historically suggests
other dimensions of adaptation or preference-based sorting are also active.
    High temperatures have been shown to impact agricultural yields (e.g., Schlenker and
Roberts, 2009), and both Feng et al. (2012) and Cai et al. (2016) find that temperatures
drive outmigration (internally and internationally, respectively) through reduced agricultural
yields.15 We probe this relationship in our data using a number of different measures of
the centrality of agriculture across counties. In Table 6, we present coefficient estimates
from the separate re-estimation of the main specification for origin-counties: 1.) in Corn
Belt states and not; 2.) with above and below the median share of land dedicated to
agricultural production; and 3.) with below and above the median population density. These
results reveal that the impacts of high temperatures have larger magnitudes in the Corn
Belt, in more Ag-dependent areas, but in more densely populated areas. The differences in
magnitudes are substantial for the Corn Belt vs. Non-Corn Belt comparison, somewhat less
so for high- versus low-ag counties, and insubstantial based on the density categorization.
Corn Belt results mirror those reported by Feng et al. (2012), though they do more to
link observed temperature-driven outmigration to economic losses attributable to reduced
agricultural yields. Viswanathan and Kumar (2015) do something similar in India. It is
important to notice however, that this cannot be the only active channel driving our results
given that significant impacts of extreme temperatures exist for outmigration from places
which are densely populated, have little agricultural land, and/or are outside the Corn Belt.
    We also briefly consider whether affluence might modulate the population sensitivity to
high temperature exposures. In particular, we interact the share of the over-25 population
that finished high school and county-level per capita income (both from BEA data) with
the counts of hot and cold days. Estimates reported in columns 4 and 5 of Table 5 suggest
that out-migration rates in more-educated and higher earning counties are more responsive
to high-temperature realizations. These results are in line with those of (Fan et al., 2016),
which leverage a sorting model to find "that extreme temperatures have a greater [migration]
impact on households with higher educational attainment". Both results are consistent with
  15
    Others have shown that negative weather-shocks can reduce outmigration by tightening liquidity con-
straints, though this channel is unlikely to be as central in the U.S. context (Hirvonen, 2016; Bazzi, 2017).



                                                     22
greater sensitivity to high temperature realizations among more affluent populations.


5.3     Destinations
Finally, if people decide to leave an area because of perceived increases in long-term temper-
atures, to what types of places do they move? The addition of variables for the long-term
average weather conditions in destination counties to our main two-bin specification can
provide some relevant evidence.16 However, the characteristics of destination counties are
determined by migrant decisions, and are therefore clearly endogenous. Such coefficient es-
timates have no causal content and should therefore be interpreted as purely descriptive.
Given that we find migrators are driven by perceptions of warming in their origin counties,
it would make sense that they would be more likely to move to places where hot days are
perceived to be less frequent. This is precisely what we see in the regression estimates pre-
sented in Table 7. Destinations that have historically had (and are therefore likely to be
perceived to have) fewer hot days, are more likely to be migration destinations in our data.
Again, this is consistent with our overarching story that migration is driven by perceived
increases in local long-term temperatures.


6      Conclusion
Migration is often posited as a likely response to changing climatic conditions, and the
reallocation of populations and human capital is an important consideration when assessing
the implications of global climate change. To date however, most research linking climatic
conditions (and shifts thereof) to migration are focused on international flows, developing
countries, and catastrophic events. This investigation has focused on the responses of internal
migratory flows to perceived local temperature shifts in the context of a developed county,
namely the United States.
    Our central empirical result is that more instances of hot-days lead to higher rates of out-
migration in terms of households, individuals, and total earnings. Compared to studies which
look at international migration in response to temperature shocks, our results are in line with
those of Cai et al. (2016) (though they find that high-temperature outmigration is driven by
reduced agricultural yields), but stand in contrast to those of Beine and Parsons (2015) which
show no effect of "climate factors" (including high temperatures) on international migration.
Our results fit with three other studies that find higher temperatures are associated with
  16
    Origin-destination-pair fixed effects are replaced with origin-county fixed effects to allow for the estima-
tion of coefficients on static, destination-county variables.



                                                      23
higher-rates of outmigration to destinations within the same country. Feng et al. (2012) find
that outmigration is driven by "climate-driven changes in crop yields" in the United States
Corn Belt, Viswanathan and Kumar (2015) find similar results in India, and Bohra-Mishra
et al. (2014) find that local high-temperatures drive out-migration in Indonesia.
    Beyond this straightforward identification of the link between temperature anomalies and
internal migratory flows, we go further to decompose the the temporal character of the vari-
ation in temperatures that underlies our main result. The Random Utility Model framework
that commonly serves as the conceptual basis for migration analyses implies that migration
should only respond to changes in expected weather, and not idiosyncratic weather realiza-
tion. We formalize this implication of the RUM framework and develop a working hypothesis
that migration will respond to permanent, but not transitory, changes in temperatures. This
analog to the Permanent Income Hypothesis could similarly be stated as identifying migra-
tion as a long-term, extensive, or belief effect of climate change (in the framings of Kolstad
and Moore (2020), Auffhammer (2018a), and Hsiang (2016) respectively). In all cases, the
underlying claim of our working hypothesis is that migration is undertaken as an adap-
tive mechanism in response to long-term changes (or perceptions thereof) in the underlying
distribution of local weather.
    We present empirical evidence that short-term weather variation is not driving our main
estimates (using year fixed effects and high-pass time series filters), that long-term temper-
ature variation is driving our main estimates (using high-pass time series filters and long-
differences estimation), and that these effects of long-term variation on migration are acting
through the channel of updated expectations regarding local weather conditions. We also
present several empirical results suggesting that expectation-changing, long-term variation
in temperatures that drivers our main results is associated with climate change. Finally,
we present descriptive results that even as outmigration is driven by increased incidence of
high temperature days, migration destinations tend to be those that experience (on average)
fewer such hot days. Taken together, our result suggest that migration is already serving as
an active mechanism for adaptation to climate change within the United States.
    While we provide initial answers to the questions of whether climate change will induce
migration among those living in developed economies (yes) and when such responses might
start (already have), there is much more work to be done to understand how climate change
will impact people's decisions of where to live and whether and where to move. In particular,
our estimates do not factor in the effects of increased natural disasters or coastal flooding
also expected under climate change, and together these factors could contribute to significant
levels of geographic displacement, even in a developed-country setting like the United States.



                                             24
References
Angrist, Joshua D and J¨   orn-Steffen Pischke, Mostly harmless econometrics: An em-
 piricist's companion, Princeton university press, 2008.

Auffhammer, Maximilian, "Climate adaptive response estimation: Short and long run
 impacts of climate change on residential electricity and natural gas consumption using big
 data," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

  , "Quantifying economic damages from climate change," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  2018, 32 (4), 33­52.

Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S
 Shapiro, "Adapting to climate change: The remarkable decline in the US temperature-
 mortality relationship over the twentieth century," Journal of Political Economy, 2016,
 124 (1), 105­159.

Bazzi, Samuel, "Wealth heterogeneity and the income elasticity of migration," American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2017, 9 (2), 219­55.

Beine, Michel and Christopher Parsons, "Climatic factors as determinants of interna-
 tional migration," The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 2015, 117 (2), 723­767.

   and Christopher R Parsons, "Climatic factors as determinants of international mi-
  gration: Redux," CESifo Economic Studies, 2017, 63 (4), 386­402.

  , Simone Bertoli, and Jes´     us Fern´andez-Huertas Moraga, "A practitioners' guide
  to gravity models of international migration," The World Economy, 2016, 39 (4), 496­512.

Bertoli, Simone and Jes´  us Fern´andez-Huertas Moraga, "Multilateral resistance to
 migration," Journal of development economics, 2013, 102, 79­100.

  , Herbert Br¨ ucker, and Jes´us Fern´andez-Huertas Moraga, "The European crisis
  and migration to Germany," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 2016, 60, 61­72.

Biden, Joseph R., "Executive Order on Rebuilding and Enhancing Programs to Resettle
  Refugees and Planning for the Impact of Climate Change on Migration," Federal Register
  Volume 86, Issue 25, February 2021, (14013).

Black, Richard, Stephen RG Bennett, Sandy M Thomas, and John R Bedding-
  ton, "Migration as adaptation," Nature, 2011, 478 (7370), 447­449.

Bohra-Mishra, Pratikshya, Michael Oppenheimer, and Solomon M Hsiang, "Non-
 linear permanent migration response to climatic variations but minimal response to dis-
 asters," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2014, 111 (27), 9780­9785.

Boustan, Leah Platt, Matthew E Kahn, and Paul W Rhode, "Moving to higher
 ground: Migration response to natural disasters in the early twentieth century," American
 Economic Review, 2012, 102 (3), 238­44.

                                            25
Burke, Marshall and Kyle Emerick, "Adaptation to climate change: Evidence from US
 agriculture," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2016, 8 (3), 106­40.

Cai, Ruohong, Shuaizhang Feng, Michael Oppenheimer, and Mariola Pytlikova,
 "Climate variability and international migration: The importance of the agricultural link-
 age," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2016, 79, 135­151.

Carleton, Tamma A and Solomon M Hsiang, "Social and economic impacts of climate,"
 Science, 2016, 353 (6304), aad9837.

Cattaneo, Cristina and Giovanni Peri, "The migration response to increasing temper-
 atures," Journal of Development Economics, 2016, 122, 127­146.

  , Michel Beine, Christiane J Fr¨       ohlich, Dominic Kniveton, Inmaculada
  Martinez-Zarzoso, Marina Mastrorillo, Katrin Millock, Etienne Piguet, and
  Benjamin Schraven, "Human migration in the era of climate change," Review of Envi-
  ronmental Economics and Policy, 2019, 13 (2), 189­206.

Chudik, Alexander and M Hashem Pesaran, "Common correlated effects estimation
 of heterogeneous dynamic panel data models with weakly exogenous regressors," Journal
 of Econometrics, 2015, 188 (2), 393­420.

Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F Jones, and Benjamin A Olken, "Temperature shocks
 and economic growth: Evidence from the last half century," American Economic Journal:
 Macroeconomics, 2012, 4 (3), 66­95.

  , , and , "What do we learn from the weather? The new climate-economy literature,"
  Journal of Economic Literature, 2014, 52 (3), 740­98.

Desch^
     enes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone, "The economic impacts of climate change:
 evidence from agricultural output and random fluctuations in weather," American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2007, 97 (1), 354­385.

   and , "Climate change, mortality, and adaptation: Evidence from annual fluctuations
  in weather in the US," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3 (4),
  152­85.

Deser, Clara, Reto Knutti, Susan Solomon, and Adam S Phillips, "Communica-
 tion of the role of natural variability in future North American climate," Nature Climate
 Change, 2012, 2 (11), 775­779.

Fan, Qin, H Allen Klaiber, and Karen Fisher-Vanden, "Does extreme weather drive
  interregional brain drain in the US? Evidence from a sorting model," Land Economics,
  2016, 92 (2), 363­388.

Feng, Shuaizhang, Michael Oppenheimer, and Wolfram Schlenker, "Climate
  change, crop yields, and internal migration in the United States," Technical Report, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research 2012.


                                            26
Friedman, Milton, "The permanent income hypothesis," in "A theory of the consumption
  function," Princeton University Press, 1957, pp. 20­37.

Gross, Emily, "Internal revenue service area-to-area migration data: strengths, limitations,
 and current uses," Statistics of Income. SOI Bulletin, 2005, 25 (3), 159­160.

Hall, Robert E, "Stochastic implications of the life cycle-permanent income hypothesis:
 theory and evidence," Journal of Political Economy, 1978, 86 (6), 971­987.

Hawkins, Ed and Rowan Sutton, "Time of emergence of climate signals," Geophysical
 Research Letters, 2012, 39 (1).

Hirvonen, Kalle, "Temperature changes, household consumption, and internal migration:
 Evidence from tanzania," American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 2016, 98 (4), 1230­
 1249.

Hornbeck, Richard, "The enduring impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short-and long-
 run adjustments to environmental catastrophe," American Economic Review, 2012, 102
 (4), 1477­1507.

Hsiang, Solomon, "Climate econometrics," Annual Review of Resource Economics, 2016,
 8, 43­75.

Hsiang, Solomon M, Marshall Burke, and Edward Miguel, "Quantifying the influ-
 ence of climate on human conflict," Science, 2013, 341 (6151), 1235367.

IPCC, Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of
  Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
  Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, 2014.

Kaczan, David J and Jennifer Orgill-Meyer, "The impact of climate change on migra-
 tion: a synthesis of recent empirical insights," Climatic Change, 2020, 158 (3), 281­300.

Kala, Namrata, "Learning, Adaptation, and Climate Uncertainty: Evidence from Indian
 Agriculture," MIT Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research Working Paper,
 2017, 23.

Kolstad, Charles D and Frances C Moore, "Estimating the economic impacts of climate
 change using weather observations," Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2020,
 14 (1), 1­24.

Laczko, Frank, Christine Aghazarm et al., Migration, Environment and Climate
  Change: assessing the evidence., International Organization for Migration (IOM), 2009.

Lemoine, Derek, "Estimating the Consequences of Climate Change from Variation in
  Weather," NBER Working Paper, 2018, (w25008).

Mahajan, Parag and Dean Yang, "Taken by storm: Hurricanes, migrant networks, and
 us immigration," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

                                            27
Marchiori, Luca, Jean-Fran¸cois Maystadt, and Ingmar Schumacher, "The impact
 of weather anomalies on migration in sub-Saharan Africa," Journal of Environmental
 Economics and Management, 2012, 63 (3), 355­374.

McFadden, Daniel et al., "Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior," 1973.

Missirian, Anouch and Wolfram Schlenker, "Asylum applications respond to temper-
 ature fluctuations," Science, 2017, 358 (6370), 1610­1614.

Molloy, Raven, Christopher L Smith, and Abigail Wozniak, "Internal migration in
 the United States," Journal of Economic perspectives, 2011, 25 (3), 173­96.

Mueller, Valerie, Clark Gray, and Katrina Kosec, "Heat stress increases long-term
 human migration in rural Pakistan," Nature climate change, 2014, 4 (3), 182.

Pachauri, Rajendra K, Myles R Allen, Vicente R Barros, John Broome, Wolf-
 gang Cramer, Renate Christ, John A Church, Leon Clarke, Qin Dahe, Purna-
 mita Dasgupta et al., Climate change 2014: synthesis report. Contribution of Working
 Groups I, II and III to the fifth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
 Climate Change, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2014.

Pesaran, M Hashem, "Estimation and inference in large heterogeneous panels with a
 multifactor error structure," Econometrica, 2006, 74 (4), 967­1012.

Pierce, Kevin, "SOI migration data: a new approach: Methodological improvements for
  SOI's United States Population Migration Data, calendar years 2011-2012," Statistics of
  Income. SOI Bulletin, 2015, 35 (1).

Schlenker, Wolfram and Michael J Roberts, "Nonlinear temperature effects indicate
  severe damages to US crop yields under climate change," Proceedings of the National
  Academy of sciences, 2009, 106 (37), 15594­15598.

Taraz, Vis, "Adaptation to climate change: Historical evidence from the Indian monsoon,"
  Environment and Development Economics, 2017, 22 (5), 517­545.

Viswanathan, Brinda and KS Kavi Kumar, "Weather, agriculture and rural migration:
 evidence from state and district level migration in India," Environment and Development
 Economics, 2015, 20 (4), 469­492.

White, Corey, "The dynamic relationship between temperature and morbidity," Journal
 of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 2017, 4 (4), 1155­1198.




                                            28
Figures
 Figure 1: Estimates for Main Specification from Three IRS SOI Outcome Measures




 Notes: Red dots denote point estimates. Gray-shading denotes 95% confidence intervals based on
 robust standard errors clustered by county-of-origin. The correlations between the numbers of
 migrating returns and exemptions is 0.991, while the correlation between migrating returns and
 aggregate income is 0.923. Outcomes are IHS migration ratios of each measure. The analyzed
 sample is 1990-2017 for tax returns and tax exemptions. It is 1992-2017 for aggregate income.




                                               29
             Figure 2: Limiting Temporal Variation - Filtered Time Series




Notes: Markers denote point estimates. Whiskers denote 95% confidence intervals based on robust
standard errors clustered by county-of-origin. Estimates are based on high-pass filtered
(Butterworth Filter) time series of temperature-bin counts and the IHS migration rate of tax
returns. Such filtering leaves variation with periodicity in the ranges indicated in the time series,
while removing variation with other periods of variation. Outcomes are filtered IHS tax return
migration ratios and sample period is 1990-2017.




                                                 30
                           Figure 3: Long Differences Estimates




Notes: Markers denote point estimates. Shaded area denotes 95% confidence intervals based on
robust standard errors clustered by county-of-origin. Estimates are based on the 30-year difference
(the longest our sample will allow) of 5-year moving averages of the temperature-bin counts (and
precipitation controls) and IHS migration rate of tax returns. Origin and destination fixed effects
are included and standard errors are clustered by origin county. The coefficient estimates now
capture the marginal effect of a change in the 5-year average number of days in each bin, and are
thus much larger in magnitude that the estimated marginal effects of a change in the 1-year count
of days in each bin. Outcome is the change in the 5-year average of the IHS tax return migration
ratio from 1987 and 2017. The regression is based on 160,473 origin-destination obeservations.




                                                31
                       Figure 4: Influence of Expectations Removed




Notes: Markers denote point estimates. Shaded area denotes 95% confidence intervals based on
robust standard errors clustered by county-of-origin. Estimates are based on the Common
Correlated Effects (CCE) method applied to our main results. Effectively, cross-sectional averages
of the dependent and independent variables are interacted with the origin-destination fixed effects
and included as independent variables in the regression. Origin and destination fixed effects are
also included directly and standard errors are clustered by origin county. The coefficient estimates
now capture the marginal effect of an additional day in each temperature bin relative to a day in
the 60-70 F temperature range after the influence of such a realization acting through expectations
regarding the future is removed. Outcome is the IHS tax return migration ratio and the sample
runs 1990-2017.




                                                32
             Figure 5: Coefficients on Hot Temperature Days Over Time




Notes: Markers denote point estimates. Whiskers denote 95% confidence intervals based on robust
standard errors clustered by county-of-origin. Period-specific estimates are taken from the
interaction term between an indicator for each 3-year time period and the count variable of days
with mean temperatures >80 F. Time-period indicators are also included directly. Outcome is the
IHS tax return migration ratio and the analyzed sample runs 1983-2017.




                                              33
       Figure 6: High-Temperature Coefficients by Norms in County-of-Origin




Notes: Markers denote point estimates. Whiskers denote 95% confidence intervals based on robust
standard errors clustered by county-of-origin. Outcome is the IHS tax return migration ratio and
the sample period is 1990-2017. Baseline grouping specific estimates are taken from the interaction
term between an indicator for grouping (based on the average number of days with mean
temperatures >80 F in the years from 1983-1989) and the count variable of days with mean
temperatures >80 F in the two bin specification of the main model.




                                                34
                  Figure 7: Temperature and Belief in Global Warming




Notes: Red dots denote point estimates. Gray-shading denotes 95% confidence intervals based on
robust standard errors clustered by county. Outcome is share of county population that indicate
their belief that global warming is happening as estimated by the Yale Climate Opinion Maps
(available: https://climatecommunication.yale.edu/visualizations-data, accessed: 3/1/2020).
Sample includes all survey years: 2014, 2016, 2018, and 2019. Precipitation controls are also
included in both regressions. State time trends are linear in year, but results are similar with state
by cubic-year time trends. Results are for temperature exposures in year prior to survey.




                                                 35
     Figure 8: Estimates of Extreme Temperature Bins by NOAA Climate Zone




Notes: Markers denote point estimates. Whiskers denote 95% confidence intervals based on robust
standard errors clustered by county-of-origin. Outcome is the IHS tax return migration ratio and
the sample period is 1990-2017. Estimates are from a single regression with a vector of indicators
for NOAA Climate Zone interacted with the temperature bin variables in the two bin specification.
The fixed-effect and precipitation control scheme from main specification is used. A map of the
NOAA Climate Zones is available here:
https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/monitoring-references/maps/us-climate-regions.php.




                                               36
Tables


             Table 1: Summary Statistics: 1990-2017 Sample Maintained by IRS

                                        Returns                    Exemptions       Aggregate Income
               Time Period:            1990-2017                    1990-2017          1990-2017
    Annual Mean Outmigration Rate:       0.0504                       0.0439             0.0390
         Mean Annual Outflow:            10,794                       20,221            510,566
   Mean Total (Movers and Non-Movers):  202,263                      435,226           12,524,130



                              # Days Each Year           Mean          SD
                                    <30                31.49307     31.93735
                                   30-40               39.16017     23.97559
                                   40-50               53.17385     19.87988
                                   50-60               64.40277     19.35899
                                   60-70               69.78972     15.37675
                                   70-80               71.29063     29.77624
                                   80-90                34.377      37.42157
                                    >90                1.562778     6.686679
                                   Total                365.25

Notes: Outmigration statistics describe the 1990-2017 sample used in the analyses and maintained by the
IRS. Weather statistics describe mean, annual origin-county conditions over this same period. Outmigration
statistics represent means of annual outmigration totals by origin county. All annual origin-county means
are weighted by the number of destination counties in the data for each origin county. There are 3,055 origin
counties represented in the data each year with an average of 52.53 destination counties each.




                                                     37
                   Table 2: Short-Term Temperature Effects - Three Outcomes

                                     (1)                            (2)                 (3)
                                Tax Returns                     Exemptions       Aggregate Income
        Annual Mean Temperature -0.0000679                      -0.0000860          -0.0000461
                                 (0.000198)                     (0.000191)          (0.000184)
        N                         4493236                        4493236             4172290

 p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
Notes: Mean temperature value is the average of monthly mean temperatures in the origin county. All
specifications include origin-state by year fixed effects in addition to the origin-destination-pair fixed effects
and precipitation controls of the main specification. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by
origin county. Each column is from a separate regression based on the outcome variable in the column
headings. Estimates in column 3 are based on fewer observations because data on aggregate income data is
only available beginning in 1992, while the samples for returns and exemptions begin in 1990. All samples
run through 2017.




                                                       38
                           Table 3: Main Specification: Three Outcomes


                                     (1)              (2)                 (3)
                                Tax Returns       Exemptions       Aggregate Income
                    < 30F       -0.000789         -0.00100            -0.00294
                                 (0.000327)       (0.000316)          (0.000346)

                    30-40F       0.00264           0.00239               0.000319
                                 (0.000375)        (0.000360)           (0.000397)

                    40-50F       0.00133           0.00102               0.000391
                                 (0.000377)        (0.000361)           (0.000359)

                    50-60F       0.00223           0.00199              0.000618
                                 (0.000356)        (0.000344)           (0.000313)

                    70-80F       0.000661          0.000550             0.00136
                                 (0.000275)        (0.000265)           (0.000269)

                    80-90F       0.00431           0.00412              0.00557
                                 (0.000337)        (0.000320)           (0.000342)

                    > 90F         0.00960          0.00910              0.00793
                                  (0.00145)        (0.00142)            (0.00126)
                    N              4493236          4493236              4172290

  p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by county-of-origin. All estimates are based on the
main, seven-bin specification which includes origin-destination- pair fixed effects and precipitation controls.
The outcome variable is the IHS migration ratio of the relevant measure in each column. Estimates in column
3 are based on fewer observations because data on aggregate income data is only available beginning in 1992,
while the samples for returns and exemptions begin in 1990. All samples run through 2017. The correlations
between the numbers of migrating returns and exemptions is 0.991, while the correlation between migrating
returns and aggregate income is 0.923.




                                                      39
                                                         Table 4: High-Pass Filtered Estimates

                                      0-3 Years        0-6 Years         0-9 Years       0-12 Years       0-15 Years         Baseline
                                    of Variation     of Variation      of Variation     of Variation     of Variation     (Unfiltered)
                        < 30 F       -0.00341         -0.00829         -0.00990         -0.00973         -0.00911         -0.000870
                                     (0.000235)       (0.000322)        (0.000378)       (0.000381)       (0.000365)       (0.000334)
                        30-40 F      -0.00234         -0.00503         -0.00568         -0.00527         -0.00475          0.00268
                                     (0.000259)       (0.000345)        (0.000395)       (0.000400)       (0.000389)       (0.000380)
                        40-50 F     -0.000955         -0.00351         -0.00403         -0.00374         -0.00344          0.00121
                                     (0.000284)       (0.000378)        (0.000443)       (0.000445)       (0.000423)       (0.000383)
                        50-60 F      0.000549        -0.000980         -0.00154         -0.00148         -0.00134          0.00217
                                     (0.000271)       (0.000266)        (0.000307)       (0.000311)       (0.000302)       (0.000358)
                        70-80 F       0.000298       0.000596            0.000205        0.0000486        -0.0000124       0.000680




40
                                     (0.000209)       (0.000206)        (0.000226)       (0.000228)       (0.000226)       (0.000286)
                        80-90 F       0.000216        0.00257           0.00296          0.00332          0.00366          0.00422
                                     (0.000177)       (0.000184)        (0.000206)       (0.000215)       (0.000219)       (0.000340)
                        > 90 F       -0.00197         0.00324           0.00441          0.00499          0.00536          0.00954
                                     (0.000704)       (0.000652)        (0.000888)        (0.00104)        (0.00107)        (0.00147)
                        N              4493020          4493020           4493020          4493020          4493020          4493020
     
       p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
     Notes: Each column corresponds to a separate estimation of the main model with the IHS migration rate of tax returns and meteorological variables
     filtered with a high-pass, time-series filter (Butterworth Filter) using the periodicity indicated in the column titles. Such filtering leaves variation
     within the indicated periodicity. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by county-of-origin. All estimates are based on the main, seven-bin
     specification which includes origin-destination- pair fixed effects and precipitation controls. The outcome variable is the IHS migration ratio of tax
     returns and the analyzed sample runs 1990-2017.
                                                       Table 5: Additional Results via Interaction

                                                         (1)              (2)                 (3)              (4)                  (5)
                                                                    CC Happening           Weather        Share Over25         Per Capita
                                                    Over Time        Yale Survy            Variance       Finished HS        Income (1000s)
                      
                 > 80 F                              -1.161           -0.0204             0.00773           0.00627             -0.000286
                                                     (0.0777)         (0.00432)           (0.000631)        (0.00294)          (0.000877)

                 > 80F X Year                       0.000582
                                                    (0.0000389)

                 > 80F X CC Happening                                 0.000457
                                                                      (0.0000646)




41
                 > 80F X Hot Day MDEV                                                    -0.000402
                                                                                         (0.0000608)

                 > 80F X Share Fin HS                                                                      0.000330
                                                                                                           (0.0000897)

                 > 80F X income                                                                                                0.000137
                                                                                                                               (0.0000292)
                 N                                    4493236            641892            4493236           1123311             4439756
     
      p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
     Notes: Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by county-of-origin. Reported coefficients are from interaction terms of the regression-specific
     measure of interest with the >80 F temperature bin in the two-bin specification. The <30 F, >80 F, and regression-specific variable of interest all
     enter directly into the regressions, as do all the fixed effects and precipitation controls from the main specification. The outcome variable is the IHS
     migration ratio of tax returns and the analyzed sample runs 1990-2017.
                   Table 6: Coefficients by Origin County Types: 1990-2017

                 (1)              (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)                      (6)
              Corn Belt        Outside         High       Low      Low  Pop                 High Pop
                State        Corn Belt      Ag County Ag County    Density                   Density
   < 30F     -0.00353         -0.000433     -0.00263 -0.00190 -0.00314                     -0.00157
             (0.000177)      (0.000297)     (0.000240) (0.000289) (0.000256)               (0.000263)

   > 80F       0.0103        0.00320        0.00569         0.00281         0.00339        0.00481
              (0.000621)     (0.000274)     (0.000335)      (0.000363)      (0.000378)     (0.000388)
   N           1145836        3347400        2241875         2250254         2215884        2276824

  p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by origin county. Each column is from a separate
regression run on a separate sample. The main, two-bin regression specification is used in all cases. The
outcome variable in all regressions is the IHS migration ratio of tax returns and the analyzed samples all
run 1990-2017. Corn belt states include: Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Michigan, Minnesota,
Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin (following Feng et al., 2012). High
Ag and Density counties are identified as those with above the median level of share-agricultural land and
population-per-area values in a given year.




        Table 7: Tax Return Migration by Origin Exposures and Destination Norms

                                                               IHS Return
                                                              Migration Ratio
                          # of Days in Origin       <30 F      -0.00216***
                               County in                        (0.000185)
                           Contemporaneous          >80 F       0.00410***
                                 Year                           (0.000273)
                           Mean # of Days           <30 F        0.0768***
                              per Year in                         (0.0167)
                          Destination County        >80 F        -0.160***
                               1983-1989                          (0.0144)
                                  N                               4493236

  p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by origin county. Regression includes origin-county
fixed effects and county-specific time trends for both origin and destination counties. Destination baseline
values are mean counts of days <30 F and >80 F in the destination county in the pre-analysis period:
1983-1989. The ratio of migrating to non-migrating Tax Returns is the main outcome in all regression.




                                                    42
A         Appendix
A.1        Details of RUM to Gravity Model
We are interested in understanding how push factors ­ local temperatures in particular ­ drive
internal migration within the United States during the last decades of the twentieth century
and first decades of the twenty first. Such internal migration provides a unique opportunity
to examine migration decisions which are unconstrained by the policy and administrative
barriers which define international migration flows. In our empirical context, households are
making a clear decision, weighing the advantages and disadvantages of staying put versus
migrating to another location.1
    Using the notation of the Random Utility Model, in each period, t, we model all individ-
uals in county j choosing which county k to live in for the period. Both j and k are from the
choice set C , which, for this investigation, can be thought of as all counties in the United
States (as we neither model nor analyze international moves). Non-migrators are modeled
as selecting k = j , with utility in year t of:

                                            uijjt = Ajt +    ijjt                                      (A.1)

       For all others, k = j . Such migrators face moving costs, denoted Mjkt , and thus utility:2

                                        uijkt = Akt - Mjkt +        ijkt                               (A.2)

    In both expressions, Akt represents the utility derived from the amenities of the county
of residence for the period. This term is often referred to as the deterministic component of
the utility, while ijkt is the individual-specific stochastic term. Applying McFadden et al.
(1973), we assume that ijkt follows an iid, type-1 extreme value distribution which allows
for the expected probability of an individual migrating in year t to be written as (expected
value notation omitted for clarity):3
   1
      Our model and derivations are adapted from those of Beine and Parsons (2015) and Beine et al. (2016).
   2
      Those familiar with dynamic choice models will note the silence of this approach with regard to implica-
tions of the present decision on future migration decisions. Consideration of the discounted expected values
of optimal future strategies for staying and migrating can be added to this framework (see Beine et al.,
2016, section 2.b.ii). We eschew such an extension here because of the requirement for explicit assumptions
regarding expectations of future temperature realizations. Given the dynamic availability of local predictions
of temperatures under climate change, this is an area for potential future work.
    3
      This distributional assumption on the error term implies the independence from irrelevant alternatives,
which buys us the simplicity of an analysis that depends only on the characteristics of the origin and
destination. Dropping consideration of so-called "multilateral resistance" (the idea that changes in non-
origin, non-destination locations impacts flows between the origin and destination) has long been standard
in both the trade and migration literatures (see: Beine and Parsons, 2015). That said, we will be able to
address concerns about multilateral resistance to some degree in our empirical estimation strategy.


                                                     43
                                                     Njkt     exp (Akt - Mjkt )
                       P r(uijkt = maxuijkt ) =             =                                           (A.3)
                                                     P opjt    l exp (Alt - Mjlt )
                                       k

   We now assume that utility from county amenities does not vary by county of origin.4
By taking the ratio of stayers and leavers in a county, we can therefore write:

                                            Njkt   exp (Akt - Mjkt )
                                                 =                                                      (A.4)
                                            Njjt       exp (Ajt )
   This ratio will be referred to as the migration rate for the remainder of the paper. Taking
natural logarithms of both sides yields:

                                             Njkt
                                      ln            = Akt - Ajt - Mjkt                                  (A.5)
                                             Njjt
    Thus the logged ratio of migrators between two counties and the non-migrators in the
origin county in a given period can be written as a linear function of the characteristics in the
destination and origin locations and the costs of migrating from the origin to the destination.
We now split amenities into weather and non-weather amenities, Wjt and Njt , respectively.

                                    Njkt
                             ln              = Wkt + Nkt - Wjt - Njt - Mjkt                             (A.6)
                                    Njjt
   Local weather can be modeled as a function of local climate and a mean-zero stochastic
                                                                                 2
component: Wjt = f (Cj , jt ), where Cj characterizes local climate and jt  (0, j  ). Fol-
lowing Lemoine (2018) we model local weather as the sum of local climate and a stochastic
term: Wjt = Cj + jt , yielding:

                             Njkt
                        ln            = Ck + kt + Nkt - Cj - jt - Njt - Mjkt                            (A.7)
                             Njjt
    This equation is evaluated in expectation, and E (kt ) = E (jt ) = 0. Thus, only climate
- and not weather deviations from local climate - impacts migration decisions:

                                     Njkt
                              ln              = Ck + Nkt - Cj - Njt - Mjkt                              (A.8)
                                     Njjt
   This model assumes that any deviation in weather from long-term norms is idiosyncratic
and mean zero. As noted by Lemoine (2018), he is explicitly interested in modeling a
   4
     Assuming away any heterogeneity in the deterministic component of utility based on county of origin
is the common way forward to a simple empirical specification, though Beine et al. (2016) note that this
assumption isn't reflective of reality. A potential approach to working around this assumption is to include
origin-time fixed effects in the empirical model, however this approach is not feasible in our investigation as
that is the level of variation we are interested in investigating.



                                                      44
climate that is "stationary". Under climate change however, deviations from long-term
weather norms may not in fact be idiosyncratic with mean zero.5 We now extend the model
to include a term, jt , for the contribution of climate change to local weather, which can now
be written as Wjt = Cj + jt + jt . We remain generally agnostic about the precise character
of jt , but note if temperature is the dimension of climate and weather of interest (as it is in
this paper), one of the central aims of the Paris Climate Accord is to keep the global mean
of jt < 1.5 C .
    Now, local deviations in realized weather relative to long-term norms (hereafter simply
"weather deviations") can be written as:jt + jt . As the expectation of jt is not necessarily
zero, it cannot be dropped from the expansion of Equation A.7, leaving us with:

                             Njkt
                        ln           = Ck + kt + Nkt - Cj - jt - Njt - Mjkt                              (A.9)
                             Njjt

A.2      Data Notes and Sample Construction
Our main analyses rely on annual measures of county-to-county flows of households, individ-
uals, and income which are derived from the Statistics of Income (SOI) data organized and
maintained by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). This data provides migration estimates
based on year-to-year address changes of income tax filings and is available from the IRS for
the years 1990-2017.6
     To protect privacy, annual county-to-county flows below fixed thresholds are not reported
(this threshold was 10 returns until 2013 and has been 20 since that time).
     In addition to the number of returns which move in each direction between each county
pair, the SOI data also reports the number of exemptions claimed and aggregate income
(beginning in 1992) reported on both the moving and non-moving returns. IRS guidance
points to the interpretation of return counts as a proxy for the number of households, while
the number of exemptions proxies for the number of individuals that migrate (Gross, 2005).
In addition to these proxy measures and the censoring issue noted above, the IRS SOI data
is limited in that it only captures households (migrating or not) that file taxes before late-
September (until 2011) or the end of December (2012 and onward) for the preceding tax
year. As a result, the poor and elderly are likely underrepresented in the IRS SOI data ­
as members of these populations file tax returns at lower rates ­ and the extremely wealthy
   5
     Given this is a model of decisions, what matters is perceived relationships, thus it is enough for there to
be a belief in climate change if such a beliefs leads to the perception (and action based on that perception)
that weather deviations include information about the future. In fact, another similar conceptualization,
put forward by Hsiang (2016) is that weather deviations have direct effects and "belief effects"
   6
     Additional information and raw data is available: https://www.irs.gov/uac/soi-tax-stats-migration-data,
accessed February 6, 2020.


                                                      45
- which are more likely to have long-delayed filings on the basis of complication (Pierce,
2015).7
    Weather conditions, temperatures and precipitation, are merged on to the migratory flows
based on both origin and destination counties. Weather data is from NOAA's Global Histor-
ical Climatology Network and assigned to counties based on the inverse distance weighted
average from all monitors within 300km of the centroid of the relevant county. The temper-
ature measures used in this analysis are annual counts of days with reported mean temper-
atures falling in eight distinct temperature bins in a given year for a given county. The bins
capture counts of days with mean temperatures in 10-degree Fahrenheit ranges from 30 F to
90 F, with the remaining bins counting days <30 F and >90 F . These counts are calculated
for each weather monitor in the data and then aggregated to the county level (following Dell
et al., 2014). Total precipitation and mean daily temperatures are also calculated for each
monitor and aggregated to the county level based on the same inverse distance weighting
procedure. Ultimately, only data from origin counties in the continental United States are
included in the analytic sample.
    Earlier IRS SOI data is available through the University of Michigan ICPSR project.8
This data, back to 1983, is used for several analyses looking at changes in the relationships of
interest over time, but our main analyses focus on the 1990-2017 sample that is maintained
and made available directly by the IRS. Additional county-year data for controls and sup-
porting analyses was taken from the Economic Profile by County data product (CAINC30)
provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.


A.3      Adding Intertemporal Component
The absence of consideration of the future in the RUM, and resulting gravity models, has
been noted previously by (Beine et al., 2016) and (Bertoli et al., 2016), among others. Our
approach to introducing expectations regarding the future follows that of (Bertoli et al.,
2016), as does our empirical approach to controlling for such expectations as a means of
identifying the effects of other independent variables outside the influence of expectations.
   We begin by modifying Equations 1 and 2 with terms allowing for consideration of ex-
pected future utility flows based on optimal location choices in periods t + 1 and after. This
gives us:
   7
     It is reported that 95% to 98% of fillings are received by late September and an even higher share by
the end of December. Nevertheless, the unobservability of returns that are filed after these dates likely leads
to lower representation of the very rich in the data (Gross, 2005).
   8
     Data available: https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/2937, accessed July 24, 2019.




                                                      46
                                     uijjt = Ajt +   Vt+1 (j ) +   ijjt                 (A.10)

                              uijkt = Akt - Mjkt +   Vt+1 (k ) +          ijkt          (A.11)

Following the steps leading up to Equation A.12 in Appendix Section A.1, we generate the
equivalent function for the probability an individual migrates from county i to county j in
year t:

                                            Njkt     exp (Akt - Mjkt +   Vt+1 (k ))
              P r(uijkt = maxuijkt ) =             =                                    (A.12)
                                            P opjt     l exp (Alt - Mjlt   Vt+1 (l ))
                               k

    Taking the natural log of the ratio of those that migrate to those that don't based on
this function leaves us with the analog to Equation A.13 with the terms for expectations
regarding the future:

                        Njkt
                   ln               = Akt - Ajt - Mjkt +   [Vt+1 (k ) - Vt+1 (j )]      (A.13)
                        Njjt

   As in the main body of the paper, we can decompose the amenity streams into weather
and non-weather, leaving us with Equation 10, which is the conceptual counterpart to our
empirical mode.

                Yjkt = Wkt + Nkt - Wjt - Njt - Mjkt +  [Vt+1 (k ) - Vt+1 (j )]          (A.14)

   Our main estimation rolls the terms for future utility flows into the error term of the
empirical counterpart to Equation A.14, resulting in a multi-factor error model akin to that
presented by Pesaran (2006) for which the common correlated effects (CCE) approach is
developed. We estimate as in our main analysis, except for the additional application of
the the CCE approach developed by Pesaran (2006) and extended in Chudik and Pesaran
(2015). Our implementation of the CCE estimation follows (Bertoli and Moraga, 2013) and
(Bertoli et al., 2016) by adding a vector of "auxiliary regressors" to the regression model
which is made up of the cross-sectional averages of the independent variable ­ for us, the ihs
migration rate of tax returns ­ and all independent variables ­ temperature bin day counts
and high and low precipitation indicators ­ interacted with origin-destination pair indicator
variables. Our CCE estimation is therefore:
                          B
                 Yjkt =            b Pbjt + Xjt µ + jk + j t + µk t + zt jk +    jkt    (A.15)
                          b=1


where zt is the vector of cross-sectional averages interacted with dyad-specific indicators.

                                                   47
    As discussed by (Bertoli and Moraga, 2013), the CCE specification also removes multi-
lateral resistance effects on origin to destination migration flows that arise from the failure of
the independence of irrelevant alternatives assumption implicit in the type-1 extreme value
distribution applied to the error term in the RUM model and discussed in footnote 6 of the
main paper. As a result, the CCE-specification-derived estimates remove both the influence
of changes in expectations regarding future temperature (and precipitation) conditions across
all counties, but also any other influence of changing conditions in other counties beyond the
origin and destination.




                                               48
Additional Tables
                                     Table A1: Year Fixed Effects


                        (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)                (5)
                                                   Clim Zone      State-by-year      O&D State-
                     Baseline       Year FEs       by Yr FEs           FEs           by-Year FEs
             
       < 30 F      -0.000789        -0.000565       0.000443        0.0000344        -0.00000392
                   (0.000327)      (0.000450)      (0.000356)      (0.000424)         (0.000429)

       30-40F      0.00264         -0.00137         -0.000554        -0.000613        -0.000824
                   (0.000375)      (0.000426)      (0.000349)       (0.000386)        (0.000390)

       40-50F      0.00133         -0.00288        -0.00171         -0.000708         -0.000825
                   (0.000377)      (0.000519)      (0.000307)       (0.000363)        (0.000369)

       50-60F      0.00223         -0.00159        -0.00130         -0.00135          -0.00137
                   (0.000356)      (0.000462)      (0.000292)       (0.000336)        (0.000336)

       70-80F      0.000661        -0.00102         -0.000458       0.0000975          0.000124
                   (0.000275)      (0.000287)      (0.000320)       (0.000321)        (0.000324)

       80-90F      0.00431         0.0000911       0.000715          0.000488          0.000525
                   (0.000337)      (0.000284)      (0.000348)       (0.000373)        (0.000378)

       > 90F        0.00960          -0.00111       -0.00158          -0.00157         -0.00139
                    (0.00145)       (0.00104)      (0.000926)        (0.00100)        (0.000899)
       N             4493236         4493236         4493236          4493236          4493236

  p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by county-of-origin. Each column reports estimates
from a separate regression based on the main specification with the addition of geography-specific year fixed
effects at the noted geographic granularity. Column 1 reports estimates from the main specification without
year fixed effects for easy comparison. Column 2 adds year fixed effects, column 3 replaces the year fixed
effects with NOAA Climate Zone by year fixed effects. Column 4 uses state-by-year fixed effects and column
5 includes origin-county-by-year and destination-county-by-year fixed effects.




                                                     49
                                            Table A2: Tax Returns: Building the Main Specification


                      (1)               (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)                                     (6)                      (7)
                 Origin Cnty       Origin & Dest Origin-to-Dest Origin & Dest Origin & Dest                           Origin & Dest           Origin & Dest
                 Fixed Effects      County FEs     Pair FEs     Time Trends Quad Time Trends                        Cubic Time Trends       Quartic Time Trend
        < 30F     -0.00255          -0.00255      -0.00254       -0.000789     -0.00668                                -0.00668                 -0.00668
                  (0.000424)        (0.000424)    (0.000424)     (0.000327)    (0.000317)                              (0.000318)               (0.000318)

        30-40F     0.00384           0.00384            0.00384            0.00264              -0.00297                 -0.00297                 -0.00297
                   (0.000422)        (0.000422)         (0.000422)         (0.000375)           (0.000352)               (0.000352)               (0.000353)

        40-50F     0.00164           0.00164            0.00164            0.00133              -0.00233                 -0.00234                 -0.00234
                   (0.000518)        (0.000518)         (0.000518)         (0.000377)           (0.000349)               (0.000349)               (0.000350)

        50-60F     0.00359           0.00359            0.00359            0.00223              -0.000585               -0.000584                 -0.000584
                   (0.000546)        (0.000546)         (0.000546)         (0.000356)           (0.000278)              (0.000278)                (0.000279)




50
        70-80F      -0.000417         -0.000417          -0.000417         0.000661             -0.000464               -0.000464                 -0.000464
                   (0.000350)        (0.000350)         (0.000350)         (0.000275)           (0.000228)              (0.000228)                (0.000228)

        80-90F     0.00256           0.00256            0.00256            0.00431              0.00429                  0.00429                   0.00428
                   (0.000397)        (0.000397)         (0.000397)         (0.000337)           (0.000267)               (0.000267)                (0.000267)

        > 90F      0.00779           0.00779            0.00779            0.00960               0.00604                 0.00604                   0.00604
                   (0.00141)         (0.00141)          (0.00141)          (0.00145)             (0.00111)               (0.00111)                 (0.00111)
        N           4493236           4493236            4493236            4493236               4493236                 4493236                   4493236


     
      p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
     Notes: Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by origin county. Each column is from a separate regression. Estimates in the first three
     columns do in fact differ, but not in the decimal places shown. Column 4 adds county-specific linear time trends (in year) for BOTH origin and
     destination counties. Column 5 adds county-specific quadratic time trends for BOTH origin and destination counties.
                    Table A3: Robustness of Main Specification: Tax Returns

                  (1)                     (2)              (3)          (4)                                  (5)
             Untransformed         LN((Migratants+1)/ LN(Population) Population
             Migration Rate          Non-Migrants)       Weights      Weights                              PPML
   main
   < 30F          -0.146                  -0.00111                 -0.00103            -0.00277         -0.00224
                  (0.0164)                (0.000285)               (0.000344)          (0.000618)       (0.000128)

   30-40F          0.0149                 0.00178                   0.00243             0.000240        0.000227
                  (0.0160)                (0.000342)                (0.000393)         (0.000617)       (0.000108)

   40-50F        -0.0446                  0.00138                   0.00118            -0.0000660       -0.00115
                  (0.0137)                (0.000339)                (0.000397)         (0.000572)       (0.000111)

   50-60F        0.0541                   0.00191                   0.00200            0.0000667        0.000724
                 (0.0135)                 (0.000300)                (0.000372)         (0.000584)       (0.000125)

   70-80F         0.00372                 0.000601                  0.000538           -0.0000962       -0.0000758
                  (0.0153)                (0.000271)                (0.000289)         (0.000511)      (0.0000976)

   80-90F         0.186                   0.00317                   0.00403             0.00153         0.00206
                  (0.0162)                (0.000324)                (0.000358)         (0.000599)       (0.000102)

   > 90F          0.279                   0.00706                   0.00849            0.00310          0.00419
                  (0.0708)                (0.00108)                 (0.00139)          (0.00107)        (0.000438)
   N              4493236                  4479512                   4439756            4439756          4367936


  p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered by origin county. Each column is from a separate
regression. The 1990-2017 sample of tax return flows is used in all cases. In the first column, the dependent
variable is this migration rate in levels (i.e.: not transformed by the inverse hyperbolic sine function), and the
main regression specification is used. Column 2 again reproduces the main specification but uses the natural
log of the ratio of migrant returns (plus 1) to non-migrants as the dependent variable. Columns 3 and 4
exactly reproduce the main baseline specification but add observation weights of the natural log of county
population and county population respectively. County populations are BEA estimates based on Census
data. Column 5 re-estimates the main specification based on the Poisson Pseudo-Maximum Likelihood
estimation procedure rather than OLS.




                                                       51
