                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               BAYESIAN ESTIMATION OF EPIDEMIOLOGICAL MODELS:
                 METHODS, CAUSALITY, AND POLICY TRADE-OFFS

                                          Jonas E. Arias
                                   Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
                                      Juan Rubio Ramírez
                                          Minchul Shin

                                       Working Paper 28617
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28617


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




We thank Frank Diebold for useful comments. Some of the ideas in this paper came out of
previous work with Chad Jones. John Cochrane was the first to point out to us the potential key
importance of time-varying parameters in epidemiological models. Disclaimer: The views
expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, or the Federal
Reserve System. Any errors or omissions are the responsibility of the authors. No statements here
should be treated as legal advice. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jonas E. Arias, Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Juan Rubio Ramírez, and Minchul Shin.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bayesian Estimation of Epidemiological Models: Methods, Causality, and Policy Trade-Offs
Jonas E. Arias, Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Juan Rubio Ramírez, and Minchul Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 28617
March 2021
JEL No. C1,C5,I1

                                         ABSTRACT

We present a general framework for Bayesian estimation and causality assessment in
epidemiological models. The key to our approach is the use of sequential Monte Carlo methods to
evaluate the likelihood of a generic epidemiological model. Once we have the likelihood, we
specify priors and rely on a Markov chain Monte Carlo to sample from the posterior distribution.
We show how to use the posterior simulation outputs as inputs for exercises in causality
assessment. We apply our approach to Belgian data for the COVID-19 epidemic during 2020.
Our estimated time-varying-parameters SIRD model captures the data dynamics very well,
including the three waves of infections. We use the estimated (true) number of new cases and the
time-varying effective reproduction number from the epidemiological model as information for
structural vector autoregressions and local projections. We document how additional government-
mandated mobility curtailments would have reduced deaths at zero cost or a very small cost in
terms of output.

Jonas E. Arias                                 Juan Rubio Ramírez
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia           Emory University
10 N Independence Mall W                       Rich Memorial Building
Philadelphia, PA 19106                         Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
United States of America                       and Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank
jonas.arias@phil.frb.org                       and Fulcrum Asset Management
                                               juan.rubio-ramirez@emory.edu
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
Department of Economics                        Minchul Shin
University of Pennsylvania                     Research Department
The Ronald O. Perelman Center                  Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
for Political Science and Economics            Ten Independence Mall
133 South 36th Street Suite 150                Philadelphia, PA 19106
Philadelphia, PA 19104                         visiblehand@gmail.com
and CEPR
and also NBER
jesusfv@econ.upenn.edu
1       Introduction
We present a general framework for the Bayesian estimation of epidemiological models and their
use for causality assessment and policy evaluation. Also, we show how to measure the trade-off
between containing the spread of an epidemic and maintaining economic activity induced by
non-pharmaceutical interventions, such as "shelter-in-place" orders. We do so in four steps. First,
we write a generic epidemiological model using a state-space representation. This representation
provides a familiar and intuitive notation to encompass a wide range of models, independently
of the number of compartments, reinfection probabilities, and other features.
    State-space representations deal efficiently with epidemiological models with time variation
in the parameters controlling an infectious disease's dynamics. Time variation is critical: i)
to incorporate changes in the behavior of individuals as they respond to the public health
conditions (either voluntarily due to precautionary behavior or forced by government mandates);
and ii) to include shifts in the transmission and clinical outcomes of the epidemic, such as
virus variants, new medical treatments, or better logistical organization of social distancing.
Thanks to points i) and ii), epidemiological models with time-varying parameters can account
for the successive waves often observed in epidemic data. For example, as individuals observe
rising death rates, they reduce their mobility, which lowers the number of effective contacts.
After some periods, fewer contacts lead to falling death rates, and individuals revert to higher
mobility, thus increasing effective contacts and death rates after a lag. Without time variation
in parameters, one would be forced, in an attempt to fit the data, to depart from the class of
standard epidemiological models (see Ho et al., 2021, for a similar argument).1
    Another strength of the state-space representation is that it easily incorporates variables
observed at different frequencies, from high-frequency and regular data on hospitalizations,
deaths, and reported new cases to low-frequency and irregular data from seroprevalence studies.
As our empirical application shows, this flexibility is vital while estimating epidemiological
models as researchers might need to scramble disparate sources of data.
    Second, and as the key step in our paper, we use sequential Monte Carlo techniques to
evaluate the likelihood of the model while fully accounting for the essential nonlinearities and
possible non-normalities present in the dynamics of epidemiological models. Doing so is necessary
to capture correctly the fast variations in the spread of infectious diseases and the turning points
of the different waves of an epidemic. Sequential Monte Carlos enjoy many advantages. More
concretely, we will implement a particle filter that handles the nonlinearities and non-normalities
    1
     We do not claim that these time-varying parameters are structural in the sense of being invariant to policy
interventions `a la Hurwicz (1966). We consider them only as behavioral parameters, which might be complex
functions of structural parameters describing preferences, technology, and information processes. See Fern´
                                                                                                          andez-
Villaverde and Rubio-Ram´   irez (2007) for a more detailed discussion of the distinction between structural and
behavioral parameters. Alternatively, we could write a constant-parameters decision theory model, but that
would move us away from the typical epidemiological models we consider.

                                                       2
in the model much more efficiently than older alternatives such as the extended Kalman filter,
whose behavior deteriorates quickly when the nonlinearities of the model are severe, a common
feature among many epidemiological models. The particle filter is easy to code and well-suited
for implementation in massively parallel computational environments.
    Third, we use Markov chain Monte Carlo techniques to sample from the posterior of the
epidemiological model. In that way, we can implement a fully Bayesian approach. In our context,
the Bayesian approach allows incorporating information in the prior of the parameters from
laboratory results, clinical studies, seroprevalence surveys, and the experience of other regions
or countries. For example, the average duration of a spell at a recovering compartment of an
inhabitant of Belgium (the country we will use for our empirical application) is likely to be close
to the average duration of a spell at a recovering compartment of an inhabitant of neighboring
countries. If we have high-quality estimates of the latter, we can build an informative prior
for the former. The Bayesian choice is also attractive because it quickly gauges the range
of uncertainty existing in the data by looking at the whole posterior, instead of focusing on
the maximum likelihood point estimate or relying on simulation errors as in Li et al. (2020).
Furthermore, by evaluating the marginal likelihood, the Bayesian approach allows for efficient
model comparison.2
    Fourth, we show how to use outputs from the epidemiological model to answer critical policy
questions involving causality in a time-series environment. Let us illustrate this point with an
example. A key element in measuring the effect of a government mandate curtailing mobility,
such as "shelter-in-place" orders, is to have access to a reliable sample of new infectious cases.
However, such data might not exist or be subject to large and biased measurement error due to
problems like testing constraints, unwillingness to test, etc. (this point was recognized long ago
in the epidemiological literature; for example, see O'Neill and Roberts, 1999). To complicate
matters, the biased error in the measured new cases might not be constant over time (for instance,
as testing becomes more accessible), and simple corrections (such as scaling up the number of
recorded cases by some factor) would produce flawed results.3 Similarly, recorded death due to
the disease might be different from the true deaths, as miscounting and classification errors are
likely, especially at the start of an epidemic or during peak moments.
    An epidemiological model can take observations of recorded new cases, recorded hospitaliza-
tions, recorded new deaths in hospitals and at home, and from irregular seroprevalence studies
and impose the discipline brought by the cross-equation restrictions determined by the model's
    2
      Also, a Bayesian approach can help with weak identification, a common problem in epidemiological models
(Alahmadi et al., 2020; Korolev, 2021). This advantage is not so much a consequence of the informativeness of the
prior (we could always rely on flat priors), but because Bayesian inference can integrate over the whole posterior
to obtain important outputs for policy analysis, such as a smoothed estimate of the effective reproduction number,
even if portions of the parameters' posterior are flat.
    3
      Nonetheless, see the more sophisticated approaches in Manski and Molinari (2021) and Toulis (2021) to
estimate COVID-19 prevalence based on partial identification.

                                                        3
dynamics. In such a way, we can transform, for example, a series of recorded new cases into
a series of estimated true new cases and use the latter as an input to ascertain the effects of
a "shelter-in-place" order using standard techniques such as structural vector autoregressions
(SVARs) and local projections (LPs). In comparison, a reduced-form model ­such as those
described in Gostic et al. (2020)­ that does not use the structure of an epidemiological model
cannot build on the strengths of the cross-equation restrictions and the biological and clinical
information they bring to the estimation.4 Interestingly, this methodology goes well beyond
epidemiological models: it can be applied to any causal inference problem that relies on obtaining
good estimates of unobserved variables.5
    We illustrate these four steps using data from the COVID-19 epidemic in Belgium during
2020. While this application is of interest in itself, we must emphasize that our methods are much
more general than the details of the model we specify or the data we use. As we mentioned above,
they are applicable to a wide range of epidemiological models, other diseases beyond COVID-19,
and alternative techniques to ascertain causality in time series. In that sense, our application
should be read as being representative of the range of exercises that can be performed.
    We pick Belgium for five reasons. First, it is one of the countries that has suffered the most
from the COVID-19 epidemic. As of March 13, 2021, it is the fourth territory globally with the
highest COVID-19 deaths per capita, behind only tiny Gibraltar and San Marino and the larger
Czechia. Second, Belgium is a small country, 30,689 km2 (roughly 20% larger than Maryland),
and geographically and climatically quite homogeneous in the area where most of the population
is concentrated (that is, in the coastal plain and central plateau outside the Ardennes). That
allows us to consider Belgium as a single unit for our analysis.6 Third, as mentioned above, we
will use the cross-equation restrictions to discipline the estimated true new cases and deaths.
Belgium has high-quality national data, including reported new cases, hospitalizations, deaths
in hospitals and at home, and several national seroprevalence studies that allow us to efficiently
implement those cross-equation restrictions. Fourth, Belgium experienced, within our sample,
three waves of the epidemic, which would demonstrate how our methods can handle intricate
data patterns. Fifth, the Belgian government has passed different mandates curtailing mobility
on several occasions, which will give us the identification of the effects of these mandates.
    We postulate a SIRD model of COVID-19 for Belgium with time variation in the effective
    4
      The cross-equations discipline could come at a cost if the model is misspecified: the resulting smoothed
estimates might be biased. Since our framework is general enough to encompass many epidemiological models,
we could detect misspecification by comparing our SIRD model against flexible reduced-form time-series models
such as the one proposed by Ho et al. (2021).
    5
      In a different environment, Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) follow a similar approach by using a pricing model
to recover a measure of sentiment in the corporate credit market. They show, using reduced-form regressions
and SVARs, how such a measure can affect the economy and asset prices.
    6
      The incidence of COVID-19 has been around 10% higher in Wallonia than in Flanders in per capita terms
(with Flanders having a worst first wave and Wallonia a more damaging third wave) and about average in
Brussels. To keep our analysis as transparent as possible, we can ignore these relatively small regional differences.

                                                         4
 contact rate among individuals in the model, the hospitalization rates, and death probabilities.
The first variation embodies the idea that individuals react to the prevailing health conditions and
"shelter-in-place" orders. The second and third variations incorporate changes in hospital capacity
 and improvements in medical protocols (and possible changes in the epidemic's demographics
 not fully added to the model). We let this variation evolve as random walks, with the likelihood
 function telling us about the most likely innovations to them.
     We estimate the model using data from Sciensano, a public institution in Belgium, of COVID-
19 per capita deaths in hospitals and at home, per capita hospitalizations due to COVID-19, the
 observed per capita new cases, and the seroprevalence rates. The sample starts on March 15,
2020, the first day with available data on COVID-19 hospitalizations, and ends on November
30, 2020, the latest available data when we estimated the model. We show how the data are
 informative about the parameters of the model, how the point estimates are in line with other
 evidence, and how the model fits the data very well (including tracking the three waves of the
 epidemic). Also, we recover the smoothed states such as time-varying reproduction numbers,
 time-varying death rates, and new cases.
     Next, we illustrate how we can use these outcomes from the estimated epidemiological model
 to answer policy-relevant questions, such as the effectiveness of mobility-curtailing policies in
 controlling the epidemic's spread and its lethality and in measuring their cost in terms of output.
 Identifying the causal effects of these policies is challenging because mobility, as measured by
 indexes such as the Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports, changes due to both
voluntary behavior and government orders.
     To get around this problem, we rely on the two most salient methods for assessing causality
 in a time-series context: SVARs and LPs. We use an SVAR to identify a government stringency
 shock (such as a "shelter-in-place" order). We use the LP approach to analyze how a reproduction
 shock (such as the spread of a new, more contagious variant of the SARS-CoV-2 virus) affects
 the rest of the variables depending on the level of government mobility limitations. However,
 for SVARs and LPs to deliver reliable answers, we need accurate inputs for their estimation.
 Some of those inputs, such as the effective reproduction number, are not directly observed.
 Others, such as new cases, are observed subject to large, biased, and time-varying measurement
 errors. As highlighted above, our estimated epidemiological model can deliver those inputs and,
 therefore, be a vital piece for SVARs and LPs and other causality-assessment exercises.
     Using the SVAR, we estimate that a positive stringency shock --normalized such that, upon
 impact, the posterior median increase is equivalent to a one-unit increase in one of the ordinal
 components of the Oxford Stringency Index of mobility curtailments-- leads to roughly 1, 000
 fewer deaths in Belgium after 2 months, or around 6% fewer deaths in the sample at a negligible
 cost in terms of output. In fact, our point estimate implies a small economic gain of e4.2 per
 capita (although it is hard to distinguish it from zero cost or a small cost). The intuition is that,


                                                  5
by controlling the epidemic, a positive stringency shock brings higher economic activity after a
few weeks that more than compensate for the very short-run losses.
   Using the LP, we find that a high government stringency --i.e., a level of stringency above
the median in our sample-- could save up to about 250 deaths in the first two weeks after
the reproduction shock, or around 1.5% of the deaths in our sample, compared with a low
government stringency, at the small cost of between e2 and e4 per capita.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 frames our paper within the literature.
Section 3 presents a general framework for the Bayesian estimation of epidemiological models.
Section 4 presents a time-varying model of the COVID-19 epidemic. Section 5 introduces the
data from Belgium for our application. Section 6 reports our results and Section 7 shows how to
exploit these results for causality and policy trafe-off analysis with SVARs and LPs. Section 8
concludes.


2     Literature Review
Our paper makes a contribution to the literature estimating epidemiological models and to the
emerging literature studying the causal effects of health policy.

Bayesian approach The use of a Bayesian approach in epidemiological models became
popular after the contributions of O'Neill and Roberts (1999). The state-of-the-art methods for
Bayesian analysis of infectious diseases are reviewed by Alahmadi et al. (2020) and Broemeling
(2021). New research in the area includes approximate Bayesian Computation for epidemic
models by Kypraios et al. (2017) and Minter and Retkute (2019), importance sampling-based
Bayesian inference by Black (2019) and Li et al. (2020). That last paper, the closest to our
approach, uses an ensemble adjustment Kalman filter to estimate with maximum likelihood
an epidemiological model for 375 Chinese cities. We improve on this approach along two key
dimensions. First, the particle filter is more powerful than variations of the Kalman filter when
dealing with highly nonlinear models, like the ones in epidemiology. Second, we can assess
the whole uncertainty on the posterior instead of relying in simulation errors to build credible
intervals for the maximum likelihood estimates as Li et al. (2020) do. This will be important
when we evaluate the infectious period (a central component of the model), which we conclude
has a much wider range of likely values than their tight estimate.
    Black (2019) and Walker, Black, and Ross (2019) propose sampling algorithms to perform
Bayesian inference when one wants to exactly match epidemiological observations available to
state variables. While these are useful techniques, the COVID-19 epidemic is characterized by
the misreporting issue mentioned above. Walker, Ross, and Black (2017) propose two methods
--exact Bayesian inference using data-augmentation and approximate Bayesian inference-- for


                                                6
Bayesian inference of within-household transmission, recovery, and between-household transmis-
sion using data from the first few hundred studies (a data collection process that occurs at the
onset of a pandemic influenza outbreak). Their approach is valuable for computing the effective
reproductive number in the early stages of an epidemic, but as acknowledged by the authors, it
relies on the assumption of perfect detection of infectious cases.
    More recently, Atkeson et al. (2020) use a Bayesian approach to estimate the trend growth
of daily deaths by assuming that it follows a mixture of Weibull density functions. Then, they
recover the time-varying effective reproduction number combining their estimated reduced-form
model for deaths and the restrictions implied by a SIR model. Arnon et al. (2020) estimate the
time-varying effective reproduction number by using the Bayesian method developed by Cori
et al. (2013), but they do not evaluate the likelihood or estimate the behavorial parameters of
the model. Bognanni et al. (2020) estimate the location-specific parameters of infection rates per
excursion and present the cost of infection of a spatial economic-SAIRD model using a Bayesian
approach similar to ours, but they do not formulate a general framework to encompass abstract
epidemiological models. Dehning et al. (2020) estimate a Bayesian SIR model to infer change
points in the spread of COVID-19, but they can only evaluate a very simple likelihood.

Frequentist approach Some papers estimate a similar compartmental model under the
frequentist paradigm. For example, Toda (2020) and Korolev (2021) estimate a compartmental
model by minimizing a loss function measured by the distance between the model-implied
share of new cases and the reported new cases. Horta¸   csu et al. (2021) estimate the fraction of
unreported infections in epidemics with a known epicenter by utilizing the covariation in initial
reported infections across regions and the number of travelers to these regions from the epicenter.
Our approach requires much less granular information. Renne et al. (2020) estimate a SIRD
model using a quasi-likelihood methodology and the extended Kalman filter. Arroyo-Marioli
et al. (2021), Fern´
                   andez-Villaverde and Jones (2020), Pesaran and Yang (2020), and Lee et al.
(2021) estimate time-varying contact rates using the restrictions implied by the SIR model.
Avery et al. (2020, Table 1) list a dozen COVID-19 predictive epidemiological models, but most
of them either rely on simple curve fitting or the formal estimation takes a secondary role to
granularity in location details.

    Our main methodological innovation relative to the previous papers is to show how to combine
sequential Monte Carlo methods with a general epidemiological framework that simultaneously
deals with under-reporting cases and includes data on new cases, hospitalizations, deaths in
hospitals and at home, as well as serological studies and time-varying parameters. Importantly,
in addition to its usefulness for establishing causal inference (to be discussed below), our paper
is potentially useful for policymaking. For example, our smoothed estimates about the share of
individuals recovering in hospitals and at home can be applied to planning purposes such as

                                                7
new construction of hospitals or the optimal design of lockdowns, both in terms of stringency
and duration (as in Acemoglu et al., 2020).

Causal effects of policy on health outcomes and behavior Chernozhukov, Kasahara,
and Schrimpf (2021) quantify the causal effects of masks, policies, and behavior on new cases
and death outcomes using a structural equations model based on causal diagrams. Since this
approach requires the use of the true cases, it dovetails perfectly with the outputs of our
estimated SIRD model. The same can be said of the growing literature on the effects of policy
on behavior as measured by Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports, e.g., Abouk and
Heydari (2021), Maloney and Taskin (2020), Andersen (2020), and Wilson (2020). Since all
of these papers rely on reported cases, the outputs of our estimated SIRD model can be most
valuable for their estimations by correcting the biases in those reported cases.
    Hsiang et al. (2020) and Courtemanche et al. (2020) use a reduced-form model to gauge
the effects of policies on the growth rate of infections. While reduced-form approaches help
in understanding properties of the data, the lessons from modern empirical studies on the
propagation of structural shocks indicate that a structural model is essential to establish causal
inference.
    In summary, one of our paper's main contributions is to combine the output from our
estimated model with state-of-the-art causal inference methods to establish how mobility
curtailments affect the transmission rates and deaths of COVID-19. More in general, we offer an
innovative approach for conducting causal inference in situations where obtaining good estimates
of unobserved variables is critical for establishing causality.


3    A General Framework
We use the well-known state-space representation of a dynamic model to encompass a large
class of epidemiological models (SIRD, SIS, etc.). We rely on this representation because it is
convenient for filtering, smoothing, forecasting, and estimation. Section 4 will show how the
abstract notation on the next pages works in an application dealing with COVID-19.
    The state-space representation consists of a transition equation, governing the evolution of
the states of the model, and a measurement equation, linking those states with the observed
variables. The transition equation of a general epidemiological model takes the form:

                                      Xt = f (Xt-1 , E t ; )                                  (1)

where the vector Xt stacks all the states of the model (share of the population in each of
the different compartments of the model in period t, hospital and ICU bed occupancy rates,


                                                8
government policy, the season of the year, etc.), E t is a vector of innovations, and  is a vector
of parameters indexing the function f (·) and the distributions of E t and Vt (to be defined below).
We use capital letters to denote random variables and lower case letters for the realizations
of those random variables, a straight bold font for the vector of parameters, and, for all other
vectors, an italic bold font. Vectors can always be interpreted, if needed, as being 1 × 1.7
     We highlight five points regarding the transition equation. First, the Markov structure
of Equation (1) is not a tight restriction because we can redefine the vector Xt to include
additional lags of the relevant state variables. Second, the vector Xt can include state variables
indexed by location (i.e., susceptible population in location j ) and individual characteristics
(i.e., susceptible population over 65) or any other combination of interest. Third, we are not
forcing any restriction in the function f (·). In general, this function will be nonlinear and may
include threshold effects or jumps. Fourth, at this level of abstraction, we are not imposing any
distributional assumption on E t , and it might include non-Gaussian innovations. Fifth, we will
include in Xt all the time-varying parameters of the model that capture the notion that the
behavior of individuals, government policies, and medical technology (broadly construed) can
change over time. We will reserve  for the parameters that are time-invariant. That is, if the
mortality rate changes over time (for example, due to better clinical protocols), the mortality
rate at period t will be a state of the model, while the parameters of the law of motion of the
mortality rate will belong to .
     The measurement equation of a general epidemiological model can be written as:

                                            Yt = g (Xt , Vt ; )                                          (2)

where Yt is a vector of observables (cases, deaths, hospitalizations, ...) and Vt is a vector of
innovations to observables. As before, we are not imposing a functional form on g (·) or a
distribution assumption on Vt . In particular g (·) can be, along some dimensions, an identity
(i.e., we observe one or several states of the model).
     Two aspects of Equation (2) deserve further discussion. First, the observable variables can
come at different frequencies, with some components of Yt being the empty set for some periods.
This feature is desirable as some data may come daily (e.g., new hospitalizations and deaths),
others may be more informative weekly (e.g., reported new cases), or some might be gathered
only sporadically (e.g., seroprevalence surveys). The latter would be the case in our application
in Section 4. Second, Vt might be a shock (e.g., an unexpectedly high level of deaths given the
number of recovering individuals) or a measurement error (e.g., cases are under-reported due to

   7
     In this paper, we will deal with epidemiological models in discrete time. Since we will be taking these
models to the data, which comes in discrete units of time, this is a more natural framework than continuous
time, which is often more convenient for mathematical analysis. We could rework our framework into continuous
time with some extra notation.

                                                     9
an insufficient testing).
   Combining Equations (1) and (2), we get:

                       Yt = g (f (Xt-1 , E t ; ), Vt ; ) = h(Xt-1 , E t , Vt ; ),

which shows that, conditional on the states Xt-1 , Yt is a change of variables of E t and Vt and
that the distributions of these innovations induce a distribution for Yt : p (Yt |Xt-1 ; ).
    Unfortunately, since the functions f (·) and g (·) are, in standard epidemiological models,
nonlinear, even if the distributions of E t and Vt were to belong to well-known parametric families
(e.g., Gaussian), Yt would not follow any known distribution (except in nongeneric situations).
    Given a sample of observables over T periods, y T = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yT }, our goal is to evaluate
the likelihood function of y T given , i.e., p y T ;  . We can write:

                                                       T
                              p y T ;  = p (y1 |)            p yt |y t-1 ;  .
                                                       t=2


Then:
                                                        T
            T
         p y ; =        p (y1 |X1 ; ) p(X1 ; )dX1               p (yt |Xt ; ) p Xt |y t-1 ;  dXt .   (3)
                                                       t=2

                                                                    T
In other words, knowledge of the sequence {p (Xt |y t-1 ; )}t=1 allows the evaluation of the like-
lihood in Equation (3) of the model (given the ability to solve or approximate the corresponding
integrals). Also, notice that y 0 is the empty set and, therefore, p(X1 ; ) = p (X1 |y 0 ; ).
                                      T
    The sequence {p (Xt |y t-1 ; )}t=1 can be found with filtering, by solving the Chapman-
Kolmogorov equation:

                   p Xt |y t-1 ;  =        p (Xt |Xt-1 ; ) p Xt-1 |y t-1 ;  dXt-1                    (4)

and applying Bayes' theorem:

                                              p (yt |Xt ; ) p (Xt |y t-1 ; )
                            p Xt |y t ;  =                                                           (5)
                                                      p (yt |y t-1 ; )

where:
                        p yt |y t-1 ;  =      p (yt |Xt ; ) p Xt |y t-1 ;  dXt                       (6)

is the marginal distribution of yt given y t-1 . We assume that  includes X0 . Hence, we are
computing the likelihood conditional on those initial states.
    Since this filtering problem is standard, we will not spend much time addressing it. Fern´
                                                                                             andez-


                                                  10
Villaverde et al. (2016) review this topic in detail. Suffice it to say that we can use the particle
filter or other sequential Monte Carlo methods to efficiently simulate swarms of particles
representing possible alternative values of Xt . Relying on a law of large numbers, we can
substitute the integrals in Equations (3), (4), (5), and (6) by averages of the corresponding
probabilities evaluated at the simulation. Beyond their applicability to an extensive class of
filtering problems, sequential Monte Carlo methods have the additional advantages of being easy
to code and well suited for massive parallelization. Thus, in this paper, we will use the particle
filter to evaluate the likelihood function.8
     Alternatives to sequential Monte Carlo methods such as the extended Kalman filter or the
unscented Kalman filter are unlikely to work with high enough accuracy in epidemiological
models because of the strong nonlinearities present in these models. Examples, in other fields,
where a well-designed particle filter clearly outperforms variations of the Kalman filter in head-
to-head comparisons include Chatzi and Smyth (2009) and Lee et al. (2010). Also, Smyth et al.
(1999) document the poor performance of the extended Kalman filter in highly nonlinear setups.
     Once we have the likelihood function, p y T ;  , we can either maximize it or combine it
with a prior p () to obtain a posterior p |y T  p y T ;  p () and perform a Bayesian
analysis. We can rely on clinical and experimental evidence to build informative priors.9
     The posterior p |y T can be sampled using a Markov chain Monte Carlo such as the
Metropolis-Hastings or the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. When we combine the particle filter
to evaluate the likelihood with a Metropolis-Hastings to draw from the posterior, the joint
algorithm is often known as the PFMH. We follow this approach in this paper. One central
object of interest in our exercise will be the smoothed sequence of states conditional on the
posterior mode, since it will inform us about the epidemiological situation at any given moment,
a key input for policymakers and our causal assessment of mobility curtailments.
     With the output of the Markov Chain Monte Carlo, we can integrate the likelihood function
p y T ;  with respect to the parameters . The resulting marginal likelihood p y T can
be used to build Bayes factors to compare different epidemiological models (for example, to
determine the best number of compartments). See Llorente et al. (2020) for an updated review
of methods for computing the marginal likelihood.




   8                                                                                            T
      There is an associated smoothing problem where we compute the sequence p Xt |y T ;  t=1 , that is, the
probability distribution of states conditional on all the data. In general, future observations are informative
about current states (as we will show in our application).
    9
      If we adopt a uniform prior p (), we can draw from a posterior that is proportional to the likelihood. By
looking at the parameter values  that deliver the maximum value of p y T ;  in the Markov chain, we would
have obtained a maximum likelihood estimate that is often more reliable than the one that comes from traditional
optimization algorithms. We can also use  as an (excellent) initial guess for an optimization algorithms.

                                                      11
4    Our Application
As our application, we select a SIRD compartmental model of COVID-19 to be estimated with
data from Belgium. The application will highlight the importance of allowing for time variation
in i) the effective contact rate among individuals; ii) the hospitalization rates; and iii) death
probabilities.

                                                         H,t               H,t H
        St-1               t                     It                 Ht                    Dt

                                                                            (1 - P,t )P
                                                 (1 - H,t )
                                                                           (1 - H,t )H


                           It-1                                     Pt                    Ct
                                                                           P,t P


                                  Figure 1: Outline of the model.

    Figure 1 outlines the compartments' structure. All individuals start as susceptible (S )
except for a small fraction of infectious individuals (I ). Susceptible individuals meet with
infectious individuals and become, with some probability, infectious themselves. This probability
is controlled by t , the time-varying effective contact rate. Every day, a share  of infectious
individuals can recover in a hospital (H ) or at home (P ). Here, "home" means all dwellings,
including private residences and retirement communities, outside of hospitals (unfortunately,
our data set does not distinguish between private residences and retirement communities, a
potentially important distinction). Of those, the share of individuals recovering in hospitals is
time varying and equal to H,t . Hence, the share 1 - H,t recovers at home. Recovery ends with
death (D) or a return to a healthy status (C ). Every day a share H (P ) of individuals in a
hospital (at home) recover. Of those, H,t (P,t ) die, while 1 - H,t (1 - P,t ) return to healthy
status. These death rates are also time varying.
    We assume that, once cured, an individual cannot become infectious again. We pick this
specification because the evidence is that re-infections with SARS-CoV-2 during 2020 (our data
sample) were possible but unlikely. However, it would be easy to extend the model to allow for
re-infections, perhaps after the (stochastic) waning of immunity or the arrival of new varieties
of the virus, a common concern later in the epidemic. Indeed, our causal analysis in Section 7
treats the emergence of new variants as a possible interpretation of a reproduction shock.
    We move now to the detailed presentation of the model.




                                                12
4.1     The Transition Equation
The transition equation of the model we will estimate is:
                                                                                        
                          St             St-1                     -t St-1 It-1
                          It             It-1                  t St-1 It-1 - It-1
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                     
                         Ht      
                                        Ht-1      
                                                               H,t It-1 - H Ht-1        
                                                                                        
                          Pt             Pt-1               (1 - H,t )It-1 - P Pt-1
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                          bt    =        bt-1    +                    b b,t             ,                    (7)
                                                                                        
                         gH,t           gH,t-1                        g g,t
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                     
                         dH,t    
                                        dH,t-1    
                                                                      h h,t             
                                                                                        
                         dP,t           dP,t-1                        p p,t
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                          nt             nt-1                         n n,t

where we have a 9 × 1 vector of states Xt = {St , It , Ht , Pt , bt , gH,t , dH,t , dP,t , nt } and a 5 × 1 vector
of innovations E t = {b,t , g,t , h,t , p,t , n,t }. Let us describe each of these variables.
    Row one of Equation (7) tells us that the share of the population that is susceptible on day
t, St , is equal to the share of the susceptible population the day before, St-1 , minus the new
infections as a share of the population, given by a matching function of the share of susceptibles
and infectious, It-1 , yesterday: t St-1 It-1 .
    The most relevant feature of row one, and a central aspect of our model, is that the effective
contact rate, t , in the matching function is time varying. In many textbook epidemiological
models, the effective contact rate is a constant parameter. However, individuals respond to
the epidemiological situation for two reasons. First, individuals take voluntary precautionary
measures (lower mobility, wearing personal protection equipment, changed business protocols).
For this point to hold, we do not need to assume full agent rationality; we only require some
degree of endogenous reaction. Second, individuals change how often they effectively interact with
each other in any given period because governments impose non-pharmaceutical interventions
(NPIs) in response to the health situation, such as curtailments on businesses and travel or
mandatory mask-wearing. By letting the effective contact rate be time varying, the model can
capture these two mechanisms.
    At this point, we could take two routes. First, we could introduce an explicit decision-theory
model of the individual and policy responses. This route would force us to impose a considerable
degree of additional structure. Alternatively, we can specify a flexible form for the evolution of
t and let the data inform us about it.
    We chose this second route by assuming that bt = log(t ) follows a random walk. More
concretely, in row five of Equation (7), bt = bt-1 + b b,t , where the innovation is a truncated



                                                       13
standard normal distribution:

                                                            -1
                  b,t | t-1 , It-1  N (0, 1, lb(Xt , yt ), -b  (log(It-1 ) + log(t-1 ))).

The lower bound of the truncation, lb(Xt , yt ), is imposed to avoid having more new cases in the
model (St-1 - St ) than in the data (notice that we are defining the function lb(Xt , yt ) implicitly).
Later, we will argue that there will be a percentage of true cases of COVID-19 that are not
reported (for instance, because the cases are asymptomatic or due to insufficient testing), but
that the situation where there are more reported cases than true cases is not relevant empirically.
The number of "false positives" is most likely trivially small and swamped, by at least an order
of magnitude, by the under-reporting of "false negatives."10 The upper bound of the truncation,
   -1
-b    (log(It-1 ) + log(t-1 )), prevents St from becoming negative.
   Row two of Equation (7) describes how the share of infectious, It , evolves. The new share is
equal to the share yesterday, It , plus the new infections t St-1 It-1 , minus the share of infectious
that move to the next compartment, It-1 .
   Row three of Equation (7) determines the evolution of Ht , the share of the population
hospitalized on day t. The share evolves through inflows from the compartment of infectious
at a rate H,t It-1 and outflows at a rate H . We allow H,t to move to reflect the changing
availability of hospital beds and shifting decisions by patients (e.g., should I go to a hospital?)
and clinical protocols (e.g., should this patient be hospitalized or sent back home?).
   As we did with the effective contact rate, we specify a flexible law of motion for H,t .
Specially, in row six of Equation (7), we define a random walk for gH,t , gH,t = gH,t-1 + g g,t ,
                                     gH,t
where g,t  N (0, 1) and H,t = egeH,t +1 . Hence, the mapping from H,t to gH,t is:

                                                           H,t
                                           gH,t = log                .
                                                         1 - H,t

This mapping will be useful for interpreting gH,0 later on.
     Row four of Equation (7) governs the evolution of the share of individuals recovering at home,
Pt . In parallel to Ht , the share evolves through inflows from the compartment of infectious at
a rate (1 - H,t )It-1 and outflows at a rate P . Rows three and four implicitly assume that
individuals recovering in a hospital or at home do not switch between these two compartments.
This assumption is due to data limitations (as we do not observe how many patients previously
in a hospital die while recovering at home). Fortunately, this assumption does not cause too
many problems. If a patient is at home but later hospitalized, we can consider her as still

   10
     Many clinical tests are designed to minimize "false positives" at the cost of "false negatives." Nonetheless,
we could change the lower bound to allow for more reported cases than true cases (this might be helpful in other
applications). In a robustness analysis, we checked for the possibility of more cases reported than true ones, and
we only got a worse fit of the model.

                                                        14
being in the infectious compartment. Conversely, individuals formerly hospitalized and currently
recovering at home are unlikely to be infectious and, hence, they could be considered as being
in the recovered compartment. Also, the measurement error will help us tackle, empirically,
deviations from this assumption in the data.
    Rows seven to nine of Equation (7) describe the evolution of three random walks that will
be used in the measurement equation below, with innovations i,t  N (0, 1) for i  {h, p, n}.
    Finally, notice that the rows of Equation (7) define an implicit law of motion of Ct because:

                         St + It + Ht + Pt + DH,t + DP,t + Ct = 1, with C0  0.                       (8)

Hence, Ct = Ct-1 + (1 - H,t )H Ht-1 + (1 - P,t )p Pt-1 .


4.2     The Measurement Equation
                                                     obs                     obs
In our data set, we observe deaths in a hospital (DH,t   ), deaths at home (DP,t ), and hospitalized
             obs                                       obs
patients (Ht ) at a daily frequency; new cases (Gt ) at a weekly frequency; and the point
estimates of St from the seroprevalence surveys for some periods (see Section 5 for details). We
assume that the log of each of these five variables is measured with a normally distributed error
ui,t  N (0, 1) for i  {DH , DP , H, G, S }. The log form ensures that the model only predicts
positive values for the five observables. The measurement error arises for many reasons, from
administrative mistakes and delays in file keeping to the under-reporting of cases due to testing
bottlenecks. We will let the data tell us about the standard deviation of this measurement error.
     Thus, the measurement equation is:
                                                                             
                1           obs                      1                                         
      log   Population
                         + DH,t            log   Population
                                                              + H,t H Ht-1         DH uDH ,t
                                                                              
    log         1           obs               1                                    DP uDP ,t
                                                                                               
            Population
                         + DP,t      log
                                          Population
                                                     + P,t P Pt-1             
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
                                   =                                         +     H uH,t      .     (9)
                                                                              
   
              log Htobs                         log (Ht )                                      
                                                                                   G uG,t
                                                                                               
              log Gobs                   log ((St-1 - St )n,t )
                                                                                               
                    t+5                                                      
               log Stobs                         log(St )                          S uS,t

   Row one of Equation (9) links the (log) first difference of the observed share of deaths in
                    obs
hospitals, DH,t         , with the share of individuals in hospitals Ht-1 and the time-varying death rate
           dH,t
          e
H,t = 1+edH,t , where dH,t comes from row seven of Equation (7). For the first two observed series
in Equation (9) we add the term 1/Population because there are few days with zero deaths.
   Row two of (9) links the (log) first difference of the observed share of deaths at home,
    obs
DP,t    , with the share of individuals recovering at home Pt-1 and the time-varying death rate
           d
          e P,t
P,t = 1+     d
            e P,t
                  , where dP,t is a random walk that comes from row eight of Equation (7).
   Time variation of the death rates in a hospital and at home captures improvements in clinical


                                                    15
protocols that raise the survival of patients, variation in hospital congestion (which may facilitate
or complicate the treatment of patients), and changes in the mix of recovering individuals across
different demographic groups.11
    Row three of (9) tells us that the observed share of the population in hospitals is measured
with error. An interpretation of this measurement error (beyond administrative mistakes in
recording hospitalizations and discharges) is that some patients in hospitals are still infectious
because isolation measures have not been fully implemented. Thus, while measured as being in
a hospital, the individuals are still in the infectious compartment for the purposes of the model.
    Row four of (9) gives us the observed share of cases, equal to the difference of the share
                                                     ent
of susceptible individuals times a factor n,t = en    t +1
                                                           e-µ < 1 that determines the percentage of
cases that are reported. The rate of under-reporting depends on nt , which follows the random
walk defined in row nine of Equation (7).12 The parameter µ ensures that under-reporting
never goes to zero, for example, due to false negatives. As we discussed above, we let cases be
under-reported by the n,t factor because this was a key factor at the start of the COVID-19
epidemic and we want to recover an estimate of the rate of reporting. At the same time, we
assume that cases cannot be over-reported. As we will explain in more detail in Section 5, we only
use row four every Friday by matching it to the new cases reported the following Wednesday.13
    Row five of (9) links the point estimates of the susceptible share of the population from
Herzog et al. (2020) to the corresponding share from our model. As we will describe below in
more detail, this study is a prospective serial cross-sectional nationwide seroprevalence evaluation
conducted in Belgium using blood samples collected during five different periods. We only use
this equation for the dates for which the study is available. This row forces our smoothed
states to incorporate the high-quality information from seroprevalence surveys, but allowing for
differences due to sampling uncertainty and possible measurement errors.
    Rows four and five of Equation (9) illustrate how state-space representations parsimoniously
incorporate observables at different frequencies.


4.3     The Time-Varying Reproduction Numbers
A key state in our model is the effective contact rate t , the time-varying parameter that
determines the speed of contagion in the matching function of susceptible and infectious

   11
     In a model with several compartments for individuals indexed by age, this last effect would disappear.
However, in our model, given the data available, we have only one group of individuals.
  12
     The degree of under-reporting is sometimes called in the epidemiological literature the multiplication factor
(MF). See Gibbons et al. (2014) for a survey of the somewhat ad hoc methods used to estimate the MF. A related
approach to our measurement of under-reporting, also using an epidemiological model, is in Chudik et al. (2020).
  13
     We could generalize this assumption. For example, Li et al. (2020) use a separate observational delay model
and Arnon et al. (2020) assume 3 days from exposure to the onset of symptoms and 7 days from the onset of
symptoms to a positive result.

                                                       16
individuals. When t is high, the infection spreads quickly. When t is low, the infection spreads
slowly and might eventually abate.
    The basic reproduction number, R0,t , is a closely related concept. The popularity of this
measure is due to its straightforward interpretation: the basic reproduction number is the
expected number of cases generated by one case in a population where all individuals are
susceptible. In our model, R0,t =  
                                    t
                                      . Thus, the basic reproduction number inherits the same
time variability encoded in t .
    A similar measure to R0,t is the effective reproduction number, Re,t , which considers the
changes in the share of the susceptible population over time:

                                                          t St
                                       Re,t = R0,t St =
                                                          

By doing so, Re,t offers a better measure of the instantaneous speed of the spreading of the
infection. In Section 6, we will report the estimated evolution of R0,t and Re,t .


4.4    Summary
We summarize all the variables and parameters of the model in Table 1. For ease of exposition,
we partition Table 1 into five parts. The first part outlines the model compartments, the second
part summarizes the model time-varying parameters, the third part presents observed variables,
the fourth part shows the constant parameters of the model, and the fifth part lists the initial
states. We assume that the initial states' distribution, X0 , is degenerate. As mentioned above,
we will treat these initial states as additional parameters and set priors over them.


5     The Data
We build daily frequency data, including data on deaths in hospitals, total deaths, hospitalizations,
and new cases from Sciensano, a public institution recognized as a research institution by the
Belgian Science Policy Office. All the data except for deaths in hospitals, which will be explained
below, were downloaded from Sciensano on December 17, 2020. Our data span the period from
March 15, 2020, to November 30, 2020. The starting date corresponds to the first day for which
we have data on COVID-19 hospitalizations, and the ending date is the latest day for which we
have data on deaths in hospitals. Deaths at home are computed as the difference between total
deaths and deaths in hospitals. The latter was obtained upon request from Sciensano and it
is dated as of December 15, 2020. In a few days, the number of total deaths in hospitals was
above the number of total deaths. In such cases, we input zero deaths at home.
    The raw data on new cases exhibit weekend and holiday effects. Hence, we use the data from


                                                 17
                                   Table 1: Model Road Map

Model Compartments
St        Share of the population that is susceptible at time t.
It        Share of the population that is infectious at time t.
Ht        Share of the population that is hospitalized at time t.
Pt        Share of the population that is recovering at home (outside the hospital) at time t.
DH,t Share of the population that has died in a hospital as of time t.
DP,t Share of the population that has died at home as of time t.
Ct        Share of the population that has recovered as of time t.
Model Time-Varying Parameters
t         Effective contact rate at time t.
bt        Natural logarithm of the effective contact rate, i.e., bt = log(t ).
H,t Share of the population no longer infectious at time t because they are recovering in a hospital.
gH,t Inverse of the logit function mapping gH,t to H,t , i.e., gH,t = log(H,t /(1 - H,t )).
H,t Share of those leaving the hospital at time t due to death.
dH,t Inverse of the logit function mapping dH,t to H,t , i.e., dH,t = log(H,t /(1 - H,t )).
P,t       Share of those no longer recovering at home at time t due to death.
dP,t      Inverse of the logit function mapping dP,t to P,t , i.e., dP,t = log(P,t /(1 - P,t )).
n,t       Share of new cases at time t detected in the data.
nt        Inverse of the logit function mapping nt to n,t , i.e., nt = log(n,t /(1 - n,t )).
Observed Variables
   obs
DH,t      Observed share of the population that has died at a hospital as of time t.
   obs
DP,t Observed share of the population that has died at home as of time t.
Htobs Observed share of the population that is hospitalized at time t.
Gobs
   t      Observed new cases at time t as a share of the population.
Stobs Observed share of the population that is susceptible at time t.
Model Constant Parameters
          Share of the population that is no longer infectious at time t.
H         Share of the population that leaves the hospital at time t.
P         Share of the population that is no longer recovering at home at time t.
b         Standard deviation of the innovation to bt .
g         Standard deviation of the innovation to gH,t .
h         Standard deviation of the innovation to dH,t .
p         Standard deviation of the innovation to dP,t .
n         Standard deviation of the innovation to nt .
DH Standard deviation of the innovation to the measurement equation of DH,t .
DP Standard deviation of the innovation to the measurement equation of DP,t .
H         Standard deviation of the innovation to the measurement equation of Ht .
G         Standard deviation of the innovation to the measurement equation of St-1 - St .
S         Standard deviation of the innovation to the measurement equation of St .
µ         Upper bound of the share of detected cases.
Initial Values
S0 , I0 , H0 , P0 , b0 , gH,0 , dH,0 , dP,0 , n0




                                                18
new cases reported every Wednesday save for Wednesday, November 11, 2020, a public holiday
in Belgium (Remembrance Day). For this date, we use the reported cases on Tuesday, November
10, 2020. We consider that those cases were infected the previous Friday. Since Sciensano assigns
new cases according to the date on which the sample was taken, we impute new cases in the
model to 5-day-ahead reported new cases.14 Thus, we match an average incubation period of 5
days. As the CDC reports, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus and
some studies consider day 5 as the typical day of the onset of symptoms (Kucirka et al., 2020).
    We picked this specification after extensive testing of alternatives. In those preliminary tests,
we found that alternative approaches that seasonally adjusted for nonbusiness days not only
distorted the number of reported cases but, more importantly, required potentially dubious
assumptions to capture the nonlinear nature of the time series.15 Hence, we use the data for new
cases at a weekly frequency; this is the simplest and most transparent solution that we found.
    Concerning the share of the susceptible population, we use the point estimates from Herzog
et al. (2020). This study is a prospective serial cross-sectional nationwide seroprevalence
evaluation conducted in Belgium using blood samples collected during the following five collection
periods: March 30-April 5, April 20-April 26, May 18-May 25, June 8-June 13, and June 29-July
3. In total, the collection periods include 33 days, i.e., about 15% of our sample. The population
data used to express variables in per capita terms correspond to 2019 and were obtained from
the World Bank's website.


6        Results
We now present our results. First, we will describe the algorithm we employ for estimation.
Second, we will present our priors and report the posterior moments. Third, we will show that the
model fits the data extremely well. Fourth, we will report the time-varying reproduction numbers
implied by the model. Fifth, we will discuss the estimated time-varying death probabilities
(i.e., the time-varying death rates divided by H and P , respectively). Sixth, we will back up a
measure of which percentage of cases were reported. We will conclude with a brief discussion of
the findings regarding the other states of the model.


6.1      Algorithm
As described in Section 3, we implement a PFMH algorithm. To do so, we first need to evaluate
the likelihood function p y T ;  given a set of parameters  (we include X0 in  since we

    14
      According to the data documentation from Sciensano, the diagnostics include molecular techniques (i.e.,
polymerase chain reaction or PCR) and rapid antigen tests.
   15
      Similarly, the nonlinearity of the model made the use of cumulators to aggregate cases over the week
challenging to implement and generated results that were not transparent.

                                                     19
take the initial states X0 as given) using the particle filter with the following pseudo-code:

     Step 0, Initialization: Set t    1.
     Step 1, Prediction: Sample {X ~ i }N from the conditional density p(X i |) if t = 1,
                                     t i=1                                            t
         i   i
and p(Xt |Xt-1 ; ) otherwise.
                                             i
     Step 2, Filtering: Let the weights t      = p(yt |Xti ; ) for i = 1, . . . , N .
     Step 3, Sampling: Sample with replacement {Xti }N                  ~i N
                                                              i=1 from {Xt }i=1 using weights
 i
t  .
     Step 4, Recursion: If t < T set t        t + 1 and go to step 1. Otherwise move to
next step.
     Step 5, Evaluation: Use {{Xti }N    T
                                    i=1 }t=1 to estimate the likelihood function as:

                                                T     N      i
                                       T                    t
                                   p(y ; ) =
                                                t=1   i=1
                                                            N


    Step 1 is implemented by sampling from the distribution of innovations (which, given their
normality, is straightforward) and, given the swarm of simulated states at t - 1, using Equation
(7) to get the swarm of simulated states at t. Notice how simple it would be to introduce
non-normal innovations; we would just need to switch the sampler of the innovations. Step 2 is
also straightforward. From Equation (9), we can plug in the observations and the states and
back up the measurement errors that make both the left- and right-hand side equal. Then, we
evaluate the probability of those measurement errors given a normal distribution. Because of
the sampling in Step 3, the estimated likelihood p(y T ; ) in Step 5 is a random variable and
not differentiable with respect to the parameter values.
    We nest the particle filter with a random walk Metropolis-Hastings to approximate the
posterior distribution of interest. The following algorithm generates a Markov chain that
converges to the posterior distribution of .

   Step 0, Initialization: Set (0)  N (µ0 , 0 ) and g 1
   Step 1, Proposal: Draw  from a multivariate normal with mean (g-1) and covariance
matrix  .
   Step 2, Acceptance/Rejection: Set (g) =  with probability

                                                    p(y T ;  )p( )
                       (|(g-1) ) = min 1,
                                                p(y T ; (g-1) )p((g-1) )

   and (g) = (g-1) otherwise.
   Step 3, Recursion: If g < G, set g           g + 1 and go to step 1.         Otherwise exit

                                               20
the algorithm with {(g) }G
                         g =1 .



   In Step 1, we set µ0 as the posterior mode, and 0 =  . Step 2 is based on the random-
walk proposal with covariance matrix  . In accordance with standard practice (Roberts and
Rosenthal, 2001), we select  so that the resulting acceptance rate of the algorithm is close to
20%. We set G = 100, 000 with a burn-in of 10, 000. Using the draws from the algorithm, we
approximate the posterior moments of interest such as mean, 5%, and 95% quantiles of . We
approximate the posterior distribution of states by the marginalization

                              p(X T |y T ) =    p(X T |, y T )p(|y T )d


where p(|y T ) is given by the algorithm above and p(X T |, y T ) can be approximated by either
the particle smoother or the particle backward sampler (see Fern´ andez-Villaverde et al., 2016).


6.2     Prior and Posterior Moments
We impose prior distributions for the parameters and initial states of the model that capture
previous existing knowledge about the features of COVID-19. For transparency, we use well-
known parametric families commonly applied in similar problems. These priors are described in
Table 2. The table also describes the posterior moments. We use N = 50, 000 to compute the
particle filter and 30 repetitions of the filter to compute the mean and the standard deviation of
the posterior mode estimates.

Prior Let us briefly discuss the rationale underlying the parametric choices for our priors, their
central tendency, and their tightness. We pick beta priors for the three parameters determining
transitions across compartments:  , H , and p . The prior for  is centered at 0.2 (implying that
the median time a person remains infectious is about five days) consistent with the evidence in
Bar-On et al. (2020). The standard deviation of  is 0.05, which implies an interdecile range
(IDR) of 4 to 7 days and attributes a 10% probability to average infectious periods beyond 7
days.16 The prior mean and standard deviation for H are set to 0.10 and 0.02, respectively,
implying a median length of average stays in hospitals of about 10, an IDR of 6 to 13 days,
and a 10% probability of average stays longer than 13 days, broadly in line with the average
hospital stays in Belgium according to Catteau et al. (2020), who found a median stay of 9 days
with a 6­to-15-day interquartile range. Even so, our prior rules out neither average hospital
stays as short as five days nor average stays longer than 20 days. We set the prior mean for P

  16
     We are dealing with the average infectious period across the population, which may include longer and
shorter infectious periods. The standard deviation of  embodies uncertainty about the average duration of
spells of infectiousness, not about their dispersion in the cross-section of individuals.

                                                   21
equal to 0.15, implying a median average home recovery of between 6 and 7 days and an IDR
of about 4 to 11 days. While less is known about home recoveries, our prior assumes that, on
average, individuals recovering outside of hospitals present less severe symptoms and hence are
more likely to recover faster. In any case, the standard deviation of this prior allows the model
to encompass a wide range of possibilities. Our choice of standard deviations for the priors of
H and P highlights a quintessential benefit of following a Bayesian approach. We can take
advantage of the nationwide scope of the data in Catteau et al. (2020) and the observation that
most of the studies outside of China find an average stay in hospitals slightly below 10 days
(e.g., Lavery et al. 2020, and Rees et al. 2020) to discipline the estimation, while remaining more
agnostic about those parameters, such as the average duration of home recoveries, for which it
is harder to gather external data.
    We pick inverse gamma priors for the parameters governing the law of motion of the time-
varying parameters b , g , h , p , and n . Inverse gamma priors are popular choices for the
step size changes across a variety of applications. We set the prior mean equal to 0.2 for b , g ,
h , p , and n to allow for quick changes in behavior, policies, and medical treatments. In the
case of the effective contact rate, our prior for b implies that this rate varies, on average, by
about 20% from one day to the next, in line with the fast changes recorded after stay-at-home
orders. In the case of the law of motion governing the share of those infected recovering in a
hospital, our prior implies (up to first order) that the share of those infected recovering in a
hospital changes on average by about 20 × (1 - H,t-1 )% from period t - 1 to period t.17 Thus,
when the share of the population hospitalized is small, we expect larger changes than when this
share is large. Similarly, the prior mean of h to 0.2 implies (up to first order) that the death
rate at a hospital changes on average by about 20 × (1 - H,t-1 )% from period t - 1 to period
t. This is a flexible specification that allows death death rates in hospitals to fluctuate more
when the death rate is low, capturing sharp increases in death rates. The persistence of the
death rate implied by the prior increases with its level, as it is likely to be subject to shocks
that are proportionally smaller when the death rate level is high. We impose an identical prior
for p . With regard to n , our prior implies that (up to first order) the share of detected cases
changes on average by about 20 × (1 - n,t-1 )% from period t - 1 to period t. Thus, when the
detection rate is low, the day-to-day changes are larger than when the detection rate is large.
Importantly, the standard deviation of the prior for b , g , h , p , and n is set to 0.2. Hence,
our prior allows for either extremely slow or fast changes in the time-varying parameters.
    Next, we discuss the prior for the initial value of the states. We set the prior mean for
S0 equal to 0.98. This is a value that is about one percentage point above the share of the
population susceptible to the virus as of March 30, 2020, according to the point estimates in
                                           gH,t
  17                                       e
     This follows from linearizing h,t = eg H,t +1 around h,t-1 and dividing the resulting expression by h,t-1 ,
         H,t -H,t-1
that is,   H,t-1    = (1 - H,t-1 )(gH,t - gH,t-1 ).

                                                      22
Herzog et al. (2020). The standard deviation is set equal to 0.01, which is about two times
the standard deviation associated with the 95% confidence interval for the seroprevalence of
COVID-19 in Belgium as of March 30, 2020, reported in Herzog et al. (2020). The prior mean
for I0 is 0.001, which implies that 0.1% of the Belgian population was infectious on March 15,
2020. Notice that assuming a contagion rate of 0.6 (a value we will describe below), then the
number of new cases on March 16, 2020 implied by this assumption is 6,752, which is broadly
consistent with the order of magnitude implied by inflating the reported cases under our implied
prior for the share of detected cases as will be discussed below. The standard deviation of I0 is
set to 0.001, which is also in line with our assumptions on the detection rate. Since the priors
for S0 and I0 are independent, and hence to make sure that the constraints in equation (8) are
satisfied, we discard any draw of S0 and I0 that violates such restrictions.
    The prior mean for b0 is set equal to log(0.6), so that prior belief about R0,t is around 3 on
March 15, 2020, a value consistent with other assumptions in the literature, e.g., D'Arienzo and
Coniglio (2020). The standard deviation for b0 is set to 0.5, so that if we were to use values of b0
one standard deviation below and above the mean, we would obtain values of R0 in the interval
[1.8, 5.9]. The prior mean for gH,0 is set so that when mapped to H,0 it implies that 1% of
those recovering from COVID-19 were doing so in a hospital on March 15, 2020. This number is
computed as follows. We sum the "true COVID-19" cases embedded in our prior as implied by
a detection rate of 5.5% (a plausible value according to our prior) from March 11 until March
15. The result is 27,054. Since 266 individuals were hospitalized on March 15, we have that
266/27, 054  0.01. The standard deviation for gH,0 is set equal to 2, which is large enough
to cover an interval of hospitalized individuals between [15; 800], which is quite wide given the
reported 266. The prior mean for dH,0 is set equal to log(0.15/(1-0.15)). This number is obtained
by the measurement equation assuming that deaths in hospitals are measured without error
                                   DH,0        4
on March 15, 2020; thus H,0 = H0      H
                                         = 266×  0.1
                                                     = 0.15. The standard deviation for dH,0 is set
equal to 2 so that the prior for the probability of those leaving the hospital because of death is
concentrated in the interval [0.02, 0.56]. The prior mean and standard deviation for dP,0 is set
equal to the ones for dH,0 .
    The prior mean for n0 is set equal to -1.00 and the standard deviation is set equal to 1.00.
This choice, together with the prior over µ (described below), implies a fairly flat prior over the
share of detected cases on March 15, 2020 as shown in Appendix A.1.
    We have degenerate priors for H0 and P0 . In particular, we set H0 = 2.31 × 10-5 (that is,
266 hospitalized expressed as a share of the Belgian population the day before the start of our
sample) and P0 = 0. The first is given to us by the data and the second is just for convenience,
since its effects on the estimation are trivially small.
    Next, we justify our choice of prior for µ, i.e., the parameter controlling the share of false
negatives. The prior mean of µ is 0.175, the mid-point of the 2 to 33% interval of false


                                                23
negatives in PCR tests reported by Arevalo-Rodriguez et al. (2020) when the type of specimen is
nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal. In our model, this implies that as the permanent component
of the share of detected cases approaches one, a false negative rate of 17.5% is the most likely
outcome. The standard deviation for µ is set equal to 0.05. This choice for the standard
deviation of µ implies an IDR range for the false negative rate of 11 to 24%. Although rare, our
prior does not completely rule out false negative rates below 5% or above 35%. We allow for
this wide range of possible values because there can be differences between the accuracy of PCR
tests as measured in a lab and when applied widely in a myriad of different situations.
    Finally, we impose degenerate priors over the parameters governing the standard deviation of
the measurement errors of observables, DH , DP , H , G , and S . We use the data to calibrate
DH , DP , H , and G by applying a Hodrick-Prescott filter to the observed variables. We tune
the frequency of the filter so that the cyclical component is nearly serially uncorrelated. Then,
we set the mean of the parameters in question equal to the standard deviation of the serially
uncorrelated cyclical component. This procedure results in DH = 0.29, DP = 0.32, H = 0.017,
and G = 0.16.
    The prior mean for S is set equal to 0.02, which is roughly about 5 times the average
standard deviation across collection periods implied by Herzog et al. (2020). Serological studies
are a useful guide, but likely to be subject to large measurement error, as is evident in the
variation in the share of individuals infected by the virus throughout the collection periods.
    Columns two to four of Table 2 summarize the priors of each parameter.

Posterior We now discuss the posterior moments reported in Table 2 (mode, mean, and the
90% posterior probability interval).18 For ease of exposition, we focus on the posterior mean,
save for a few parameters where the 90% posterior probability interval is of particular interest.
    The posterior mean and 90% posterior probability interval for  are 0.070 and [0.055; 0.105],
respectively. This suggests that the implied posterior mean estimate of the average length a
person remains infectious is between 13 and 14 days and the 90% posterior probability interval
is between 9 and 19 days (we compute the statistics regarding days by inverting every draw of  ,
not by inverting the mean  ; the same will apply to all other statistics regarding time). Hence,
according to our estimates, an infected person remains contagious for a longer period than in
the mean of our prior beliefs. The posterior mean and 90% posterior probability interval for H
are 0.193 and [0.161; 0.229], respectively. Hence, the posterior mean of the average length of
stay in hospitals is between 5 and 6 days and the 90% posterior probability interval is between 4
and 7 days, which is a shorter duration than our prior. The posterior mean and 90% posterior
probability interval for P are 0.144 and [0.084; 0.215]. The implied posterior mean of the average
  18
    Appendix A.2 shows the prior and posterior distribution for all the estimated parameters. While some
parameters are more sharply identified than others, the contrast between the prior and posterior distribution
shows that the data are informative about the estimated parameters.

                                                     24
                                    Table 2: Prior and Posterior Moments

Parameter/                     Prior                                               Posterior
Initial State        Dist.   Mean            Std        Mode             Mean           5%                95%
                     B       0.20            0.05       0.070            0.075           0.055            0.105
H                    B       0.10            0.02       0.208            0.193           0.161            0.229
P                    B       0.15            0.05       0.122            0.144           0.084            0.215
b                    IG      0.20            0.20       0.161            0.186           0.126            0.263
g                    IG      0.20            0.20       0.153            0.175           0.139            0.221
h                    IG      0.20            0.20       0.078            0.091           0.065            0.122
p                    IG      0.20            0.20       0.152            0.149           0.116            0.188
n                    IG      0.20            0.20       0.224            0.307           0.168            0.485
S0                   B       0.98            0.01       0.973            0.976           0.959            0.99
I0                   B       0.001           0.001      0.0009           0.0013          0.0006           0.0024
b0                   N       log(0.60)       0.50       log(0.357)       log(0.362)      log(0.232)       log(0.562)
gH,0                 N       logit(0.01)     2.00       logit(0.225)     logit(0.149)    logit(0.068)     logit(0.325)
dH,0                 N       logit(0.15)     2.00       logit(0.121)     logit(0.138)    logit(0.101)     logit(0.192)
dP,0                 N       logit(0.15)     2.00       logit(0.041)     logit(0.024)    logit(0.009)     logit(0.072)
n0                   N       -1.00           1.00       -0.954           -1.478          -2.611           -0.220
µ                    G       0.175           0.05       0.121            0.124           0.082            0.170
Mean p(|y T )                                           281.91           281.27
Std p(|y T )                                            1.35             1.04

Note: This table is based on an MCMC chain with 90,000 posterior draws obtained after a burn-in period of 10,000
draws. The number of particles used in the estimation is 50,000. The acceptance rate is about 16%. The mean and
standard deviation of the log posterior density are based on 500 evaluations at the posterior mean and mode, respectively.


 length of stay at home is between 7 and 8 days, and the 90% posterior probability interval is
 between 4 and 12 days. The likelihood overturns the prior for H and P : our point estimates
 suggest a longer recovery at home, perhaps due to higher-quality treatments given in hospitals.
     Now we turn to the parameters controlling the step size of changes in behavior, policies, and
 medical treatments. The posterior distribution for b is centered around the prior mean, 0.20,
 but it is more concentrated than our prior, ruling out small and abrupt changes in daily behavior.
 A similar conclusion emerges for the parameter controlling the share of infected individuals
 recovering in hospitals, g . In contrast, the posterior mean for h , 0.091, is much lower than
 the prior mean of 0.20. Hence, according to our model, moderate-to-large step sizes (such as a
 value of about 0.2) in the transmission rate are more plausible than in the transmission rate or
 in the share of infected individuals recovering in hospitals than in the share of mortality rates
 in hospitals, h . In the case of the mortality rates at home, p , the posterior mean is 0.149,
 which is a step-size value somewhat higher than in the case of mortality rates in hospitals. The
 posterior mean for changes in the share of detected cases is 0.307, which is larger than our prior
 mean. This is consistent with expedited increases in testing capacity.
     Finally, we describe the posterior mean for the initial conditions, which in our estimation


                                                            25
corresponds to March 15, 2020, as well as the posterior mean of the share of false negatives.
The posterior mean and 90% posterior probability bands for the initial share of the population
susceptible to the virus are 0.976 and [0.959; 0.99]. Consequently, our posterior estimates indicate
that, with high probability, about 2% of the Belgian population had come in contact with the
virus by mid-March 2020. The posterior mean and posterior probability bands for the initial
share of the population that was infectious are 0.0013 and [0.0006; 0.0024]. Hence, according to
our estimates, about 0.1% of the Belgian population was infectious with high probability by
around March 15. The posterior mean of the initial log of the transmission rate is log(0.362),
implying a basic reproduction number, R0,t , of around 4.8.
    The posterior mean of the process driving the initial share of the population hospitalized
is logit(0.149) so that 14.9% of those infected with COVID-19 were recovering in hospitals at
the beginning of our estimation sample. The posterior mean of the share of those no longer
recovering in hospitals due to deaths is 13.8% and the posterior mean of the share of those
no longer recovering at home due to deaths is 2.4%. These numbers imply an initial death
probability of 2.6% conditional on being hospitalized and an initial death probability of 0.35%
conditional on recovering at home. These findings suggest that, by mid-March 2020, very sick
patients were being admitted to hospitals for COVID-19 treatment. As documented in Appendix
A.2, the posterior distribution n0 is very similar to the prior distribution, with roughly the same
mean. However, our choice of prior for n0 was an educated guess: since this parameter was
hard to identify, we conducted multiple optimizations of n0 starting our Monte Carlo simulation
at different initial values. The optimizer consistently delivered values concentrated around the
mean of our prior.
    The posterior mean of the share of false negatives implied by our model is 12.4%, which
is smaller than our prior. The posterior mean of parameters µ and n0 imply a 90% posterior
probability interval for the initial share of detected cases of between 9 and 31%. Thus, according
to our estimates, as of March 15, 7 out of 10 cases were being undetected in Belgium.


6.3    Data Fit
Figures 2 and 3 show the fit of the model to the data at the posterior mean. The left panel of
Figure 2 plots, in a continuous black line, the (log) first difference of the share of (daily) deaths
in hospitals in Belgium from mid-March until late November (i.e., the share of new deaths). We
can see two large peaks, one in early April and one in early November, corresponding to the
first and third waves of COVID-19 in Belgium, plus a smaller wave in mid-August. In red, we
plot the median of the one-step-ahead forecast of the model, evaluated at the posterior mean,
together with a 90% probability band. The right panel plots, following the same formatting
as the left panel, the (log) first difference of the share of the deaths outside of hospitals, the


                                                 26
one-step-ahead forecast, and the 90% probability band.




                  (a) Death in hospitals                               (b) Deaths at home

                  Figure 2: Deaths: One-step-ahead forecast and data, Belgium




               (a) Population in hospitals                            (b) New reported cases

Figure 3: Hospitalized population and new cases: One-step-ahead forecast and data, Belgium

   The main lesson from Figure 2 is that the model fits the data remarkably well, capturing the
three waves of deaths. The observations fall within the 90% probability band on most days. The
only misses are during the summer of 2020, when deaths were fewer than ten a day. During this
time, small random differences between one period to the next are extremely difficult to forecast.
The model also accounts for the observation that deaths in hospitals had reached, by early
November, the same level as in early April, but deaths at home had not. This might reflects
Belgian hospitals's better ability to cope with severe COVID-19 patients due to additional
available beds: hospitals can admit more patients and, therefore, more deaths occur there.19
   This hypothesis is supported by the left panel of Figure 3, where we plot the (log) share of
hospitalizations following the same formatting as in Figure 2. As can be seen, hospitals had more
  19
    We could also plot the one-step-ahead forecast integrating over the whole posterior. This alternative exercise
makes little difference in practice, but complicates the interpretation of the figures.

                                                       27
patients at the end of the sample. This left panel also shows that the model can account for
hospital utilization. Finally, the right panel of Figure 3 draws the (log) share of newly reported
cases. The data indicate many more cases in the last peak than in the first. However, recall
that this panel plots reported cases and our forecast of those recorded cases, not actual cases.
We will come back to this point below.

           1                                               1.5

                                                             1
         0.5

                                                           0.5
           0
                                                             0
         -0.5
                                                           -0.5

          -1
                                                            -1

         -1.5                                              -1.5
            Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec           Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
                           time (days)        20                             time (days)        20

         (a) Forecast error, deaths in hospitals             (b) Forecast error, deaths at home
         0.15                                               0.4

          0.1                                               0.2

                                                              0
         0.05
                                                           -0.2
            0
                                                           -0.4
        -0.05
                                                           -0.6
         -0.1                                              -0.8

        -0.15                                                -1
            Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec           Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
                           time (days)        20                             time (days)        20

       (c) Forecast error, population in hospitals         (d) Forecast error, new reported cases

                       Figure 4: One-step-ahead forecast errors, Belgium

    An alternative way to assess the fit of the model is Figure 4, where we plot the one-step-
ahead forecast errors for our four observables. The errors are well grouped around zero (except,
partially, reported cases), although they present heteroscedasticity. The clustering of forecast
errors around zero is another indication that the model fits the data well. The heteroscedasticity
is not a problem for our Bayesian approach. Still, it suggests an important avenue for a future
extension of the model to account for this time-varying volatility.




                                                      28
6.4    The Estimated Time-Varying Reproduction Numbers
From our posterior distribution, we can recover the smoothed value of the unobserved states (or
related variables) and their probability distribution. These are, often, the most relevant objects for
policymaking, as they describe the epidemiological situation of a given area (country/region/...)
under study and can be used, as inputs, in a loss function to pick an optimal policy.
    A key variable to monitor in an epidemic is the basic reproduction number R0,t . The left
panel on Figure 5 plots the smoothed R0,t and the 90% smoothed band. We see that the basic
reproduction number started in mid-March slightly above 4, around the values that several
clinical studies have suggested. For example, see Table 1 in Katul et al. (2020) for a list of
estimates (the authors conclude that their best estimate of an unmitigated R0,t for COVID-19
is 4.5, quite close to our result). However, R0,t fell very rapidly and, by mid-April, it was well
below 1. In May and June, R0,t stabilized around 0.5 and increased back to 2 during the summer
of 2020, fluctuating until late October between 2 and 1. After November, the basic reproduction
number is again at a much lower level, with the whole 90% smoothed band below 1.




                   (a) R0,t = t /                                (b) Re,t = R0,t St

                           Figure 5: Reproduction numbers, Belgium

   The right panel of Figure 5 reports our smoothed median and 90% probability estimates
of Re,t , the effective reproduction number. While Re,t starts at the same level as R0,t , as time
passes by and the share of the suspectible populations shrinks, Re,t moves toward lower values.
   The difference, however, between R0,t and Re,t is not large. Figure 6, which draws our
smoothed estimate of the share of susceptibles (and the 90% probability band), tells us why.
Even as late as November, our model estimates that only around 12% of the population had
ever been infected. By early December, our estimates suggest that Belgium was far away from
herd immunity.
   Figure 6 also plots, in red squares, the point estimates of the seroprevalence studies reported
by Herzog et al. (2020) and, in black crosses, the 95% confidence interval of the studies. Figure

                                                 29
                         Figure 6: Share of susceptible population, Belgium


6 illustrates our argument regarding the power of state-space representations to incorporate
disparate data sources. Our model can account for those seroprevalence studies: in all cases, our
90% probability band and the 95% confidence interval of the studies overlap.


6.5     Time-Varying Death Probabilities
Another central state variable in our model is the time-varying death probabilities. Those
probabilities can change for many reasons. We can enumerate a few. First, medical protocols
vary. As health workers learn more about an infection, they can handle patients better, even in
the absence of effective treatments. Second, hospitals experience different occupancy rates, with
variations in the inflows and total capacity, as the supply of beds and ICU units responds to the
crisis. Third, the demographics of patients can change, by varying either in terms of age or in
terms of comorbidity levels.20
    The left panel of Figure 7 shows the in-hospital death probability (median smoothed, plus
the 90% probability band), which went down from over 2.5% in March to less than 1% by early
July. The sizeable third peak of COVID infections in the fall of 2020 increased that probability
only around 1.5%, suggesting a considerable degree of improvement in clinical outcomes.
    The right panel of Figure 7 shows the at-home death probability, which fell from around
0.5% in March to less than 0.1% by early July. Here the changing conditions at retirement
communities, which were unprepared for the virulence of COVID-19 in the late winter of 2020,
are probably at the core of the estimated variation in death probabilities.

   20
    Imagine, for example, that individuals with a high probability of infection (e.g., due to their social networks)
and high fatality rate (e.g., smokers) got infected in the first wave. As there are fewer of these individuals in the
population when the second wave arrives, the measured death rates will mechanically fall.

                                                        30
      (a) In-hospital death probabilities, Belgium        (b) At-home death probabilities, Belgium

                             Figure 7: Death probabilities, Belgium


6.6     New Cases
Figure 8 plots, in blue, the smoothed median and 90% probability bands of the true new cases,
and, in black, the reported new cases in Belgium. We can clearly see that the first peak is much
smaller, with either measure, than the third one (with a minor second peak in the middle). The
fall in death probabilities explain why deaths did not reach the first wave levels.




                                  Figure 8: New cases, Belgium

    In addition, the reported cases and the estimated cases were very different during the first
wave. Figure 9 makes this point clearly by showing, in the left panel, our median smoothed
estimate of the share of reported cases and, in the right panel, the permanent component of
this share. By late March, less than 20% of all cases were being reported, while by the summer
of 2020, after testing became more prevalent, around 88% of cases were being reported. The


                                                     31
permanent component of this share suggests that this increase in reported cases is very persistent.




        (a) Share of reported cases, Belgium         (b) Permanent component of the share of
                                                     reported cases, n,t , Belgium

                          Figure 9: Share of reported cases, Belgium



6.7    Other States
Finally, we present the smoothed estimates of the share of the population that is infectious,
the share of the population that is recovering (in hospitals and at home), and the inflow of
hospitalizations as a share of those that are no longer infectious.
    Figure 10 shows the time series of these smoothed variables throughout our sample. The
share of infectious increases to 1.8% by the end of March: more than twice as large as the March
15 estimate of 0.7%. This sharp increase in the share of infectious may provide a rationale for
the first nationwide lockdown imposed by the Belgian government on March 18, 2020. These
measures appear to have had an effect as the number of infectious dropped at the beginning of
April and continued to decline, reaching a trough at the end of June 2020. After that, the share
of infectious began to increase but at a moderate pace up until the first week of September, when
we observe a second exponential increase in the share of infectious, leading to a reintroduction
of lockdown measures on November 2, 2020.
    The shares of the population recovering in hospitals and at home broadly track the contour
of the share of infectious with a lag. For example, the first peak of infections occurs on March
30, and the first peak of hospitalizations occurs on April 7. A similar pattern emerges for the
share of the population recovering outside of hospitals. Notice that while the peak of the third
wave of infections and the one of those recovering at home is more than twice as high as the
peak of the first wave, during the second wave, hospitalizations peak at a level only marginally
higher than the one of the first wave. This is consistent with the decline in the share of those
recovering from COVID-19 in hospitals during the third wave relative to the first one.

                                                32
                   (a) It , Belgium                              (b) Ht , Belgium




                   (c) Pt , Belgium                             (d) H,t , Belgium

                           Figure 10: Other state variables, Belgium


7     Causality and Policy Trade-offs
This section illustrates how to exploit the outcomes from the estimated epidemiological model in
Section 4 for causality and policy trade-off analysis. We measure, with two different approaches,
the effects of mobility curtailment policies on the spread of the virus, the death toll, and economic
activity using the smoothed estimates of variables such as the effective reproduction number,
new cases, deaths in hospitals, and deaths at home. These exercises gauge the trade-off between
slowing down the spread of the virus and decreasing economic activity that policymakers face
when enacting shelter-in-place and/or compulsory business closure orders.

Why do we need a causality assessment? Starting in March 2020, individuals' mobility
in most countries plummeted due to COVID-19, slowing down the virus's spread at the cost of
lower economic activity. Some of the reductions in mobility were voluntary, as individuals took
extra precautions to avoid getting infected (or were affected by other individuals taking such
measures; for instance, a household canceling its home cleaning services to avoid having third


                                                 33
parties come inside its dwelling reduces the mobility of the workers of the cleaning service).21
Some of the reductions in mobility were triggered by government mandates, such as orders to
shelter-in-place or compulsory business closures.
   Since both mechanisms coincided in time, in order to ascertain the causality effect of these
government mandates on deaths and economic activity, we need to disentangle voluntary and
policy-induced changes in mobility, the virus's spread, the death toll, and economic activity.
Knowing by how much governments can affect current and future epidemiological conditions
and gauging their cost in terms of economic activity are key factors when designing the length
and severity of mobility curtailments.

Why are the outputs from the estimated epidemiological model useful? One of the
challenges when performing the above described exercises is that some of the relevant variables
needed, such as the effective reproduction number, are not directly observable. Furthermore,
other variables, such as the number of reported cases, are subject to large, persistent, biased, and
time-varying measurement errors. These problems either preclude the application of standard
techniques to assert causality in time series or generate flawed results.
    The structure imposed by an epidemiological model allows us to tackle these challenges.
The dynamics of an epidemiological model discipline the data by enforcing the cross-equation
restrictions among the model's states implied by the transitions among compartments dictated by
the disease's biological and clinical properties. The likelihood of the model tells us, for example,
that in the case of COVID-19, relatively high seroprevalence rates and low reported new cases in
Belgium during the first half of 2020 can only be reconciled with large under-reporting of cases.
Likewise, the parallel evolution of hospitalizations, deaths in hospitals vs. deaths at home, and
the reported new cases during 2020 informs us of the evolution of under-reporting and changes
in mortality probabilities. Thanks to our use of an epidemiological model, we transform noisy
and biased observations of new cases, new deaths in hospitals and at home, and seroprevalence
surveys into useful unobserved outputs, such as smoothed estimates of the effective reproduction
number or the (true) number of new cases.
    In contrast, one could try to estimate the effective reproduction number using purely
statistical methods (e.g., comparing newly reported cases along a moving window), but such an
exercise could not correct the changing share of unreported cases. Another option would be to
perform the causality and policy analysis exercises without the effective reproduction number,
but such a policy analysis would suffer from an omitted variable bias, which we know from other
environments (like studying the effects of monetary policy) can be a fatal flaw.

  21
     Arnon et al. (2020) estimate that the bulk of reductions in U.S. contact rates and employment came from
voluntary changes in behavior. Gupta et al. (2020), Maloney and Taskin (2020), and Andersen (2020) report
similar results.

                                                    34
Two procedures for causality assessment We address the effects of government-mandated
mobility curtailments on both the spread of the virus and economic activity using the two most
salient methods for assessing causality in time series: structural vector autoregressions (SVARs)
and local projections (LPs).
    First, we build on the tradition of SVARs and identify a government stringency shock by
restricting the systematic component of the government stringency policies rule that maps health
and economic conditions into mobility curtailments. A stringency shock should be thought as
an unexpected change in the mobility curtailment policy. The identification assumptions are
motivated by the observation that health policymakers have continuously emphasized that their
mandates follow a data-driven approach when imposing mobility curtailments. In situations
where we can impose credible restrictions on the systematic component of policy, SVARs have
been shown to offer reliable answers (Wolf, 2020).
    Second, we work with LPs to identify a reproduction shock and analyze how it affects the rest
of the variables (including deaths in hospital and at home and economic conditions) depending
on the level of government mobility curtailments. A reproduction shock can be thought of as a
shock that changes the contagious properties of the virus. This can be due to biological factors
(e.g., the spreading of a variant of the virus) or social mechanisms (e.g., the distribution of
better facial masks, improvements in ventilation in public spaces, better organization of social
distancing). More concretely, we want to measure whether government mobility curtailments
affect the transmission of the reproduction shock. LPs are a very flexible approach that allows
us to address state dependencies without making strong parametric assumptions.
    While our selection of methods is illustrative, it is not exhaustive. Many other methods
for assessing causality can use the output from our estimated epidemiological model, such as a
vector error correction model, regression discontinuity designs that exploit local variations in
government mandates (e.g., Goolsbee and Syverson, 2020), synthetic controls (e.g., Cho, 2020),
event studies (e.g., Gupta et al., 2020), or many of the other ideas in Imbens and Rubin (2015).
We could also generalize our SVAR analysis to a Markov-switching SVAR `        a la Sims and Zha
(2006). We skip all those additional experiments to keep our study tightly focused.


7.1    Government Stringency Shock
We write our SVAR as:
                              yt A0 = xt A+ + t     for 1  t  T,

where yt is an n × 1 vector of endogenous variables, xt = yt-1 · · · yt-p zt 1 , zt is a
z × 1 vector of exogenous variables, t is an n × 1 vector of structural shocks, A0 is an n × n
invertible matrix of parameters, A+ is a (np + z + 1) × n matrix of parameters, p is the lag
length, and T is the sample size. The vector t , conditional on past information and the initial


                                               35
conditions y0 , ..., y1-p , is Gaussian with mean zero and covariance matrix In (the n × n identity
matrix). The matrices A0 and A+ are the structural parameters.
   One of the equations in the SVAR characterizes the policymaker's behavior when imposing
mobility curtailments aimed at slowing the transmission of the virus. Consequently, we call such
an equation the government stringency policy rule.22
   We summarize the decisions of the policymakers using a government stringency policies
indicator that we will describe below. We will call this indicator the policy instrument. We
assume the indicator reacts to other variables in the system such as new cases and the effective
reproduction number. Without loss of generality, we assume that the first equation of the SVAR
characterizes the policy rule. This implies that:

                             yt a0,1 = xt a+,1 + zt g + 1t     for 1  t  T,

is the policy equation, where 1t denotes the first entry of t , a+,1 denotes the first column
of A+ for 0   p, and as,ij for s  {0, +} denotes the (i, j ) entry of As and describes the
systematic component of the policy rule. Thus, restricting the systematic component of the
policy rule is equivalent to restricting as,ij for s  {0, +} and identifies a policy shock that we
call the stringency shock.
    Next, we describe the SVAR specification in more detail and how we restrict the policy
rule. Our baseline SVAR sample runs from March 21 through November 30 and contains seven
endogenous variables. Three of these seven endogenous variables come from outside sources.
First, we use the Oxford Stringency (OS) index for Belgium as our mobility curtailment policies
indicator (Hale et al., 2020). The authors of the OS index compile information on when and
which measures governments take. The particular index we use is a simple average of nine
individual component indicators. Each component is an ordinal measure of closings of schools
and universities, closings of workplaces, canceling of public events, limits on gatherings, the
closing of public transportation, orders to shelter-in-place, curtailments on internal movement
between cities/regions, prohibitions on international travel for non-citizens, and the presence of
public information campaigns. Due to data limitations, we do not consider non-mobility-related
NPIs such as face-masks or improved ventilation.
    Second, we use a mobility index for Belgium from the Google COVID-19 Community Mobility
Reports, available at https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/. This measure of mobility
is a simple average of the measures of nonresidential mobility categories in the Google Mobility
Reports (excluding parks): i) Retail and recreation; ii) Grocery and pharmacy; iii) Transit
stations; and iv) Workplaces. The mobility measure is expressed in percentage points and it
  22
     We could have several policy equations, each capturing one different containment policy as a function of
public health variables, as in Chernozhukov, Kasahara, and Schrimpf (2021). We keep our analysis to one policy
equation to avoid overparameterizing the SVAR.

                                                     36
corresponds to daily changes in mobility relative to a baseline value for that day of the week,
which is the median value observed during the 5-week period Jan 3­Feb 6, 2020.
    Third, we use a daily economic news sentiment (ENS) indicator for Belgium constructed
by Algaba et al. (2021) using natural language processing as a daily index of economic activity.
This indicator is based on the media archive of the national Belgian News Agency. When
aggregated at a monthly frequency, the index is positively correlated with the National Bank of
Belgium's monthly consumer confidence survey and other measures of economic activity such
as construction, manufacturing, business-related services, and industrial confidence in the euro
area, among others. The daily ENS indicator was obtained in two formats: a latent daily series
and a 14-day moving average of the series. We use the latter because the former is too noisy.
    The other four endogenous variables come from the estimated epidemiological model: i) the
model-implied point-wise median smoothed estimate of the effective reproduction number; ii)
the model-implied point-wise median smoothed estimate of new cases (as reported in Figure
5); iii) the model-implied point-wise median smoothed estimate of daily deaths per capita in
hospitals; iv) and the model-implied point-wise median smoothed estimate daily deaths per
capita at home (the two estimates of deaths per capita as reported in Section 6).
    The stringency index, the effective reproduction number, and new cases are expressed in
log percent. Daily deaths enter in levels so that we can compute the impulse response function
(IRF) of cumulative deaths to a stringency shock. The SVAR includes 14 lags, a constant
term, and, as an exogenous variable, the average daily temperature to control for the effect
that weather conditions might have on the variables of interest. The observable corresponds
to the temperature measured at the Brussels Airport Station and it was downloaded from
https://www.wunderground.com/. While in general weather conditions are heterogeneous
within a country, our measure is representative of the weather conditions for Belgium as a
whole given that this nation's territory is only about 30,689 km2 and most of the population is
concentrated in the flat coastal plain and central plateau.
    The SVAR is estimated with a Bayesian approach following Arias, Rubio-Ram´         irez, and
Waggoner (2018). We impose a normal-generalized-normal (NGN) prior distribution over the
structural parameters (A0 , A+ ). The NGN prior is a conjugate prior characterized by four
parameters (, , , ). The parameters  and  govern the marginal prior distribution of
vec(A0 ): if  = n ­as will be the case in our application­ vec(A0 ) is normally distributed with
mean zero and variance -1 . The remaining parameters  and  govern the prior distribution
of vec(A+ ), conditional on A0 . Such a distribution is normal with mean vec(A0 ) and variance
. We set  = n,  = 0n,n ,  = 0mn,n2 , and -1 = 0mn,mn .
    The policy equation is identified with sign restrictions on the systematic component of the
policy actions in line with Arias, Caldara, and Rubio-Ram´  irez (2019) and the SVAR tradition of
Leeper, Sims, and Zha (1996). The identification restrictions are:


                                               37
Restriction 1. The stringency index is the mobility curtailment policies indicator, and it reacts
contemporaneously and positively to the effective reproduction number, mobility, new cases,
deaths, and the index of economic activity.

    Restriction 1 embodies the idea that policymakers react to current public health conditions
and economic activity. For example, on March 17, 2020, the Belgian government announced
the first nationwide lockdown arguing that: "The situation has evolved and forced us to take
severe measures to stem the spread of the virus."23 On April 15, the government relaxed some
measures since: "We are aware that the measures taken will have serious long-term consequences,
both psychologically and economically. We plead that the measures last as long as necessary."24
On October 16, the Belgian government ordered bars and restaurants to close, justifying the
measure with sentences such as: "The number of confirmed cases is rising, every day, and not
just by a few percentage points." Other sentences such as: "This virus is affecting our country
in a very hard way," "Thirty-five people died yesterday from the effects of COVID-19," and "In
the days to come, the news will be bad" make clear that policymakers were reacting to public
health conditions in real time.25
    Figure 11 plots (in brown lines) the IRFs to a positive (increase) stringency shock and
(in yellow bands) the 68% point-wise posterior probability bands. The stringency shock is
normalized such that, upon impact, the posterior median increase in the stringency index equals
7.4%. This is equivalent to a one-unit increase in one of the ordinal measures that composed
the OS index. For instance, this change corresponds to a nationwide measure that unexpectedly
increases the "shelter-in-place" component of the index from 1 (which recommends not leaving
the house) to 2 (which requires not leaving the house, with exceptions for daily exercise, grocery
shopping, and essential trips). Other examples include an unexpected nationwide increase in
the limits on gatherings from 2 (curtailments on gatherings between 101-1000 people) to 3
(curtailments on gatherings between 11-100 people).
    A positive stringency shock leads to a drop in the effective reproduction number for more
than a month. This drop is beyond the fall triggered by individuals' endogenous responses due
to changed risk conditions (which are controlled for by the coefficients in the SVAR). Mobility,
new cases, and deaths also decline, albeit with different degrees of persistence. In the case of
mobility, the decline is more transient than in the case of the effective reproduction number,
suggesting an exhaustion effect among individuals: after around three weeks, mobility is back to
its baseline value without a stringency shock. The decline in deaths in hospitals and at home

  23
      See the March 17, 2020 Reuters article "Belgium to impose coronavirus lockdown from Wednesday."
  24
      See the April 15, 2020 EURACTIC article "Belgium extends COVID-19 lockdown until 3 May, but relaxes
some measures."
   25
      See the October 16, 2020 Reuters article "Belgium to close all bars and restaurants for a month, imposes
night curfew," and the AP article "Belgium imposes Covid curfew, closes bars and restaurants," on the same day.
Notice that, in comparison with Chernozhukov et al. (2021), we allow for policy to react to behavior.

                                                     38
Figure 11: IRFs of a one standard deviation positive stringency shock. The solid curves
represent the point-wise posterior medians, and the shaded areas represent the 68% equal-tailed
point-wise probability bands. The figure is based on 10,000 independent draws.


lasts much longer, reflecting the illness's lag effects. We measure that a positive stringency shock
leads to roughly 1, 000 fewer deaths (500 in hospitals and 500 at home) after 2 months. This
represents about 6% of the total number of deaths in our sample, 16, 840.
    To interpret the effects of a positive stringency shock in terms of output, we scale the ENS
indicator following Lewis et al. (2020). We aggregate the daily ENS indicator to quarterly
frequency, denote the resulting series by ENSq , and run a regression of four-quarter real GDP
growth 1 quarter ahead on a constant and ENSq over the sample 2000Q1-2019Q4, i.e.,

             RGDPq4q4q+1 =  +  ENSq + ut , where q  {2000Q1, . . . , 2019Q3} .

We estimate this regression by OLS and obtain       ^ = 1.6 and   ^ = 1.2. Based on these point
estimates, we can express the news sentiment indicator in terms of real GDP: A decline of 0.2
standardized units in sentiment implies that, if such a value were to persist for an entire quarter,


                                                39
we would expect (on average) real GDP in the next quarter to be about 0.25% lower than in the
absence of the shock.
    The pointwise posterior median IRF of the ENS indicator to a stringency shock is on average
about 0.04 during the first 90 days, with a 68% probability interval of [-0.1459, 0.2298]. If we
take the posterior median 0.04 and compute the equivalent in terms of the Belgian GDP per
capita, we find that a stringency shock brings a net per capita gain of e4.2. Repeating the same
exercise for the two extremes of the probability interval, we obtain the result that the per capita
cost(-)/benefit(+) of a stringency shock is between -e14.7 and +e23.1.26
    This finding suggests that the effect of a positive stringency shock on economic activity is
negligible (given the uncertainty, it is hard to tell whether there is a net cost or benefit). In other
words: in our sample, and given the systematic component of the health policy of the Belgian
government and the voluntary changes in behavior, a marginal and unexpected tightening of
mobility curtailments would have saved many lives with close to a zero impact on income per
capita. By controlling the virus's spread, a positive stringency shock has a short-term output
cost for 15 days, but increases economic activity later. As the stringency measures improve
public health conditions, the policy's systematic component drives the stringency index below
zero 25 days after the initial increase. In comparison, the reproduction number starts to increase
only 40 days after the shock. This difference in timing is consistent with the presence of transient
precautionary behavior by the public.

The systematic component of the health policy rule Beyond the analysis of IRFs,
SVARs provide useful information regarding the systematic component of the government-
mandates policy implied by our identification scheme.27 More specifically, the contemporaneous
coefficients correspond to ratios of entries in the vector a0,1 . Thus, abstracting from lags and
the constant term, the health policy equation can be written as:

             strt = R ret + M mt + -S nct + DH ndht + DP ndpt + ns nst + 1,t ,

where str denotes the stringency index in log-percent, rt denotes the effective reproduction
number expressed in log-percent, mt denotes mobility in percentage points, nct denotes the log of
new cases in log-percent, ndht denotes the number of new deaths in hospitals, ndpt denotes the
number of new deaths at home, and nst denotes the ENS indicator. Accordingly, the coefficient

  26
       See Table A.1 in Appendix A.3 for the regression results and see Figure A.5 in Appendix A.3, which plots
the ENS indicator in real GDP units along with one-quarter-ahead four-quarter real GDP growth. Given the
short time span (90 days) and the low real interest rates prevailing at the moment, discounting the GDP flows to
put them in present terms does not make any quantitative difference. Notice that we cannot measure the welfare
effect of the positive stringency shock.
    27
       This is a common practice when identifying monetary or fiscal policy equations in SVARs: e.g., Leeper and
Zha (2003), Sims and Zha (2006), and Caldara and Kamps (2017).

                                                      40
R = -a0,11 /a0,31 denotes the contemporaneous response of the stringency index to the effective
reproduction number, M = -a0,21 /a0,31 denotes the contemporaneous response of the stringency
index to mobility, -S = -a0,41 /a0,31 denotes the contemporaneous response of the stringency
index to new cases, DH = -a0,51 /a0,31 denotes the contemporaneous response of the stringency
index to new deaths in hospitals, DP = -a0,61 /a0,31 denotes the contemporaneous response of
the stringency index to new deaths at home, ns = -a0,71 /a0,31 denotes the contemporaneous
response of the stringency index to economic conditions as measured by the ENS indicator, and
 = 1/a0,31 is the standard deviation of the health policy shock.
                   Table 3: Contemporaneous Coefficients in the Health Policy Equation

 Coefficient                  R               M             -S              DH              DP               ns
 Median                       0.86            3.32             0.49         5.37             1.83            34.05
 68% Prob. Int.            [0.21;3.37]    [0.78;13.06]    [0.12;1.68]   [1.43;18.78]     [0.43;6.73]    [9.24;115.54]
 90% Prob. Int.           [0.06;10.06]    [ 0.24;42.53]   [0.04;4.45]   [0.45;51.47]    [ 0.12;19.56]   [2.85;321.06]

 Note: The table's entries denote the posterior median estimates of the contemporaneous coefficients in the health policy
equation under our identification. The 68% and 90% equal-tailed posterior probability intervals are reported in brackets.
The table is based on 10,000 independent draws.

     Table 3 reports the posterior distribution of the contemporaneous coefficients in the health
policy equation. The posterior median of R equals 0.93, which implies that the stringency
index increases by about 9.3% in response to a 10% increase in the reproduction number. As a
reference point, recall that a 7.4% rise in the index is equivalent to a one-unit increase in one
of the ordinal measures that composed the OS index. The posterior median of M equals 3.3,
indicating that the stringency index increases by about 16.5% (where 16.5=3.3 × 5) in response
to a 5 percentage point increase in daily mobility. The posterior median of -S equals 0.5, that
is, the stringency index increases by about 5% in response to a 10% rise in the daily new cases.
The posterior median of DH , 5.73, suggests that the stringency index increases by about 57.3%
in response to 10 new daily deaths in hospitals. The posterior median of DP , 1.94, means that
the stringency index increases by about 10.94% in response to 10 new daily deaths at home.
The posterior median of ns , 34.05, means that the stringency index decreases by about 17.02%
in response to a half-standard-deviation decrease in the ENS indicator. In terms of output, this
means stringency increases 17.02% (i.e., about a one-unit increase in two of the ordinal measures
that composed the OS index) in response to a drop of around 0.6% in next quarter real GDP.
Overall, the coefficients are plausible given the behavior of health authorities in 2020 across
the advanced economies. The 68% and 90% probability intervals are wide, but one could easily
extend our analysis to impose bounds on coefficients based on external evidence or judgment; see
Arias, Caldara, and Rubio-Ram´     irez (2019). We skipped this venue because we want to present
our result as free of prior effects as possible.

                                                          41
7.2    A Reproduction Shock and Government Stringency Level
We next identify a reproduction shock and analyze whether its effects on the virus's spread,
deaths, and economic activity depend on the level of government stringency. To answer this state-
dependency question we use the LP approach proposed by Jord`    a (2005) and further developed
by Ramey and Zubairy (2018), Stock and Watson (2018), and Plagborg-Møller and Wolf (2021),
among others. In particular, we use LPs with interaction terms as in Ramey and Zubairy (2018)
to study how a reproduction shock propagates depending on the level of government stringency.
Our identification scheme consists of sign and zero restrictions implemented as described in
Plagborg-Møller and Wolf (2021). Consider the following LP specification:

                                                   
            wi,t+h = It-1   µH,i,h + H,i,h wt +        H,i,h, wt- + H,i,h st
                                                  =1
                                                         
                                                                                                   (10)
                   + (1 - It-1 ) µL,i,h + L,i,h wt +          L,i,h, wt- + L,i,h st   + i,h,t
                                                         =1


for i = 1, . . . , n, and h = 0, . . . , H , where wt is the w × 1 vector of endogenous variables equal
to yt defined in Section 7.1 save for the OS index, which is excluded from wt , wi,t+h denotes
the value of the i-th variable in wt+h , and st is an s × 1 vector of exogenous variables.
    The exogenous variables include zt (defined in Section 7.1), the point-wise median smoothed
death probability in hospitals, and the point-wise median smoothed death probability at home.
It-1 is a dummy variable that indicates whether Belgium is in a high government stringency
regime. The high government stringency regime is determined based on whether the OS index
is above its median level over the sample (58.33). The parameters µH,i,h , H,i,h , H,i,h, , and
H,i,h correspond to the high government stringency regime and the parameters µL,i,h , L,i,h ,
L,i,h, , and L,i,h correspond to the low government stringency regime, i.e., the stringency index
is below its sample median. The innovation term for h = 1, 1,t = (1,1,t , . . . , w,1,t ) , is assumed
to be mean zero with covariance matrix Et (1,t 1,t ) = .28
    All told, the LP specification is similar to the SVAR specification used above with a few
modifications tailored to the question at hand. First, we do not include the stringency index
because it is the variable we use to split the sample. Second, we use 3 lags to reduce parameter
uncertainty. Third, we add death probabilities as exogenous variables to control for any effect
related to the sample split. In particular, it could be the case that high (low) government
stringency episodes are correlated with high (low) mortality rates. In fact, the death probability
was higher at the beginning of our sample as better treatments and refined clinical protocols for
the disease were not ready yet. The restrictions to identify the reproduction shock are:

  28
     We have also experimented with the case in which the covariance matrix is regime specific. The main
conclusions of this section remained unchanged.

                                                  42
Restriction 2. The reproduction number increases for at least three days in response to a
positive reproduction shock. Mobility decreases for at least three days in response to a positive
reproduction shock. The impact response of mobility in percentage points is bounded to be smaller
than the percentage point increase in the reproduction number. In addition, the reproduction
shock does not affect deaths, new cases, and the ENS indicator contemporaneously.

    Restriction 2 identifies what we call a reproduction shock, that is, an exogenous variation
in the transmission rate of COVID-19. As we explained above, such an exogenous variation
could occur when people relax their compliance with social distancing measures or when a more
contagious variant of the virus emerges. The positive sign restrictions on the reproduction
number's impact response is a normalization; the positive sign restrictions on the subsequent
days are imposed to sharpen identification. We impose just three days to be cautious and let the
data dictate the response's shape as much as possible while keeping identification. The negative
sign restriction on mobility is imposed based on the notion that, on average, people will stay at
home in response to an unexpected increase in reproduction numbers.
    The elasticity bound is imposed to discipline the identified set of mobility. In the absence of
such a bound, the identified set would include a decline in mobility of 100 percentage points as
equally likely to no decline in mobility following an unexpected 10% increase in the effective
reproduction number. Such a result is implausible. Hence, we use a bound to rule out dubious
IRFs as in Kilian and Murphy (2012) and Arias, Caldara, and Rubio-Ram´       irez (2019). The zero
restrictions on deaths and new cases are predicated on the CDC's reports that it takes more
than one day for the symptoms to develop, and on evidence showing that it takes more than
one day to die from COVID-19. For example, Wortham, Lee, Althomsons, et al. (2020) report a
median clinical course of the disease of 10 days with an interquartile range of 6 to 15 days. The
zero restriction on the impact response of the ENS indicator is that it takes at least one day
to have broad coverage of the mobility restrictions following the shock and for the audience to
process it.
    Given the sign and zero restrictions described above, we compute the identified set by
numerically solving the quadratic program described in the supplement to Plagborg-Møller and
Wolf (2021). In particular, let S1 be a 7xw matrix that selects the IRFs that we restrict to be
either positive or negative, and let Z1 be a 4xw matrix that selects the IRFs that we restrict to
zero. Then, for each regime r  {H, L}, we draw 1 million orthogonal matrices Qr that satisfy:

                              S1 C^ 0,r B^ Qr e 1
                                                                      ^ 0,r B
                                                             0 and Z1 C     ^ Qr e1 = 0               (11)
                      ^ 0,r B
                            ^ Qr e1 /e C  ^ ^
                   e2 C                 1 0,r B Qr e1 - 1



      ^ 0,r = 
where C            ^r,1,0 , . . . , ^r,w,0 , ^r,j,0 denotes the OLS estimate of r,j,0 for j = 1, . . . , w,
^ = chol(
B          ^ ) , chol is the upper triangular Cholesky decomposition of       ^, ^ is the OLS estimate

                                                    43
of , e2 C ^ 0,r B
                ^ Qr e1 /e C
                           ^ ^
                          1 0,r B Qr e1 denotes the ratio between the impact IRF of mobility and
the reproduction number, and ei denotes the i-th column of the identity matrix.
   The numerical computation of the identified set is similar to Algorithm 2 of Giacomini and
Kitagawa (2018): given B    ^ and C  ^ 0,r , we draw Qr K times and let {Qr,k : k = 1, . . . , K } be the
draws that satisfy the sign and zero restrictions in Equation (11). Then, letting qr,k,1 denote
the first column of Qr,k the identified set for variable i at horizon h is given by

                                                                     ^ 0,r Bq
                                                             mink ei C     ^ r,k,1 , maxk e C
                                                                                            ^ ^
                                                                                           i 0,r Bqr,k,1 .



                                              R                                                               Mobility                                                      New Cases
                         30                                                                 2.5                                                           36
                                                                    Percentage points

                         20                                                                   0                                                           24

                                                                                            -2.5                                                          12
       Percent




                                                                                                                                        Percent
                         10

                          0                                                                  -5                                                            0

                         -10                                                                -7.5                                                         -12
                                       Stringency > 58.33
                                       Stringency <= 58.33
                         -20                                                                -10                                                          -24
                               0   3      6       9    12      15                                  0   3      6       9   12   15                               0      3      6       9    12    15
                                           Days                                                                Days                                                            Days
                                   Deaths in Hospitals                                                     Deaths at Home                                           Economic News Sentiment
                         200                                                                 80                                                          0.4
     Cumulative Number




                                                                        Cumulative Number




                                                                                                                                    Standardized Units
                         160                                                                                                                                               Stringency > 58.33
                                                                                             60                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                           Stringency <= 58.33
                         120                                                                 40                                                            0

                         80                                                                  20                                                          -0.2

                         40                                                                   0                                                          -0.4

                          0                                                                 -20                                                          -0.6
                               0   3      6       9    12      15                                  0   3      6       9   12   15                               0      3      6       9    12    15
                                           Days                                                                Days                                                            Days

                                                       Figure 12: IRFs of a reproduction shock

    Figure 12 reports the identified set following a reproduction shock. We show the IRFs from
horizon 0 up to horizon 15. The shorter horizon relative to the horizon of the IRFs shown in
the SVAR is due to the length of our sample and the parameter uncertainty associated with
LPs. Notice, in particular, that the LP looks at the variation in the systematic regime, while
the SVAR focuses on the effect of a shock within the regime. Figure 12 truncates the horizon at
15 days, which encompasses the illness duration of patients who died from COVID-19 reported
in Wortham, Lee, Althomsons, et al. (2020), who find a median duration of 10 days and an
interquartile range of 6 to 15 days, and it is a tad below the findings of Sousa et al. (2020), who
report a median illness duration of 19 days and an interquartile range of 12 to 23 days.
    In response to a reproduction shock that increases the reproduction number by 10%, the
average decrease in the mobility index in the high government stringency regime, -41.3 percentage


                                                                                                             44
points, is larger than the average mobility index in the low government stringency regime, -17.0
percentage points. Consequently, new cases increase by less in the high government stringency
regime, leading to fewer deaths (both in hospitals and at home). Another factor explaining
the higher level of new cases and deaths in the low government stringency regime is that the
increase in the effective reproduction number is much more persistent in such a regime. Our
results imply that high government stringency could save up to about 250 deaths in the first
two weeks after the reproduction shock. This is around 1.5% of the deaths in our sample. Let
us now assess the effects on economic activity of the reproduction number shock under the high
and low stringency regimes. In response to the shock, the ENS indicator decreases by about 0.2
to 0.4 standardized units after 7 days in the high stringency regime and increases by about 0 to
0.2 standardized units in the low stringency regime.
    As in Subsection 7.1, it is useful to map the standardized units to real per capita GDP terms.
After a reproduction shock, a high stringency regime saves 250 lives at a cost of between e2
and e4 per capita. The cost of preventing a death is higher in the case of LPs, but note that
the horizon of the IRFs in the case of LPs is 15 days, while in the case of the SVARs it is 60
days, when there is more room for a recovery of economic activity. In any case, the economic
cost of a high stringency regime is negligible.


8     Conclusion
This paper has presented methods to estimate epidemiological models using Bayesian methods
and applied the results to address causality and policy questions. There are many venues in which
to generalize our results. First, we could implement a formal identification analysis along the lines
suggested by Poyiadjis et al. (2011). Second, we could introduce a rich network structure between
different compartments (for example, reflecting heterogeneity by age, gender, occupation, and
location) and estimate how the parameters governing the movements among those compartments
evolve (do effective contact rates between regions drop more persistently than effective contact
rates within regions?). Examples of these richer data structures appear in Acemoglu et al.
(2020) and Aguirregabiria et al. (2020). Third, we could integrate our epidemiological model
within a more economic model and estimate how individuals make decisions regarding mobility
instead of imposing a random walk variation. Fourth, we could consider how one infectious
disease interacts with other contagious diseases. For instance, it has been noted that changes in
behavior due to COVID-19 have also caused a dramatic drop in flu contagion; see, e.g., Hills
et al. (2020) and Olsen et al. (2020). Fifth, we could study how the introduction of new medical
treatments, like a vaccine, affects the spread of the disease, both in terms of changed biological
considerations (vaccinated individuals are less likely to get infected) and in terms of endogenous
decisions (vaccinated individuals are less likely to follow precautionary behavior).

                                                 45
References
Abouk, R. and B. Heydari (2021). The Immediate Effect of COVID-19 Policies on Social-
 Distancing Behavior in the United States. Public Health Reports 136 (2), 245­252.

Acemoglu, D., V. Chernozhukov, I. Werning, and M. D. Whinston (2020). A Multi-Risk SIR
  Model with Optimally Targeted Lockdown. Technical report, MIT.

Aguirregabiria, V., J. Gu, Y. Luo, and P. Mira (2020, May). A Dynamic Structural Model of
 Virus Diffusion and Network Production: A First Report. Technical Report 14750, C.E.P.R.
 Discussion Papers.

Alahmadi, A., S. Belet, A. Black, D. Cromer, J. Flegg, T. House, P. Jayasundara, J. Keith,
  J. McCaw, R. Moss, J. Ross, F. Shearer, S. Tun, J. Walker, L. White, J. Whyte, A. Yan,
  and A. Zarebski (2020). Influencing Public Health Policy with Data-Informed Mathematical
  Models of Infectious Diseases: Recent Developments and New Challenges. Epidemics 32,
  100393.

Algaba, A., S. Borms, K. Boudt, and B. Verbeken (2021). Daily News Sentiment and Monthly
  Surveys: A Mixed­Frequency Dynamic Factor Model for Nowcasting Consumer Confidence.

Andersen, M. (2020). Early Evidence on Social Distancing in Response to COVID-19 in the
 United States. Available at SSRN 3569368 .

Arevalo-Rodriguez, I., D. Buitrago-Garcia, D. Simancas-Racines, P. Zambrano-Achig, R. del
  Campo, A. Ciapponi, O. Sued, L. Martinez-Garcia, A. Rutjes, N. Low, P. M. Bossuyt, J. A.
  Perez-Molina, and J. Zamora (2020). False-Negative Results of Initial RT-PCR Assays for
  COVID-19: A Systematic Review. medRxiv .

Arias, J. E., D. Caldara, and J. F. Rubio-Ram´
                                             irez (2019). The Systematic Component of
  Monetary Policy in SVARs: An Agnostic Identification Procedure. Journal of Monetary
 Economics 101, 1­13.

Arias, J. E., J. F. Rubio-Ram´
                             irez, and D. F. Waggoner (2018). Inference Based on Structural
  Vector Autoregressions Identified with Sign and Zero Restrictions: Theory and Applications.
 Econometrica 86 (2), 685­720.

Arnon, A., J. Ricco, and K. Smetters (2020). Epidemiological and Economic Effects of Lockdown.

Arroyo-Marioli, F., F. Bullano, S. Kucinskas, and C. Rond´
                                                         on-Moreno (2021). Tracking R
  of COVID-19: A New Real-Time Estimation using the Kalman Filter. PLOS One 16 (1),
  e0244474.

                                             46
Atkeson, A., K. Kopecky, and T. Zha (2020). Four Stylized Facts about COVID-19.

Avery, C., W. Bossert, A. Clark, G. Ellison, and S. F. Ellison (2020, November). An Economist's
  Guide to Epidemiology Models of Infectious Disease. Journal of Economic Perspectives 34 (4),
 79­104.

Bar-On, Y. M., A. Flamholz, R. Phillips, and R. Milo (2020). Science Forum: SARS-CoV-2
 (COVID-19) by the Numbers. eLife 9, e57309.

Black, A. J. (2019). Importance Sampling for Partially Observed Temporal Epidemic Models.
  Statistics and Computing 29 (4), 617­630.

Bognanni, M., D. Hanley, D. Kolliner, and K. Mitman (2020). Economics and Epidemics:
  Evidence from an Estimated Spatial Econ-SIR Model. IZA Discussion Paper 13797, Institute
  of Labor Economics (IZA), Bonn.

Broemeling, L. D. (2021). Bayesian Analysis of Infectious Diseases: COVID-19 and Beyond.
  CRC Press.

Caldara, D. and C. Kamps (2017). The Analytics of SVARs: A Unified Framework to Measure
  Fiscal Multipliers. The Review of Economic Studies 84 (3), 1015­1040.

Catteau, L., N. Dauby, M. Montourcy, B. E., J. Hautekiet, E. Goetghebeur, S. van Ierssel,
  E. Duysburgh, H. Van Oyen, C. Wyndham-Thomas, D. Van Beckhoven, and H. S. Belgian
  Collaborative Group on COVID-19 (2020). Low-dose Hydroxychloroquine Therapy and
  Mortality in Hospitalised Patients with COVID-19: A Nationwide Observational Study of
  8075 Participants. International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents 56 (4), 106144.

Chatzi, E. N. and A. W. Smyth (2009). The Unscented Kalman Filter and Particle Filter
 Methods for Nonlinear Structural System Identification with Non-collocated Heterogeneous
 Sensing. Structural Control and Health Monitoring: The Official Journal of the International
 Association for Structural Control and Monitoring and of the European Association for the
 Control of Structures 16 (1), 99­123.

Chernozhukov, V., H. Kasahara, and P. Schrimpf (2021). Causal Impact of Masks, Policies,
 Behavior on Early COVID-19 Pandemic in the U.S. Journal of Econometrics 220 (1), 23­62.
 Pandemic Econometrics.

Cho, S.-W. S. (2020, 08). Quantifying the Impact of Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions during
  the COVID-19 Outbreak ­ The Case of Sweden. The Econometrics Journal .




                                              47
Chudik, A., M. H. Pesaran, and A. Rebucci (2020). Voluntary and Mandatory Social Distancing:
  Evidence on COVID-19 Exposure Rates from Chinese Provinces and Selected Countries.
 Working Paper 27039, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cori, A., N. Ferguson, C. Fraser, and S. Cauchemez (2013). A New Framework and Software
  to Estimate Time-Varying Reproduction Numbers during Epidemics. American Journal of
 Epidemiology 178 (9), 1505­1512.

Courtemanche, C., J. Garuccio, A. Le, J. Pinkston, and A. Yelowitz (2020). Strong Social
  Distancing Measures in the United States Reduced the COVID-19 Growth Rate. Health
 Affairs 39 (7), 1237­1246.

D'Arienzo, M. and A. Coniglio (2020). Assessment of the SARS-CoV-2 Basic Reproduction
  Number, R0, Based on the Early Phase of COVID-19 Outbreak in Italy. Biosafety and
  Health 2 (2), 57 ­ 59.

Dehning, J., J. Zierenberg, F. P. Spitzner, M. Wibral, J. P. Neto, M. Wilczek, and V. Priesemann
 (2020). Inferring Change Points in the Spread of COVID-19 Reveals the Effectiveness of
  Interventions. Science 369 (6500).

Fern´
    andez-Villaverde, J. and J. Rubio-Ram´
                                         irez (2007). How Structural Are Structural Parame-
  ters? NBER Macroeconomics Annual 22, 83­137.

Fern´
    andez-Villaverde, J., J. Rubio-Ram´
                                      irez, and F. Schorfheide (2016). Solution and Estimation
  Methods for DSGE models. In J. B. Taylor and H. Uhlig (Eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics,
  Volume 2, pp. 527­724. Elsevier.

Fern´
    andez-Villaverde, J. and C. I. Jones (2020, May). Estimating and simulating a sird model
  of covid-19 for many countries, states, and cities. Working Paper 27128, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Giacomini, R. and T. Kitagawa (2018, November). Robust Bayesian Inference for Set-identified
  Models. (CWP61/18).

Gibbons, C. L., M.-J. Mange, D. Plass, A. H. Havelaar, R. J. Brooke, P. Kramarz, K. L.
  Peterson, A. L. Stuurman, A. Cassini, E. M. F`
                                               evre, and M. E. Kretzschmar (2014). Measuring
  Underreporting and Under-Ascertainment in Infectious Disease Datasets: A Comparison of
  Methods. BMC Public Health 14. Article number: 147.

Gilchrist, S. and E. Zakrajsek (2012, June). Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations.
 American Economic Review 102 (4), 1692­1720.


                                              48
Goolsbee, A. and C. Syverson (2020, June). Fear, Lockdown, and Diversion: Comparing Drivers
 of Pandemic Economic Decline 2020. Working Paper 27432, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Gostic, K. M., L. McGough, E. B. Baskerville, S. Abbott, K. Joshi, C. Tedijanto, R. Kahn,
 R. Niehus, J. Hay, P. M. De Salazar, J. Hellewell, S. Meakin, J. Munday, N. I. Bosse, K. Sherrat,
 R. N. Thompson, L. F. White, J. S. Huisman, J. Scire, S. Bonhoeffer, T. Stadler, J. Wallinga,
 S. Funk, M. Lipsitch, and S. Cobey (2020). Practical Considerations for Measuring the
 Effective Reproductive Number, Rt . PLOS Computational Biology 16 (12).

Gupta, S., T. D. Nguyen, F. L. Rojas, S. Raman, B. Lee, A. Bento, K. I. Simon, and C. Wing
 (2020). Tracking Public and Private Responses to the COVID-19 Epidemic: Evidence from
 State and Local Government Actions.

Hale, T., S. Webster, A. Petherick, T. Phillips, and B. Kira (2020). Oxford COVID-19
 Government Response Tracker. Available at https://covidtracker.bsg.ox.ac.uk/.

Herzog, S., J. De Bie, S. Abrams, I. Wouters, E. Ekinci, L. Patteet, A. Coppens, S. De Spiegeleer,
  P. Beutels, P. Van Damme, N. Hens, and H. Theeten (2020). Seroprevalence of Igg Antibodies
  against SARS Coronavirus 2 in Belgium ­ A Serial Prospective Cross-Sectional Nationwide
  Study of Residual Samples. medRxiv.

Hills, T., N. Kearns, C. Kearns, and R. Beasley (2020). Influenza Control during the COVID-19
  Pandemic. The Lancet 396 (10263), 1633­1634.

Ho, P., T. A. Lubik, and C. Matthes (2021). How to Go Viral: A COVID-19 Model with
 Endogenously Time-Varying Parameters. Journal of Econometrics .

Horta¸
     csu, A., J. Liu, and T. Schwieg (2021). Estimating the fraction of unreported infections in
  epidemics with a known epicenter: An application to covid-19. Journal of Econometrics 220 (1),
 106­129.

Hsiang, S., D. Allen, S. Annan-Phan, K. Bell, I. Bolliger, T. Chong, H. Druckenmiller, L. Y.
  Huang, A. Hultgren, E. Krasovich, et al. (2020). The Effect of Large-Scale Anti-Contagion
  Policies on the COVID-19 pandemic. Nature 584 (7820), 262­267.

Hurwicz, L. (1966). On the Structural Form of Interdependent Systems. In Studies in Logic
 and the Foundations of Mathematics, Volume 44, pp. 232­239. Elsevier.

Imbens, G. W. and D. B. Rubin (2015). Causal Inference in Statistics, Social, and Biomedical
  Sciences. Causal Inference for Statistics, Social, and Biomedical Sciences: An Introduction.
  Cambridge University Press.

                                               49
Jord`  ` (2005). Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections. American
    a, O.
  Economic Review 95 (1), 161­182.

Katul, G. G., A. Mrad, S. Bonetti, G. Manoli, and A. J. Parolari (2020). Global Convergence
 of COVID-19 Basic Reproduction Number and Estimation from Early-time SIR Dynamics.
 PLOS One 16 (4), 351­367.

Kilian, L. and D. P. Murphy (2012). Why Agnostic Sign Restrictions Are Not Enough: Un-
  derstanding the Dynamics of Oil Market VAR Models. Journal of the European Economic
 Association 10 (5), 1166­1188.

Korolev, I. (2021). Identification and Estimation of the SEIRD Epidemic Model for COVID-19.
 Journal of Econometrics 220 (1), 63­85.

Kucirka, L. M., S. A. Lauer, O. Laeyendecker, D. Boon, and J. Lessler (2020). Variation in
 False-Negative Rate of Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction­Based SARS-CoV-2
 Tests by Time Since Exposure. Annals of Internal Medicine .

Kypraios, T., P. Neal, and D. Prangle (2017). A Tutorial Introduction to Bayesian Inference
 for Stochastic Epidemic Models using Approximate Bayesian Computation. Mathematical
 Biosciences 287, 42­53.

Lavery, A. M., L. E. Preston, J. Y. Ko, J. R. Chevinsky, C. L. DeSisto, A. F. Pennington,
  L. Kompaniyets, S. D. Datta, E. S. Click, T. Golden, et al. (2020). Characteristics of Hospital-
  ized COVID-19 Patients Discharged and Experiencing Same-Hospital Readmission--United
  States, March­August 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 69 (45), 1695.

Lee, K., A. Oka, E. Pollakis, and L. Lampe (2010). A Comparison between Unscented Kalman
  Filtering and Particle Filtering for RSSI-based Tracking. In 2010 7th Workshop on Positioning,
  Navigation and Communication, pp. 157­163.

Lee, S., Y. Liao, M. Seo, and Y. Shin (2021). Sparse HP Filter: Finding Kinks in the COVID-19
  Contact Rate. Journal of Econometrics 220 (1), 158­180.

Leeper, E. M., C. A. Sims, and T. Zha (1996). What Does Monetary Policy Do? Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity 1996 (2), 1­78.

Leeper, E. M. and T. Zha (2003). Modest Policy Interventions. Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 50 (8), 1673­1700.

Lewis, D. J., K. Mertens, J. H. Stock, and M. Trivedi (2020). Measuring Real Activity Using a
  Weekly Economic Index. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports (920).


                                               50
Li, R., S. Pei, B. Chen, Y. Song, T. Zhang, W. Yang, and J. Shaman (2020). Substantial
  Undocumented Infection Facilitates the Rapid Dissemination of Novel Coronavirus (SARS-
  CoV-2). Science 368 (6490), 489­493.

Llorente, F., L. Martino, D. Delgado, and J. Lopez-Santiago (2020). Marginal Likelihood
  Computation for Model Selection and Hypothesis Testing: An Extensive Review. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2005.08334 .

Maloney, W. and T. Taskin (2020). Determinants of Social Distancing and Economic Activity
 during COVID-19: A Global View. The World Bank.

Manski, C. F. and F. Molinari (2021). Estimating the COVID-19 Infection Rate: Anatomy of
 an Inference Problem. Journal of Econometrics 220 (1), 181­192. Pandemic Econometrics.

Minter, A. and R. Retkute (2019). Approximate Bayesian Computation for Infectious Disease
 Modelling. Epidemics 29, 100368.

Olsen, S. J., E. Azziz-Baumgartner, A. P. Budd, L. Brammer, S. Sullivan, R. F. Pineda, C. Cohen,
  and A. M. Fry (2020). Decreased Influenza Activity during the COVID-19 Pandemic--United
  States, Australia, Chile, and South Africa, 2020. American Journal of Transplantation 20 (12),
  3681­3685.

O'Neill, P. D. and G. O. Roberts (1999). Bayesian Inference for Partially Observed Stochastic
  Epidemics. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (Statistics in Society) 162 (1),
  121­129.

Pesaran, M. H. and C. F. Yang (2020). Matching Theory and Evidence on Covid-19 using a
  Stochastic Network SIR Model.

Plagborg-Møller, M. and C. K. Wolf (2021). Local Projections and VARs Estimate the Same
  Impulse Responses. Econometrica (Forthcoming) .

Poyiadjis, G., A. Doucet, and S. S. Singh (2011). Particle Approximations of the Score and
  Observed Information Matrix in State Space Models with Application to Parameter Estimation.
  Biometrika 98 (1), 65­80.

Ramey, V. A. and S. Zubairy (2018). Government Spending Multipliers in Good Times and in
  Bad: Evidence from US Historical Data. Journal of Political Economy 126 (2), 850­901.

Rees, E. M., E. S. Nightingale, Y. Jafari, N. R. Waterlow, S. Clifford, C. A. Pearson, T. Jombart,
  S. R. Procter, G. M. Knight, C. W. Group, et al. (2020). COVID-19 Length of Hospital Stay:
  A Systematic Review and Data Synthesis.


                                               51
Renne, J.-P., G. Roussellet, and G. Schwenkler (2020). Preventing COVID-19 Fatalities: State
  versus Federal Policies.

Roberts, G. O. and J. S. Rosenthal (2001). Optimal Scaling for Various Metropolis-Hastings
 Algorithms. Statistical Science 16 (4), 351­367.

Sims, C. A. and T. Zha (2006). Were There Regime Switches in US Monetary Policy? American
  Economic Review , 54­81.

Smyth, A. W., S. F. Masri, A. G. Chassiakos, and T. K. Caughey (1999). On-line Parametric Iden-
  tification of MDOF Nonlinear Hysteretic Systems. Journal of Engineering Mechanics 125 (2),
  133­142.

Sousa, G., T. Garces, V. Cestari, R. Flor^
                                         encio, T. Moreira, and M. Pereira (2020). Mortality
  and Survival of COVID-19. Epidemiology & Infection 148.

Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (2018). Identification and Estimation of Dynamic Causal Effects
  in Macroeconomics Using External Instruments. The Economic Journal 128 (610), 917­948.

Toda, A. A. (2020). Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR) Dynamics of COVID-19 and Economic
  Impact. U.C.S.D. manuscript.

Toulis, P. (2021). Estimation of Covid-19 Prevalence from Serology Tests: A Partial Identification
  Approach. Journal of Econometrics 220 (1), 193­213. Pandemic Econometrics.

Walker, J. N., A. J. Black, and J. V. Ross (2019). Bayesian Model Discrimination for Partially-
 Observed Epidemic Models. Mathematical Biosciences 317, 108266.

Walker, J. N., J. V. Ross, and A. J. Black (2017). Inference of Epidemiological Parameters from
 Household Stratified Data. PLOS One 12 (10), e0185910.

Wilson, D. J. (2020). Weather, Mobility, and COVID-19: A Panel Local Projections Estimator
 for Understanding and Forecasting Infectious Disease Spread. Technical Report Working
 Paper 2020-23, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Wolf, C. K. (2020, October). SVAR (Mis)identification and the Real Effects of Monetary Policy
 Shocks. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12 (4), 1­32.

Wortham, J., J. Lee, S. Althomsons, et al. (2020). Characteristics of Persons Who Died with
 COVID-19 -- United States. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 69(45), 923­929.




                                               52
A      Online Appendix
A.1     Implied Density over the Initial Share of Detected Cases
Figure A.1 plots the prior and posterior distributions of the initial share of detected cases, n,0 ,
implied by our model. While the prior assigns substantial probability mass to values as high as
0.6, the posterior distribution is concentrated in values below 0.4, indicating that, according to
our model, the share of detected cases on March 15, 2020, was below 40% with high probability.




Figure A.1: Prior histograms (yellow) are based on 100,000 independent draws from the prior
distribution presented in Table 2. Posterior histograms (red) are based on the MCMC chain
with 90,000 posterior draws obtained after a burn-in period of 10,000 draws.



A.2     Prior versus Posterior
Figure A.2 shows the prior and posterior distributions for  , H , and P . These parameters are
inversely related to the average duration a person remains infectious, the average duration of
stay in hospitals, and the average duration of stay at home while recovering from COVID-19.
Figure A.2 reveals that the data are very informative about  and H and less informative about
P . Figure A.3 shows the prior and posterior distributions for b , h , p , g , and n . These
parameters govern the step size of the time-varying parameters of our model. Clearly, the data
are informative about them. Finally, Figure A.4 shows the prior and posterior distributions
for b0 , dH0 , dP0 , gH0 , S0 , I0 , n0 , and µ. These parameters are the initial-value parameters and
the share of false negatives parameter in the case of µ. Figure A.4 documents that data are
informative about these 8 parameters as well. The prior for n0 is truncated at 1 to rule out
large values of the permanent component of detected cases. Even so, the posterior indicates
that there is not much probability mass near the truncation, suggesting that the upper bound
for the prior could be relaxed without affecting our conclusions.



                                                A.1
Figure A.2: Duration Parameters. Table 1 presents definitions of these parameters. Prior
histograms (yellow) are based on 100,000 independent draws from the prior distribution presented
in Table 2. Posterior histograms (red) are based on the MCMC chain with 90,000 posterior
draws obtained after a burn-in period of 10,000 draws.




                                              A.2
Figure A.3: Step-size Parameters. Table 1 presents definitions of these parameters. Prior
histograms (yellow) are based on 100,000 independent draws from the prior distribution presented
in Table 2. Posterior histograms (red) are based on the MCMC chain with 90,000 posterior
draws obtained after a burn-in period of 10,000 draws.




                                              A.3
Figure A.4: Initial-value Parameters and Share of False Negatives Parameter. Table 1 presents
definitions of those parameters. Prior histograms (yellow) are based on 100,000 independent
draws from the prior distribution presented in Table 2. Posterior histograms (red) are based on
the MCMC chain with 90,000 posterior draws obtained after a burn-in period of 10,000 draws.

                                             A.4
A.3    Sentiment and Real GDP Growth Units
Table A.1 shows the OLS coefficients, the 95% confidence intervals for the coefficient esti-
mates (in brackets), and the R2 of a regression of four-quarter real GDP growth 1 quar-
ter ahead on a constant and ENSq over the sample 2000Q1-2019Q4, i.e., RGDPq4q4q+1 =
 +  ENSq + ut , where q  {2000Q1, . . . , 2019Q3}.


                                                        Table A.1

                                Regressors                Coefficients
                                Constant                1.61 [1.36;1.87]
                                Economic News Sentiment 1.17 [0.84;1.51]
                                R2 = 0.39


   Figure A.5 plots the quarterly average of the daily economic news sentiment index expressed
in GDP units along with one-quarter-ahead four-quarter real GDP growth.


                                                 Real GDP Growth and Sentiment
                          6
                                             Quarterly Average of Daily Economic News Sentiment in GDP Units
                                             One-Quarter-Ahead Four-Quarter Real GDP Growth

                          4



                          2
                Percent




                          0



                          -2



                          -4
                               2002   2004      2006    2008     2010     2012    2014     2016    2018

                                                        Figure A.5




                                                               A.5
