                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE SMOOT-HAWLEY TRADE WAR

                                    Kris James Mitchener
                                    Kirsten Wandschneider
                                   Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke

                                      Working Paper 28616
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28616


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




O'Rourke gratefully acknowledges the hospitality of Sciences Po as well as the financial support
of the ERC, under the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007­2013),
ERC grant agreement 249546; the Oxford History Faculty's Sanderson Fund; the John Fell OUP
Research Fund; and NYU Abu Dhabi. Alan Fernihough and Silvi Berger collected the monthly
and quarterly trade data and we are extremely grateful to both as well as to Lorenz Reiter,
Alexander Wulfers and Adrian Daues for outstanding research assistance. We thank Doug Irwin
and Wolfgang Keller as well as seminar and conference participants at the 2021 ASSA Meetings,
University of Vienna, and the Mountain West Economic History Conference for helpful
comments and suggestions, and Thierry Mayer and Raymond Hicks, who were particularly
generous in answering our queries and providing data. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Kris James Mitchener, Kirsten Wandschneider, and Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Smoot-Hawley Trade War
Kris James Mitchener, Kirsten Wandschneider, and Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
NBER Working Paper No. 28616
March 2021
JEL No. F13,F14,N70,N72

                                          ABSTRACT

We document the outbreak of a trade war after the U.S. adopted the Smoot-Hawley tariff in June
1930. U.S. trade partners initially protested the possible implementation of the sweeping tariff
legislation, with many eventually choosing to retaliate by increasing their tariffs on imports from
the United States. Using a new quarterly dataset on bilateral trade for 99 countries during the
interwar period, we show that U.S. exports to countries that protested fell by between 15 and 22
percent, while U.S. exports to retaliators fell by 28-33 percent. Furthermore, using a second new
dataset on U.S. exports at the product-level, we find that the most important U.S. exports to
retaliating markets were particularly affected, suggesting a possible mechanism whereby the U.S.
was targeted despite countries' MFN obligations. The retaliators' welfare gains from trade fell by
roughly 8-17%.

Kris James Mitchener                                    Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
Department of Economics                                 NYU Abu Dhabi, Saadiyat Campus
Leavey School of Business                               Social Science (A5), 1193
Santa Clara University                                  P.O. Box 129188
Santa Clara, CA 95053                                   Abu Dhabi
and NBER                                                United Arab Emirates
kmitchener@scu.edu                                      and NBER
                                                        kevin.orourke@nyu.edu
Kirsten Wandschneider
Department of Business, Economics and Statistics
Department of Economic and Social History
University of Vienna
Oskar-Morgenstern-Platz 1
1090 Vienna
Vienna 1090
Austria
kirsten.wandschneider@univie.ac.at
                                    The Smoot-Hawley Trade War



I. Introduction


        "The ghost of Smoot-Hawley seems to haunt President Trump."1 As fears of a trade war
between the U.S. and China grew after the U.S. presidential election of 2016, many commentators
drew precisely this link between the events of 1930 and today. And the consensus was that the
trade wars of the 1930s were an ominous portent of what might await the world if Donald Trump's
protectionist impulses were not checked.
        Empirical and theoretical interest in understanding the effects of trade wars has surged in
response to the recent U.S.-China trade war. A fast-moving literature focuses on the effects of the
tariff increases of 2018-19 on U.S. manufacturing employment, producer prices, and capital
expenditure of firms as well as welfare losses in the form of higher prices and nearly complete
pass through (Amiti, Redding and Weinstein, 2019; Amiti, Kong, and Weinstein, 2020; Flaen and
Pierce, 2020; Fajgelbaum et. al., 2020). On the other hand, while economists have for decades
used the tariff wars sparked by the Smoot-Hawley legislation of June 1930 as a cautionary tale of
what can go wrong when protectionism gets out of hand, little quantitative work has been
conducted on the Smoot-Hawley trade war. Even more surprisingly, perhaps, for non-specialists,
the general conclusion of quantitative economic historians who have explored the effects of 1930s
protectionism is that it had less of an impact than was traditionally thought. The basic point is
straightforward: the collapse in GDP during the Great Depression was so large that, on its own, it
can explain the bulk of the trade collapse of 1929-33: there is relatively little left over for a rise in
trade costs to explain (Irwin, 1998a). Our paper aims to fill this gap in the literature: we estimate
the quantitative impact of the Smoot-Hawley trade war on trade flows and conclude that it was
big.
        While there exists a large scholarly literature on the Smoot-Hawley tariff, only some of it
is quantitative.2 Several papers ask what drove legislators to vote for or against Smoot-Hawley:
was party affiliation the dominant factor (Pastor, 1980), or as argued by Eichengreen (1989), did

1
  "The ghost of Smoot-Hawley seems to haunt Trump", Robert J. Samuelson, Washington Post, June 27, 2018.
Available at (accessed March 11, 2019).
2
  For recent overviews, see Irwin (2011) and the discussion in Irwin (2017).


                                                      1
economic interests play an important and independent role (Callahan et al., 1994, Cupitt and
Elliott, 1994, Irwin and Kroszner, 1996)? This literature is not directly relevant to our paper. There
have been some papers exploring the impact of tariffs and other trade barriers on the aggregate
value and composition of trade during the 1930s (Crucini, 1994, Crucini and Kahn, 2003, Mann,
1987, Irwin, 1998a, 1998b, Madsen, 2001, James, 2001, de Bromhead et al., 2019), but while some
of them look specifically at the impact of the Smoot-Hawley tariff, virtually none study the trade
war that the tariff provoked. This paper aims to do just this.
       We focus on the act of retaliation ­ when countries decide to raise trade barriers, not for
domestic reasons, but primarily for the purpose of responding to other countries' actions. In
particular, we ask two questions. First, what determined whether a country officially protested
Smoot-Hawley, or went one step further and actually retaliated? And second, what was the impact
of retaliation on trade flows?
       Based on contemporary sources and government documents, we first identify country
responses to Smoot-Hawley (whether they filed official protests with the U.S. government,
retaliated by imposing tariffs, or simply did nothing). We analyze whether these responses are
predicted by trade or political relationships with the U.S. Interestingly, we find that a country's
response to Smoot-Hawley is not determined by a country's pre-1930 share of exports or bilateral
trade balance with the United States. The main focus of the paper, however, is on the effects of the
Smoot-Hawley trade war on bilateral imports. We estimate these using a structural gravity model,
and a new, hand-collected quarterly dataset on bilateral trade for 99 countries during the interwar
period. This is to our knowledge the first high-frequency bilateral dataset to have been constructed
for this period. These new quarterly data allow for more precise identification of the timing of the
response to Smoot-Hawley. In particular, we focus on the behavior of those countries that
responded to Smoot-Hawley by either filing official protests against Smoot-Hawley and/or
imposing retaliatory tariffs against the U.S. We employ gravity model estimates to compare these
"responders" to U.S. trade partners that did not respond. The inclusion of importer-time and
exporter-time fixed effects as well as pairwise fixed effects in these models allows us to identify
whether responders differentially reduced their imports from the U.S. after Smoot-Hawley, prima
facie evidence that a trade war occurred.
       Our results show that countries that responded to Smoot-Hawley with retaliatory tariffs
reduced their imports from the U.S. by an average of 28-33 percent, while countries that protested



                                                  2
the implementation of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff also reduced their imports, by between 15 and 22
percent. In other words, de facto retaliation went beyond the group of countries commonly labelled
as retaliators.
        These findings raise an interesting question: how did responders succeeded in targeting
U.S. exports, given that many were bound by their most-favored-nation obligations? One possible
answer is quotas, which are by their nature discriminatory, but another is that countries chose to
raise tariffs strategically by targeting particularly important exports of the United States, such as
automobiles. To test this hypothesis, we construct an additional new dataset, this time of product-
level, quarterly U.S. exports to 59 countries between 1926 and 1932, and use our primary sources
to identify key U.S. exports to each trade partner in 1928, before either the Great Depression or
the trade war struck. Our gravity model estimates show that retaliators significantly reduced their
purchases of key U.S. exports, especially automobiles, after Smoot-Hawley passed. For example,
even when controlling for aggregate U.S. exports to particular markets, we show that chief U.S.
exports to retaliators were differentially affected, falling by an additional 33% after the U.S. raised
tariffs in 1930 ­ a result that is consistent with trade partners targeting goods that were of particular
importance to the United States. Given that these models include product-time, country-time, and
product-country fixed effects, the results also speak directly to the proposed mechanism driving
the differential decline in U.S. exports during our sample period: retaliation by U.S. trade partners.
        Finally, we calculate changes in the welfare gains from trade, following a recent approach
that measures them using changes in the terms of trade.3 We find that the welfare gains from trade
enjoyed by retaliators fell by roughly 8-17%.
        In the next section, we describe the introduction of the Smoot-Hawley tariff bill and the
international responses that followed. The discussion highlights the ambiguity characterizing
existing research regarding whether particular tariff increases occurring outside the United States
constituted retaliation or were essentially autonomous. Section 3 briefly reviews the quantitative
literature on the impact of trade restrictions during the 1930s. Sections 4 and 5 ask what made
some countries officially protest U.S. policy, or retaliate, while others did not. Section 6 explores
the impact of protests and retaliation on trade flows. Section 7 finds evidence that the most




3
 See Eaton and Kortum (2002), Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare (2012), Arkolakis, Demidova, Klenow,
and Rodriguez-Clare (2008) and Felbermayr, Jung and Larch (2015).


                                                      3
important U.S. exports to countries retaliating against it were particularly targeted. Section 8
briefly examines the welfare effects of the Smoot-Hawley trade war and Section 9 concludes.


2. The Smoot-Hawley Tariff and Retaliation

           The roots of the Smoot-Hawley tariff can be traced back to the First World War.4 With
European agricultural production depressed due to conflict, it had been a boom time for New
World producers, who borrowed heavily to finance expansion. However, as European producers
came back online and crop prices fell in response to the increased global supply, a deep recession
occurred in the U.S. in 1920-21. Farm incomes remained depressed for the remainder of the 1920s
­ a decade characterized by lower agricultural prices worldwide. Heavily indebted American
farmers found themselves increasingly under pressure, with many losing their farms.
           In 1922, the Fordney-McCumber tariff was passed, resulting in a sharp increase in
protection, particularly for industrial goods. Democrats and Midwestern Republicans supporting
agricultural interests repeatedly called for a leveling of the playing field, arguing that industrial
tariffs should be lowered, or agricultural prices raised in order to help farmers; however, it proved
difficult to advance either agenda in Congress. Eventually Midwestern Republicans called for
higher agricultural tariffs ­ despite the fact that these would not provide any benefits for those
farmers whose livelihoods depended on exporting to the rest of the world. The promise was
contained in the Republican platform in the 1928 Presidential election and was endorsed by the
victorious candidate, Herbert Hoover.
           While Hoover favored focusing on agricultural tariffs, Congress had other ideas. The
House Ways and Means Committee did not wait for Hoover's inauguration before getting to work.
Under its Republican chairman, Willis Hawley, it began hearings on a new tariff bill in January
1929. The committee eventually produced a bill that raised tariffs on industrial goods more than
on agricultural products, hardly what Midwestern Republicans had intended. In May 1929, the
House approved the bill, which then went to the Senate Finance Committee chaired by Reed
Smoot. The Finance Committee raised some of the proposed tariffs and lowered others, in general
moving the legislation in a more agriculture-friendly direction. In September, the full Senate
started considering the bill, operating until March 4, 1930 as the so-called "committee of the


4
    For an excellent introduction, see Irwin (2011, Chapter 1).


                                                            4
whole." During this phase many industrial tariffs were further reduced. Following this phase,
further amendments were made to individual tariff rates, with votes traded between Senators in a
manner widely denounced at the time. The final bill reversed many of the tariff reductions that the
same Senate, meeting as the committee of the whole, had engineered just a short time previously.
The resulting Hawley-Smoot bill, or Smoot-Hawley as Smoot preferred to call it, was signed by
President Hoover on June 17, 1930, and came into effect the following day. The legislation raised
the average U.S. tariff on dutiable imports by around six percentage points (Irwin, 2017, pp. 389-
90).
        The classic text on trade wars defines them as "a category of intense international conflict
where states interact, bargain, and retaliate primarily over economic objectives directly related to
the traded goods or service sectors of their economies, and where the means used are restrictions
on the free flow of goods or services" (Conybeare, 1987, p. 3). The key concept for identifying a
trade war is thus retaliation. If countries around the world decide to raise tariffs for purely domestic
reasons, it would certainly be bad for international trade, but according to this standard definition,
it would not constitute a trade war. Thus, our primary focus in this paper will be on retaliation. We
aim to answer two questions. First, what determined whether countries responded to the U.S., the
provocateur in that it was the first that raised its tariffs? And second, what impact did retaliation
have on U.S. exports?
        In order to answer these questions, we need to clarify further the concept of retaliation in
the context of the policy environment. Implicit in the definition of a trade war is the notion that it
involves responding to the actions of an instigating country (or set of countries) whose trade
policies have harmed or will potentially harm the trade of another country or set of countries ("the
potential retaliator(s)"). Thus, in the context of Smoot-Hawley, the U.S. was the instigator and the
potential retaliators were those countries that could respond with actions of their own. However,
as Irwin (1998b, p. 337) points out, there were three possible responses, only one of which, in our
empirical analysis, fits the definition of a trade war. The first was to take "direct retaliatory
measures against the United States." The second was to view Smoot-Hawley as a signal that
international "policy discipline" had broken down, and erect trade barriers against all countries (a
sign of rising protectionism). And the third possibility was not to respond at all which, in the
context of the Great Depression, might still involve raising tariffs for purely domestic political
reasons. Irwin (1998b) speculates that the second and third possibilities were the most common



                                                   5
responses to Smoot-Hawley, especially the third option. By our definition, only the first response
is what we would consider to be consistent with retaliation resulting from a trade war.
           In practice, it has not always been easy to distinguish between these three possibilities since
all three, including the third, could represent protectionism. As Kindleberger (1973, p. 132)
comments, it can be "difficult to disengage reason from excuse," especially since some of the
retaliation may have occurred before Smoot-Hawley came into effect. If a country increased tariffs
on U.S. goods but not on other countries 'goods, that would clearly constitute retaliation, but what
if it abided by its most-favored-nation (MFN) obligations and did not discriminate against U.S.
products? It might still be retaliating if it was purposely targeting goods of particular interest to
the United States (e.g. cars); but what if it had wanted to protect its car industry anyway? It is not
surprising, then, that as noted below, scholars have disagreed about whether particular foreign
responses in fact constituted retaliation. In this paper, we develop an empirical methodology that
allows us to identify direct retaliatory effects on U.S. exports and whether key U.S exports, in
particular, were targeted.


3. Previous quantitative literature on the Smoot-Hawley tariff


           Although there is a large scholarly literature on the Smoot-Hawley tariff, only some of it
is quantitative.5 Several papers ask what drove legislators to vote for Smoot-Hawley: was party
affiliation the dominant factor (Pastor, 1980) or did economic interests play an important and
independent role (Eichengreen, 1989, Callahan et al., 1994, Cupitt and Elliott, 1994, Irwin and
Kroszner, 1996)? Hayford and Pasurka (1992) adopt a different empirical strategy, using industry-
level data to ask what factors led some industries to obtain higher tariffs than others. Although
interesting, this literature is not particularly relevant for the present study since we are specifically
interested in trade wars and the international responses to Smoot-Hawley, not its domestic political
causes.
           The conventional view of economic historians who have explored the quantitative effects
of 1930s protectionism is that Smoot-Hawley's contribution to the international trade collapse of
1929-33 was relatively minor. Their basic point is straightforward: the collapse in GDP during the
Great Depression was so large that the size of the decline in output and incomes can, on its own,

5
    For recent overviews, see Irwin (2011) and the discussion in Irwin (2017).


                                                           6
explain the bulk of that collapse. That is, there is relatively little left for a rise in trade costs to
explain. For example, Irwin (1998a) uses aggregate quarterly U.S. import data to estimate a partial
equilibrium U.S. import demand function. He finds that, even if ad valorem tariff rates had
remained unchanged in the US, imports into that country would have declined by 31.9 percent
from the second quarter of 1930 to the third quarter of 1932 ­ not that much less than the 41.2
percent fall that actually occurred.6 Furthermore, movements in the aggregate price level had larger
effects on U.S. ad valorem tariff rates than changes in nominal tariffs (Crucini, 1994; Irwin,
1998b).
         Given that trade was less than 10% of total income in an economy like the United States in
the late 1920s, it is a fortiori the case that Smoot-Hawley can have had only a small impact on
total GDP. Moreover, the qualitative impact of protection on output during the Depression is
theoretically ambiguous. Eichengreen (1989), for example, argues that the macroeconomic effects
of the Smoot-Hawley tariff on the United States were small, and probably positive, while Irwin
(1998b), using computable general equilibrium (CGE) techniques, argues that the welfare impact
was small and probably negative. Crucini and Kahn (2003) simulate a dynamic general equilibrium
trade model in which there is trade in intermediate inputs. In such a context, tariffs can slow capital
accumulation and growth: they estimate that tariffs could have reduced real output by up to 2
percent, but this remains a small effect in the context of the Great Depression. Most recently, a
detailed study by Bond et al. (2013) finds that the Smoot-Hawley bill may have lowered U.S. TFP
by 0.5 percent ­ again, not a very large effect in the context of the 1930s. As with the political
economy literature on voting, such papers are not particularly relevant for our own work which
focuses on the response of countries to Smoot-Hawley.
         Economic historians have also concluded that trade policy did not have a great impact on
the direction of trade during the 1930s. Eichengreen and Irwin (1995) downplay the role of trade
blocs in creating the trade regionalization of the period, which they say was already in motion,

6
  Madsen (2001) focuses on interwar trade volumes generally, not U.S. imports specifically. He finds a bigger role
for trade policies, but in part this is because he estimates panel regressions where the dependent variables are
aggregate trade flows, and because he interprets the time dummies in those regressions (which are, not surprisingly,
highly significant) as representing the impact of non-tariff barriers to trade. Jacks and Novy (2019) conclude that
trade wars in the interwar period predominantly reinforced existing trade blocks and that bilateral retaliation was
rare. Kitson and Solomou (1990) are another dissenting voice, who use single equation time series methods and
aggregate data for the United Kingdom. Estevadeordal et al. (2003) and Adam (2019) use gravity methods to
explore the impact of tariffs during the 1930s: the former find relatively small effects of tariffs while the latter finds
larger ones.



                                                            7
reflecting underlying economic relationships between the countries in question. Wolf and Ritschl
(2011) and Gowa and Hicks (2013) reach similar conclusions. More recently, however, de
Bromhead et al. (2019) have used commodity-level data on trade flows and policies to study the
impact of the UK's switch to protection after 1931: this explains only around a quarter of the
decline in aggregate UK imports (similar to what Irwin found for the U.S.), but it also explains the
majority of Britain's shift towards Imperial imports during the period.7
         None of these papers addresses the quantitative impact of the response of other countries
to the Smoot-Hawley tariff ­ the focus of our research.8 It might very well be the case that Smoot-
Hawley contributed relatively little to the aggregate decline in trade or production, but that
retaliation significantly impacted U.S. exports with trade partners that chose to participate in a
trade war. Our empirical analysis aims to fill this major gap in the literature.


4. Foreign Responses to Smoot-Hawley


         The U.S. threat to raise tariff rates was initially met with protests by a large number of
countries and British colonies. As Smoot-Hawley wound its way through Congress, 20 foreign
governments urged the U.S. government to reconsider, lodging official complaints with the U.S.
State Department between February and June of 1929. The Hoover administration refused to make
the number and names of these petitioners public, so the U.S. Senate passed a resolution requiring
the U.S. State Department to submit all formal complaints of countries protesting the proposed
tariff increases to the U.S. Senate Finance Committee. These were then read into the public record
during the official debate on the Smoot-Hawley legislation. By the fall of 1929, the number
officially protesting the tariff bill had grown to 35 colonies and countries, including some of the
United States' largest trade partners: the United Kingdom, Germany, and Japan (see Tables 1 and
2).9 Canada was the exception to this protocol. Given their close geographical proximity as well
as the importance of bilateral trade between the two nations, the Canadian government appealed
directly to President Hoover on March 15th, 1929 (Kottman, 1975).10

7
  Arthi et al. (2020) reach similar conclusions for interwar India.
8
  Indeed, Eichengreen (1989) concludes that without a quantitative assessment of major trading nations, it is unclear
whether countries retaliated in response to Smoot-Hawley.
9
  We include the countries whose protest letter are included in the Hearings before the Committee on Finance on
HR.2667, which includes all communication received before September 5th, 1929.
10
   In our empirical exercises we thus code Canada as a protester.


                                                          8
           Protesting countries and colonies represented the interests of domestic industries whose
exports would be harmed by tariff increases (leather goods from Austria, bananas and coffee from
Guatemala, tomatoes and olive oil from Italy, woolen goods from the United Kingdom, etc.). For
example, early as February 1929 Australian exporters of meat and wool called on Prime Minister
Stanley Bruce to take action and urged that he retaliate by increasing tariff rates on American
automobiles.11
           Protesting countries also explicitly drew attention to bilateral trade balances. More than 60
percent of the initial set of protesters argued that the U.S. ran a favorable bilateral balance of trade
with them and that the tariffs were therefore unnecessary ­ a complaint made by some responders
in more recent examples of trade wars. For example, the New York Times reported on June 15th,
1930, that a prominent newspaper in Uruguay called for a prohibitive tariff on U.S. automobiles
stating that: "Uruguay's exports to the United States in 1928 were valued at $10,000,000, while
she imported from the United States in the same year products valued at $29,000,000, of which
40% were automobiles and fuel. La Mañana holds that the restriction of automobile imports would
affect nobody except those with a frivolous idea of luxury who spend for automobiles huge sums
bearing no relation to their true wealth."12
           The protests were to no avail. Smoot-Hawley passed Congress and was signed by President
Hoover. The official trade war began when countries responded by targeting U.S. goods with new
trade taxes. As the League of Nations documented, "The Hawley-Smoot tariff in the United States
was the signal for an outburst of tariff-making activity in other countries, partly at least by the way
of reprisals. Extensive increases in duties were made almost immediately by Canada, Cuba,
Mexico, France, Italy, and Spain" (League of Nations, 1932, p.193). For example, a month after
Smoot-Hawley's passage, Spain adopted the Wais Tariff (named after its finance minister),
targeting automobiles, tires, and motion picture equipment with new duties ­ products that
overwhelmingly came from the U.S. and were not produced by Spain (Jones, 1934). To shed some
light on the political economy of this trade war, the next section examines which countries
responded and provides some reduced-form evidence on the political and economic characteristics
of American trade partners that petitioned and retaliated against U.S. imports in response to Smoot-
Hawley.


11
     New York Times, February 10th, 1929.
12
     New York Times, June 15th, 1930.


                                                    9
5. Analyzing the Characteristics of Protesters and Retaliators


        A full list of countries responding to Smoot-Hawley is shown in Table 2. Protesters filed
official petitions with the U.S. State Department in 1929, in response to the proposed tariff bill.
Retaliators are U.S. trade partners listed by Mann (1930) as imposing tariffs on U.S. exports in
response to Smoot-Hawley.13 Since most retaliators also protested the tariffs, we additionally
define "threateners" as the subset of protesters not retaliating. Threateners made up 43% of total
U.S. trade in 1928 while retaliators constituted 38% of total U.S. trade. Tables 1 and 2 show that
9 of the 10 largest recipients of U.S. exports, and 7 out of the 10 largest exporters to the U.S.,
petitioned the U.S. State Department. 6 of the 10 largest recipients of U.S. exports retaliated.
        A prime example is Canada, which McDonald et. al. (1997) characterize as being engaged
in a trade war after the passage of Smoot-Hawley. With 43 percent of its exports going to the U.S.,
the U.S.'s neighbor to the north aggressively responded to Smoot-Hawley by twice raising its
duties on U.S. goods in 1930. It first lowered duties on 270 goods imported from the British Empire
and then imposed countervailing duties on 16 American products, accounting for nearly one-third
of U.S. exports to Canada. Then, after the Conservative government won an election held in July
and characterized by anti-U.S. trade sentiment, it passed an "emergency tariff" ­ raising import
duties on textiles, agricultural implements, electrical equipment, and meat ­ most of which came
from the U.S. Canada also imposed anti-dumping duties and administrative measures directed
against U.S. products (Mann, 1958).
        Other countries also retaliated against the U.S. in the wake of the passage of Smoot Hawley.
France raised its tariffs on some of its largest imports from the U.S. in 1930, including automobiles
and parts in April (which was ranked 5th in terms of U.S. imports) and lard (which saw its rate
double) (Bidwell, 1930, p. 24). The fact that France changed the tariff on automobiles from a value
basis to a weight-basis was seen by contemporaries as a direct reprisal against the U.S. "These rate

13
   Mann was writing in 1930, the year that Smoot-Hawley was passed. He thus included in his list countries that
were preparing to retaliate, such as Argentina, or whose governments were facing pressure to retaliate, such as
Uruguay. Jones (1934) and other sources listed below later provided corroborating evidence of retaliation. On the
other hand, Eichengreen (1989) doubts whether retaliation was always involved. The evidence in Section 6 speaks to
this issue indirectly, asking whether countries listed by Mann as retaliating, or threatening to retaliate,
disproportionately reduced their imports from the United States. The evidence suggests that Mann's judgments were
sound. Note that trade flows to or from Uruguay and Paraguay were reported jointly by several countries, so we
were obliged to treat these as one entity when constructing our gravity dataset.


                                                       10
changes resulted in increases of almost 50 per cent for some models and practically closed the
French market to medium-priced American cars." (Mann, 1930, p.276). In Italy, immediately
following the passage of Smoot-Hawley, the duties on automobiles were also raised ­ by between
100 and 167 percent. On July 23, 1930 Spain increased customs duties on automobiles, sewing
machines, bicycles, motorcycles, pneumatic tires, razor blades, and paints, most of which were
primarily imported from the United States. It also rewrote its tariff schedule to charge higher duties
on non-European automobiles and parts, leading American sales representatives in Spain to reduce
"their personnel in anticipation of a substantial curtailment of sales" (Mann, 1930, p.275).
        U.S. trade partners found additional ways to retaliate against the passage of Smoot-Hawley,
including quotas and boycotts of U.S. products. For example, the Royal Italian Auto Club took out
newspaper ads calling for a boycott of American cars, branding consumers of U.S. products as
unpatriotic (Bidwell, 1930, p. 26). In South America, the widely circulated newspaper, La
Mañana, called for a continent-wide boycott of prominent American consumer goods, such as
automobiles, as did organizers in Argentina. The Federation of Uruguay Rural Societies urged the
government to place restrictive taxes on automobiles and also to consider banning them altogether
as part of a program of reprisal against the United States (Mann, 1930, p.275). Similarly, several
Swiss chamber of commerce chapters filed resolutions calling for boycotts of American products
such as typewriters and autos (Jones, 1934, p. 112, Mann 1930). And in Czechoslovakia, the
country may have imposed a quota on U.S. automobile imports in response to Smoot-Hawley
(Eichengreen, 1989). As discussed in Sections 6 and 7 of the paper, our data and econometric
estimates will allow for the possibility that responses by trade partners may have included non-
tariff barriers as well as the targeting of key American exports.
        To better understand the characteristics of responders, we analyze the trade and political
relationships countries had vis-à-vis the U.S. just prior to the onset of the trade war. Our probit
model includes economic factors highlighted in the existing literature on trade wars or mentioned
in the protests filed by trade partners in response to the American decision to consider tariff
revisions in 1929: a country's bilateral trade balance with the U.S. in the three years 1926-8; the
country's overall trade balance in the same years (both as a share of the country's total trade); and
exports to the U.S. as a share of total exports in 1928.14 The probit model also includes a number


14
  We use the trade data of Gowa and Hicks (2013). We thank Raymond Hicks for graciously providing us with the
data.


                                                     11
of political economy variables that have been identified by economic historians as potential drivers
of trade policy: a country's political regime (polity), proxied by a 21-point measure (where higher
numbers indicate a more democratic and less authoritarian regime); a dummy variable indicating
whether or not the country had an existing most-favored-nation (MFN) agreement signed with the
U.S. in 1928; and a dummy variable indicating whether the country had outstanding external
official debt arising from World War I.15 We estimate the following equation:

(1){! } = " + # !,#%&' + & !,#%&()&'
    + * !,#%&()&' + + ! + , !
    + ( ! +  -  + ! ,

where the binary dependent variable (responder) takes on a value of 1 when an economy filed a
formal complaint with the U.S. State Department during the debate on Smoot-Hawley, or when
countries imposed retaliatory tariffs in response to the passage of Smoot-Hawley.
        The last column of Table 3 presents empirical estimates of equation (1), with Huber-White-
sandwich robust standard errors shown in parentheses. Although many protesting trade partners
drew attention to their trade position vis-à-vis the U.S. in their formal complaints, the estimated
coefficients do not support the idea that countries running large bilateral trade deficits with the
United States were more likely to lodge an official complaint or to retaliate with a tariff. Indeed,
several petitioners ran bilateral trade surpluses with the U.S. (e.g., the UK, Australia, and Cuba).
The coefficient on the bilateral trade balance is statistically insignificant, and when the other two
trade-related variables are omitted, its sign actually becomes positive. Nor is a country's export
dependence on the U.S. robustly correlated with being a responder, although it has the expected,
positive sign.
        On the other hand, the overall trade balance is positively associated with responder status:
countries running larger trade surpluses were more likely to respond. Countries running trade
surpluses may have had more to lose from protectionism elsewhere, and export interests in those
countries may have been more politically powerful as well.



15
   For polity data, see: http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscrdata.html. Information on MFN clauses comes from
Tariff Bargaining under Most-Favored-Nation Treaties, Letter from the Chairman of the United States Tariff
Commission, U.S. Government Printing office, Washington, 1934. War debts are from The War Debts, Supplement
to the Economist, November 12, 1932. The lion's share of World War I debts were official debts directly or
indirectly owed to the U.S., a net creditor.


                                                    12
           The probit models also suggest that more democratic countries (those with higher polity
scores) were more inclined to petition the U.S. government. A one-unit increase in the polity score
raises the probability of protesting by around 14% percent. Intense lobbying by industries may
have been particularly effective in countries with democratically-elected officials, and industries
may have had a greater incentive to establish effective lobbying in democratic societies (consistent
with Grossman and Helpman, 1994). The Congressional Record contains 250 pages of filings from
35 governments, protesting against 300 specific items in the 1929 Tariff Bill, including cigar and
cigarette holders (Austria), imitation pearls (Spain), granite, bread & matches (Finland), shoes
(Czechoslovakia), and lacework, watches and clocks (Switzerland). This is consistent with
industry lobbying. Other political-economy variables, such as indebtedness to the U.S. (as a result
of World War I) and MFN agreements with the U.S. do not appear to play a role in a country's
response to Smoot-Hawley.


6. The effects of Retaliation on Trade Flows


       A. Time Series Evidence


           In contrast to protectionism (and as discussed in Section 2), trade wars involve tariffs or
other trade barriers applied in retaliation against the actions of a particular trade partner. In this
section, we thus focus on what happened to U.S. exports after retaliatory tariffs and other barriers
were imposed by its trade partners in response to the Smoot-Hawley tariff. To do so, we construct
a new quarterly panel data set of bilateral trade flows between 1925-1938 for 99 economies, 55 of
which were sovereign countries.
           The unbalanced panel contains 108,722 raw observations on bilateral import flows. The
country sample is based on the availability of high-frequency bilateral data from domestic sources.
A full list of country sources can be found in Appendix A. In total, our data account for 30,688
million USD of total imports for all sample countries in 1928. Since according to the League of
Nations total global imports stood at 34,475 million USD in 1928, this represents 89% of world
imports. 16 Where necessary, we take advantage of "duplicate" observations (i.e., the fact that
exports from country i to country j can also be represented as imports into country j from country

16
     League of Nations, Memorandum on International Trade and Balances of Payments, Vol 2, 1926-28.


                                                       13
i) to obtain the largest possible number of bilateral export pairs and to check the reliability of our
quarterly data. In constructing our data set, wherever possible, we follow the procedures and best
practices for gravity data outlined in Head et al. (2010). For example, our first choice is to use
import data rather than the equivalent export data; when constrained to use export data, we add 10
percent to the value to take account of the fact that exports are reported FOB, while imports are
reported CIF. 17 Full details on the data sources for the individual countries are provided in
Appendix A. Given that the early 1930s were characterized by several severe shocks, the quarterly
frequency of our data is particularly important for accurately estimating the effects of retaliatory
tariffs.
           Figure 1 summarizes one important aspect of the data by displaying time-series graphs of
aggregate nominal U.S. exports to and imports from responders and non-responders. Responders
consist of both retaliators and threateners. Non-responders are trade partners in our sample that
neither protested, threatened, nor retaliated. The first panel of Figure 1 shows that U.S. exports
declined after the passage of Smoot-Hawley (marked by the vertical line indicating June 1930).
U.S. exports to responders experienced a steeper decline than did exports to non-responders ­
consistent with the notion that there may have been retaliation. Figure 1 also highlights the fact
that responders made up the bulk of U.S. exports before the passage of Smoot-Hawley ­ about 80
percent. What happened in their markets thus had a major impact on total U.S. trade. By contrast,
the second panel of Figure 1 shows that U.S. imports declined in a roughly similar manner across
the two groups of countries. This pattern is consistent with falling U.S. demand, in general, as well
as with an increase in the general level of U.S. protection. It does not suggest that responders'
exports were differentially affected. To unpack these trends further, Figure 2 disaggregates the
responders, displaying U.S. exports by country of destination for both retaliators and threateners.
All retaliators show a sharp decrease in imports from the U.S. after Smoot-Hawley. The response
for the group of countries that filed petitions with the U.S. state department, but then did not
retaliate, the threateners, looks more mixed, but overall shows a similar drop in countries' imports
from the U.S.




17
  We use the Global Financial Database to convert trade data to $ US, supplemented with data from Obstfeld,
Shambaugh and Taylor (2004) for Bulgaria.


                                                       14
     B. Estimating the Effects on Bilateral Import Flows


        Assessing whether the Smoot-Hawley trade war had an impact on trade flows means testing
whether, ceteris paribus, U.S. exports differentially fell by more for trading partners that retaliated
than for those that did not respond. As is standard in the literature we use a theoretically well-
founded gravity model to estimate the impact of retaliation on U.S. exports. In particular, we
estimate either:

(2)P!./ Q =  + # !./ + 0 !./ + !/ + ./ + !. + !./ 

or

(3)P!./ Q =  + & !./ + * !./ + 0 !./ + !/ + ./ + !.
          + !./ .


The dependent variable, IMijt, is the log of country j's imports from country i in quarter t. The
independent variables of interest are time-varying, trade pair-specific indicator variables that take
the value 1 when country i is the U.S. and when country j is a trade partner of the U.S. that retaliated
against Smoot-Hawley (retaliator), filed a petition in response to the proposed U.S. tariff bill of
1930 but did not retaliate (threatener), or did either (i.e. the union of the two previous groups)
(Responder). These variables switch on in the quarter when protests were filed or retaliation
occurred and remain equal to 1 thereafter unless otherwise specified. As noted previously, coding
these as indicator variables allows us to account for both tariff and non-tariff barriers to U.S.
exports.
        The estimation equation includes a number of time-varying, pairwise institutional features
(Controlsijt) of the global trade environment of the interwar period, which may also have affected
U.S. exports during our sample period. These controls include whether both economies in the
bilateral trade pair were part of the Sterling Bloc, Reichsmark Bloc, Gold Bloc, or Imperial
Preference system, and whether countries had signed a reciprocal trade act with the United States
in 1934 or subsequently (RTAA). We also include variables indicating whether at least one
economy in a given bilateral trade pair was involved in the Anglo-Irish Trade War, and whether




                                                  15
two countries in a pair were simultaneously experiencing a financial crisis during a quarter.18 And,
as is now standard in the estimation of structural gravity models, we include exporter-time (!/ )
and importer-time (./ ) fixed effects, allowing us to control for a long list of potential confounders
that are time-varying but country specific (e.g. other policy responses, including increases in
general levels of protection targeting all countries) as well as other factors influencing multilateral
resistance. We also include pair fixed effects (!. ) that allow us to control for a variety of other
factors, including World War I debts owed by particular countries to the U.S. Identifying variation
thus comes from time-varying imports for a given trade pair.
        Table 4 presents OLS estimates of equations (2) and (3) (using positive observations only)
as well as Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood (PPML) estimates, following Santos Silva and
Tenreyro (2006). The OLS results in Column 1 display the difference between all countries that
responded in one way or another to the 1930 U.S. Tariff Act, and those that did not (with non-
responders as the omitted category). The coefficient on responder is negative and statistically
significant, with the coefficient showing that exports from the U.S. were, on average, 25 percent
lower when a trade partner protested or retaliated in response to Smoot-Hawley.19 Using the PPML
specification (column 2), the differential effect on U.S. exports for responders remains negative
and statistically significant at the one-percent level. Although the coefficient is somewhat smaller
than in the OLS specification, the effect is still sizable, indicating a roughly 18 percent decline.
The last two columns examine specifications for the two sub-categories of responders: threateners
and retaliators. Non-responders are once again the omitted category. As might be expected,
exports from the U.S. fall by even more when we focus only on the trade partners that retaliated,
declining by between 28 and 33 percent depending on the regression specification. The measured
average decline in U.S. exports to retaliators is consistent with the limited evidence available from
country case studies.20 It is interesting that the average threatener reduced its imports from the
U.S. by between 15 and 22 percent after it protested Smoot-Hawley ­ a finding that suggests that
de facto retaliation may have taken place even among countries not traditionally thought to have


18
   The Anglo-Irish Trade war lasted from 1932-38. See O'Rourke (1991) for details. The crisis variable indicates
whether both trade partners are simultaneously experiencing banking crises, as defined in Reinhard and Rogoff
(2009), and adjusted where possible for quarterly dates based on Bernanke and James (1991). If no end date could
be identified, banking crises were coded for four quarters.
19
   100*(1-exp(-0.287)) = 25 percent.
20
   For example, Irwin (2011, p.158) estimates that Canada's 1930 tariffs potentially reduced U.S. exports by 21%.



                                                        16
done so. This is consistent with the historical evidence presented above on Czechoslovak non-
tariff reprisals, as well as with empirical findings in the anti-dumping literature, suggesting that
the threat of countervailing duties being imposed can be sufficient to induce changes in trade
(Staiger and Wolak, 1994).


   C. Robustness Checks and Extensions


       We perform a variety of robustness checks on our gravity model. First, we explore whether
countries' colonial ties might be magnifying the response since not all polities in our analysis made
independent trade-policy decisions. We repeat our gravity regressions for non-colonies (Table 5),
which reduces the sample to 59 sovereign nations. The coefficients on responders, retaliators, and
threateners remain negative and statistically significant. In fact, the effect for sovereign countries
is larger than for the full country sample, with responders reducing imports from the U.S. by 42-
47%, threateners reducing them by 31-39% and retaliators reducing them by 57-62%.
       Next, to test whether any single country is driving the result, we eliminate each retaliator
from the sample and re-estimate the model (Table 6). The average effect on U.S. imports remains
and changes little, regardless of which retaliator is dropped, confirming our main result. Because
two of the retaliators devalued in the same year as Smoot-Hawley (Uruguay and Argentina) we
jointly drop them from the sample and re-estimate the effects. In this specification, both the
coefficients on retaliator and on responder remain negative and statistically significant at the 1-
percent level and 10-percent level, respectively (again, see Table 6).
       Finally, to further our understanding about which sets of trade partners were driving the
results, we split the sample of retaliators into three groups: (1) countries that imposed imperial
preferences (Canada and Australia); (2) those that were part of the gold bloc (France, Italy, and
Switzerland); and (3) the rest (Argentina, Cuba, Mexico, Spain, Uruguay and Paraguay). Table 7
displays the results. For all three groups the results remain negative and statistically significant.
We see the strongest retaliator effect for the imperial preference countries, followed by the Latin
American countries and Spain. It appears that members of the British Empire were particularly
effective at reducing trade with the U.S.; this is consistent with de Bromhead et al. (2019) and
Arthi et al. (2020), who find that British and Indian trade policies induced a substitution towards
imports from the Empire, at the expense of imports coming from elsewhere in the world.



                                                 17
7. Strategic Responses to Smoot Hawley


         A trade war broke out when trade partners retaliated specifically against the U.S. in
response to Smoot-Hawley. We have found that retaliators, and perhaps more surprisingly
threateners, disproportionately reduced their imports from the United States. In order to
accomplish this, policymakers in these countries presumably targeted specific U.S. products for
duties or other trade restrictions (boycotts, quotas, etc), rather than raising duties on all countries'
products in a non-strategic manner (as in general protectionism). Today, targeting another
country's products in a trade war is often done with strategic intentions. For example, in 2017-18,
China retaliated against the Trump administration's tariffs on its goods by raising duties on key
products produced in states that were "electorally sensitive" and/or main exports to China (e.g.,
agricultural goods). In other words, in a trade war, any differential effects would be observable
both at the country and the product level. 21
         The narrative evidence presented in Sections 4 and 5 suggests that strategic retaliation took
a number of forms. For example, Czechoslovakia restricted automobile imports to 750 units from
each of its most favored nations; although in principle this action was non-discriminatory, the
quota was binding for the US, but non-binding for European trade partners such as France
(Eichengreen, 1989). Quotas could also be set in an explicitly discriminatory manner. Overt
discrimination was more difficult when it came to tariffs, given countries' MFN obligations.
Countries could get around this, however, by raising tariffs disproportionately on key U.S. exports.
Higher tariffs on movies, cars, and other goods disproportionately supplied by the United States
might in principle apply equally to all trade partners, consistent with the non-discrimination
principle, but in practice particularly hit U.S. exports.22
         To test whether trade retaliation involved targeting key imports from the U.S. in a strategic
manner, we constructed a second panel data set of 27,840 quarterly observations, consisting of 104
U.S. product categories exported to 59 trade partners from 1926:III through 1932:II. Taking 1928


21
   The narrative evidence does not seem to indicate that retaliators took the additional step of targeting products
from specific states. More than likely, there would have been little short-term gain to adopting this additional
strategy as Hoover had just been inaugurated as President on March 4, 1929.
22
   British Empire countries bypassed their MFN obligations in a more straight-forward manner, arguing that
Imperial Preference did not breach the principle of non-discrimination.


                                                          18
as the benchmark, the product level dataset comprises 35.6% of all U.S. exports in 1928 and
captures the most important U.S. export partners in each product category. It is therefore weighted
toward the most important U.S. export destinations and ­ again taking 1928 as a benchmark ­
includes 42% of U.S. exports to Canada in 1928, 47% of U.S. exports to the United Kingdom, and
34% of U.S. exports to France. We hand collected data from the U.S. Department of Commerce's
United States Monthly Summary of Foreign Commerce. These bilateral-product level data allow
us to examine more precisely whether threateners and retaliators disproportionately targeted
particular imports arriving from the U.S. after Smoot Hawley, and, if so, by how much. More
precisely, the product-level data allow us to construct a measure of "strategic" targeting, specific
to each trade partner. We identify the top 10 exports from the U.S. to each country or colony in
our data set as reported by the U.S. Department of Commerce. We then estimate the following
equations using PPML:


(4)P!./ Q =  + d# 10!.  ./ + !/ + ./ + !. + !./ ,
and
(5)P!./ Q =  + d& 10!.  ./ + d* 10!.  ./ + !,/ + .,/
          + !,. + !./ .


!./ is exports of good i to country j in period t; 10!. is a dummy variable indicating whether,
in 1928, good i was among the top ten U.S. exports to country j. As in Section 6,./ ,
./ , and ./ indicate whether country j was a responder, retaliator, or a
threatener in period t. The d's represent product-time, country-time, and product-country fixed
effects. As a result, the identifying variation in U.S. exports is at the product (group)-trade partner-
time level.
         We estimate equations (4) and (5) using PPML and the results are reported in Table 8. d# ,
d& and d* are estimated to be equal to -0.255, -0.396 and -0.224, respectively.23 Thus, even when
controlling for aggregate U.S. exports to particular markets (./ ), the regression estimates show
that the most important U.S. products exported to responders were disproportionately affected. On

23
  The results are not sensitive to using a cut off of "top 5" or "top 3" exports to a trade partner. They are based on
the product groups that can be consistently identified and do not change labelling or product classification between
1926-1932. Using a broader product classification, allowing for name changes and some re-grouping does not
fundamentally alter the results.


                                                          19
average, chief U.S. exports to retaliators fell by an additional 33% after Smoot Hawley and by an
additional 20% for threateners. Aggregating retaliators and threateners, the main exports to the
average responder dropped by an additional 22.5% after Smoot-Hawley. These results are
consistent with countries targeting goods that were of particular importance to the United States.
A coefficient of the order of 0.2, combined with a trade elasticity of around 5 (see the following
section), could imply that tariffs on top U.S. exports were increased by around 4 percentage points
more than tariffs generally. We stress, however, that our results do not preclude the possibility of
overt discrimination, either via imperial preferences, or via non-tariff barriers to trade, such as
quotas and boycotts (both mentioned in the narrative evidence).
         As discussed in Sections 4 and 5, one U.S. export that may have been singled out for
potential retaliation by multiple countries and repeatedly mentioned in contemporary accounts is
automobiles ­ a fast growing and important U.S. export (Mann, 1930). Chrysler, Ford, and General
Motors were highly visible, American brands sold globally. And, unlike many other leading U.S.
exports, such as copper, cotton, and petroleum, autos were differentiated products, easily
identifiable in their final form. They were also consumer rather than producer goods, so restricting
their supply did not risk hurting domestic industries. Tariffs, quotas, and boycotts of U.S. autos
may have thus been a particularly effective way of carrying out trade reprisals directed at American
exports.
         To test this additional form of targeting, Panel B of Table 8 adds triple-interaction terms to
equations (4) and (5), where the Top10*(retaliator/threatener/responder) terms are interacted with
the product category, automobiles and other vehicles. Consistent with the historical evidence, we
find an additional negative and statistically significant effect on the triple interaction term. As
might be expected, the largest coefficients involve the retaliator dummy (column 2). The
coefficient on the 10!. *retaliator*automobiles interaction is -0.613, indicating that retaliators
reduced their automobile imports from the U.S. by an additional 46%. That said, the effect is also
statistically significant in specifications using threatener and responder dummies. Our results
suggest that while it may have been weaker, de facto retaliation, such as the aforementioned Czech
automobile quotas, occurred in a broader range of countries than sometimes assumed.24


24
  Prior to Smoot-Hawley, autos were consistently a top 10 export from the U.S. to countries in the retaliator group.
Examples include: Canada (2nd), Argentina (1st), Uruguay (1st), Spain (2nd), France (5th), Italy (10th), Cuba (4th), and
Mexico (2nd).


                                                           20
8. Welfare Effects


         What were the welfare effects of the Smoot Hawley trade war? As stressed earlier, the
welfare consequences of protection during a period of mass unemployment such as the Great
Depression are ambiguous. On the one hand, tariffs raise revenue and protect domestic industries
by raising the price of foreign goods, which may have increased welfare (Eichengreen, 1989,
Clemens and Williamson, 2004). On the other hand, welfare gains due to beggar-thy-neighbor
effects would have presumably been diminished or eliminated by the retaliation that is the focus
of this paper.25 Recent research provides new methods for measuring the gains from trade and
evaluating the welfare consequences of past trade policy shocks (Eaton and Kortum, 2002,
Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare, 2012 and Arkolakis, Demidova, Klenow, and
Rodriguez-Clare, 2008, Felbermayr, Jung and Larch, 2015). Relative to other computational
methods, the elegance of the approach lies in its simplicity and the fact that it applies to a wide
class of one-sector trade models that are popular in the literature and that differ with respect to
their assumptions about microeconomic structure.
         A basic insight from this literature is that changes in income due to trade shocks depend
on changes in the terms of trade. For a given country, changes in the terms of trade, relative to
each of its trade partners, can be surmised from the trade elasticity (i.e., one minus the elasticity
of substitution across goods). Under certain assumptions spelled out in Arkolakis, Costinot, and
Rodriguez-Clare (2012) (hereafter, ACR), calculating welfare depends only on (1) the domestic
trade share (a country's trade with itself) and (2) the elasticity of trade (measured using a gravity
equation). This formulation, however, ignores the welfare consequences of tariffs, which affect
real income directly and indirectly (through the entry and exit of firms). Since tariffs are clearly
central to our analysis and discussion of the 1930s, we modify the ACR formula using the methods
discussed in Felbermayr, Jung and Larch (2015) (hereafter, FJL).26 We measure gains from trade
in country j, . , relative to autarky, as:



25
   Crucini and Kahn (2003) also make the point that retaliation could wipe out welfare gains, and in the case of the
U.S., argue that retaliation led to higher input costs for U.S. manufacturers, leading to production distortions.
26
   In their model, ad valorem tariffs redirect consumption toward domestic goods and revenues are lump-sum
transfers to consumers. Tariffs can act as either "cost shifters" or "demand shifters."


                                                         21
                          !"    %
                   )2#3      4 #$
(6) . = 1 - .             #$ ..


where 5 is the trade elasticity of demand, ljj is the domestic expenditure share, and . is a tariff

multiplier.   ljj can be computed as 1 minus the import penetration ratio, which is calculated as
imports as a share of domestic expenditure. 27 Since equation (6) calculates welfare changes
relative to autarky, we use it to calculate the welfare gains from trade in 1929, 1930 and 1931, and
then difference between periods to estimate the effect of Smoot-Hawley. As FJL show, the tariff
multiplier, . does not require information on bilateral tariffs or bilateral trade flows and can be
computed as the share of aggregate tariff revenue in aggregate income. The gains from trade
depend on the term  . We follow FJL and present results for two cases:  = 0 (corresponding
to the Armington, Eaton and Kortum and Krugman models) and  = 0.65 (corresponding to the
Melitz model).
        To obtain a value for 5 , the trade elasticity, we follow Anderson and van Wincoop (2004)
and estimate a gravity equation of the following form:


(7) ln !./ =  !/ + ./ + 5 !./ + !./


where !/ is an exporter-specific term; ./ is an importer-specific term; and !./ captures country-
pair­specific parameters that are distinct from variable trade costs !./ (if any). Since Jacks,
Meissner, and Novy (2008) explicitly estimate trade costs, and for external validity, we employ
their database of annual trade data for the interwar period to estimate equation (5).28 Estimation of
the interwar gravity model produces a value of 5 of -4.76, which is in the range of those surveyed
in the literature for the modern period (Anderson and Van Wincoop, 2004).
        Panels A and B of Table 9 display average changes in welfare for the two types of models
and for different groups of belligerents (retaliators, threateners, and the instigator, the United
States) between the quarters immediately before the passage of Smoot-Hawley and those just after.


27
   The import penetration ratio is computing using total quarterly imports and exports from our data set and GDP
figures from the Jorda-Schularick-Taylor Macrohistory Database. Their GDP are not as inclusive as our trade data,
and so the number of countries we include in our welfare analysis is smaller.
28
   We thank David Jacks and Chris Meissner for generously sharing their data for use in this calculation.


                                                        22
In computing welfare effects, we use the actual domestic expenditure shares before and after
Smoot-Hawley. As emphasized in the literature, this formulation of welfare shuts down a number
of other sources of welfare gains from trade. As a result, much like modern empirical estimates,
the baseline values of gains of trade, relative to (counterfactual) autarky are small ­ in the range
of 1 to 5% for 1929, our baseline year, and even when tariffs are included. Because the total gains
from trade using this methodology are small, changes due to an increase in protection will be even
smaller. The table thus displays welfare changes relative to 1929, not only as percentage changes
in welfare, but as percentages of the total welfare gains from trade.
       The calculations suggest that, for retaliators, welfare declined by 0.3 percentage points
between 1929 and 1930, corresponding to a reduction of 8% in the total welfare gains from trade.
Between 1929 and 1931, welfare declined by roughly 0.6 percentage points or 17% of the total
welfare gains from trade. For threateners, the welfare effects are small but positive, while for the
U.S, they are even smaller, and of mixed signs. As FJL explain, conditional on observed tariff
multipliers and domestic expenditure shares, gains from trade are larger in the Melitz model than
in other quantitative trade models, so the effects in Panel B are slightly larger as a result.
       As noted by previous scholars, the tariff of 1930 that provoked the trade war was substantial
and broad based though not necessarily an optimal tariff, even for a large economy like the U.S.
(Crucini and Kahn, 1996), and it provoked a significant retaliatory response from U.S. trade
partners, largely negating any welfare gains based on our calculations through 1931 ­ a finding
consistent with Irwin (2011). Retaliating countries suffered welfare losses, perhaps because they
did not impose "optimal tariffs," but rather retaliatory tariffs targeting key U.S. products, such as
autos. Another possible explanation is that retaliators may have been particularly impacted by
other shocks affecting domestic expenditure shares at this time, such as Smoot-Hawley itself.


9. Conclusion


       President Trump's recent use of tariffs as a "weapon" to cudgel other nations into changing
their trade policies has renewed interest in understanding what trade wars are and how they affect
flows of goods and services across borders. As our research indicates, the current trade war was
by no means the first one initiated by the U.S. The passage of Smoot-Hawley led to direct
retaliation by important U.S. trade partners. Countries responded to its passage by imposing tariffs



                                                  23
targeting U.S. exports. Although protectionism was on the rise in the 1930s, we collect novel data
and design empirical tests which show that retaliation against Smoot-Hawley was distinctive: it
involved policies specifically directed at the U.S., the initial provocateur.
           Using a new data set on quarterly bilateral trade flows as well as detailed information on
who filed official protests during the legislative debate over the Tariff Act of 1930 and who (later)
retaliated, gravity model estimates demonstrate that U.S. exports were severely affected by the
Smoot-Hawley trade war. Even after controlling for financial crises, the effects of the global
decline in aggregate demand, and the overall decline in partner countries' imports from all sources,
U.S. exports fell substantially. If they had just fallen in line with the overall reduction in imports
in each country, we would have found no effect: instead, they fell disproportionately, by between
15 and 33 percent, depending on the specification and the countries involved. By examining the
effects for protestors as well as retaliators, we are able to more extensively assess the retaliation
against Smoot-Hawley: this was not limited to those countries traditionally regarded as
"retaliators".
           Product-level regression estimates confirm that retaliators were strategic in their response
to Smoot-Hawley (as they have been in more recent trade wars), choosing to bludgeon key U.S.
exports differentially. Fast-growing U.S. exports of automobiles appear to have been particularly
targeted by U.S. trade partners. Our results suggest that MFN constraints did not prevent countries
from effectively retaliating. In addition to strategically targeted tariffs, retaliation involved such
non-tariff measures as quotas, boycotts and increased sales resistance to American goods. Our
results show that this retaliation was extremely effective in reducing U.S. exports. In March 2018,
Peter Navarro famously predicted that no country would retaliate against U.S. tariffs. 29 The
evidence from the 1930s suggests it is a mistake, even for a country as wealthy and powerful as
the United States, to assume that it can engage in a trade war with impunity.




29
     https://twitter.com/MorningsMaria/status/969584638514679810?s=20.



                                                       24
References

Adam, Marc Christopher. 2019. "Return of the Tariffs: The Interwar Trade Collapse Revisited"
FU Berlin, School of Business and Economics Discussion paper.

Amiti, Mary, Sang Hoon Kong, and David Weinstein. 2020. "The Effect of the U.S.- China
Trade War on U.S. Investment" NBER Working Paper 27114.

Amiti, Mary, Stephen J. Redding, and David Weinstein. 2019. "The Impact of the 2018 Tariffs
on Prices and Welfare" Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 33, No. 4, pp.187­ 210.

Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop. 2004. "Trade Costs" Journal of Economic
Literature, Vol. 42, No. 3, pp.691-751.

Arkolakis, Costas, Svetlana Demidova, Peter Klenow and Andrés Rodriguez-Clare. 2008.
"Endogenous Variety and the Gains from Trade" American Economic Review, Vol. 98, No. 2,
pp.444-450.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot and Andrés Rodriguez-Clare. 2012. "New Trade Models,
Same Old Gains" American Economic Review, Vol. 102, No. 1, pp.94-130.

Arthi, Vellore, Markus Lampe, Ashwin R. Nair, and Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke. 2020. "The
Impact of Interwar Protection: Evidence from India" NBER Working Paper 27178.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Harold James. 1991. "The Gold Standard, Deflation, and Financial Crisis
in the Great Depression: An International Comparison" in R. Glenn Hubbard, Financial Markets
and Financial Crises. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER.

Bidwell, Percy W. 1930. "The New American Tariff: Europe's Answer" Foreign Affairs, Vol. 9,
No. 1, pp.13-26.

Bond, Eric, Mario Crucini, Joel Rodrigue and Tristan Potter. 2013. "Misallocation and
Productivity Effects of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff" Review of Economic Dynamics, Vol. 16(1),
pp.120-134.

Callahan, Colleen M., Judith A. McDonald, and Anthony Patrick O'Brien. 1994. "Who Voted
for Smoot-Hawley?" Journal of Economic History Vol. 54, No. 3, pp.683-90.

Clemens, Michael A., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2004. "Why Did the Tariff­Growth
Correlation Change after 1950?" Journal of Economic Growth Vol. 9, No. 1, pp.5-46.

Conybeare, John A. C. 1987. Trade Wars: The Theory and Practice of International Commercial
Rivalry. New York: Guildford: Columbia University Press.

Crucini, Mario. 1994. "Sources of Variation in Real Tariff Rates: The United States, 1900-1940"
American Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 3, pp.732-743.



                                              25
Crucini, Mario J. and James Kahn. 1996. "Tariffs and Aggregate Economic Activity: Lessons
from the Great Depression" Journal of Monetary Economics, December, Vol. 38(3), pp.427-467.

Crucini, Mario J. and James Kahn. 2003. "Tariffs and the Great Depression Revisited" Staff
Report No. 172, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Cupitt, Richard T., and Euel Elliott. 1994. "Schattschneider Revisited: Senate Voting on the
Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930" Economics & Politics Vol. 6, No. 3, pp.187-99.

De Bromhead, Alan, Alan Fernihough, Markus Lampe, and Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke. 2019.
"When Britain Turned Inward: The Impact of Interwar British Protection" American Economic
Review, Vol. 109, No. 2, pp.325-52.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum. 2002. "Technology, Geography, and Trade" Econometrica,
Vol. 70, No. 5, pp.1741-1779.

Eichengreen, Barry. 1989. "The Political Economy of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff" Research in
Economic History, pp.1-35.

Eichengreen, Barry and Douglas Irwin. 1995. "Trade Blocs, Currency Blocs and the
Reorientation of World Trade in the 1930s" Journal of International Economics Vol. 38, pp.1-
24.

Estevadeordal, Antoni, Brian Frantz and Alan M. Taylor. 2003. "The Rise and Fall of World
Trade, 1870-1939" Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 118, No. 2, pp.359-407.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Patrick J. Kennedy, and Amit K. Khandelwal.
2020. "The Return to Protectionism" Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 135, No. 1, pp.1-55.

Felbermayr, Gabriel, Benjamin Jung and Mario Larch. 2015. "The welfare consequences of
import tariffs: A quantitative perspective" Journal of International Economics, Vol. 97 pp.295-
309.

Gowa, Joanne and Raymond Hicks. 2013. "Politics, Institutions, and Trade: Lessons of the
Interwar Era" International Organization, Vol. 67, No. 03, pp. 439-67.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. 1994. "Endogenous Innovation in the Theory of
Growth" Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol.8, No.1, pp. 23-44.

Hayford, Marc and Carl Jr. Pasurka. 1992. "The Political Economy of the Fordney-McCumber
and Smoot-Hawley Tariff Acts" Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 29, No.1, pp.30-50.

Head, Keith, Mayer, Thierry, & John Ries. 2010. "The Erosion of Colonial Trade Linkages after
Independence" Journal of International Economics, Vol. 81, No. 1, pp.1-14.




                                               26
Irwin, Douglas A. 1998a. "The Smoot-Hawley Tariff: A Quantitative Assessment" Review of
Economics and Statistics Vol.80, No. 2, pp.326-34.

Irwin, Douglas A. 1998b. "From Smoot-Hawley to Reciprocal Trade Agreements: Changing the
Course of U.S. Trade Policy in the 1930s" In The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and
the American Economy in the Twentieth Century, edited by Michael D. Bordo, Claudia Goldin
and Eugene N. White 325-52. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Irwin, Douglas A. 2011. Peddling Protectionism: Smoot-Hawley and the Great Depression.
Princeton, N.J.; Oxford: Princeton University Press.

Irwin, Douglas A. 2017. Clashing over Commerce: A History of US Trade Policy, Markets and
Governments in Economic History. Chicago, London: The University of Chicago Press.

Irwin, Douglas A., and Randall S. Kroszner. 1996. "Log-Rolling and Economic Interests in the
Passage of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff" Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy
Vol. 45, pp.173-200.

Jacks, David, Meissner, Chris, and Dennis Novy. 2008. "Trade Costs, 1870-2000" American
Economic Review, Vol. 98, No. 2, pp. 529-34.

Jacks, David and Dennis Novy. 2019. "Trade Blocks and Trade Wars during the Interwar
Period" CEPR Discussion Paper 13716.

James, Harold. 2001. The End of Globalization Lessons from the Great Depression, Harvard
University Press Cambridge, MA.

Jones, Joseph M. 1934. Tariff Retaliation: Repercussions of the Hawley-Smoot Bill University of
Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.

Kindleberger, Charles. 1973. "Commercial Policy Between the Wars" in Peter Mathias and
Sidney Pollard (Eds.) The Cambridge Economic History of Europe from the Decline of the
Roman Empire, pp.61-93.

Kitson, Michael and Solomos Solomou. 1990. Protectionism and Economic Revival: The British
Interwar Economy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Kottman, Richard N. 1975. "Herbert Hoover and the Smoot-Hawley Tariff: Canada, A Case
Study" Journal of American History, Vol. 62, No. 3, pp. 609-635.

League of Nations. various years. Memorandum on International Trade and the Balance of
Payments and International Trade Statistics. Geneva: League of Nations.

Madsen, Jacob, B. 2001. "Trade Barriers and the Collapse of World Trade during the Great
Depression" Southern Economic Journal Vol. 67, No. 4, pp.848-868.




                                              27
Mann, Catherine L. 1987. "Protection and Retaliation: Changing the `Rules of the Game'"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1987, No. 1, pp.311-335.

Mann, Lawrence B. 1930. "Foreign Reactions to the American Tariff Act" Foreign Policy
Reports, Foreign Policy Association, pp.261-78.

Mann, Thomas C. 1958. "American Trade Policy and the Lessons of the 1930s" Department of
State Bulletin, Vol. 38, No. 98, pp.895-8.

McDonald, Judith A., Anthony Patrick O'Brien, and Colleen M. Callahan. 1997. "Trade Wars:
Canada 's Reaction to the Smoot-Hawley Tariff" Journal of Economic History, Vol. 57, No. 4,
pp.802-26.

Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh and Alan Taylor. 2004. Monetary, "Sovereignty,
Exchange Rates and Capital Controls: the Trilemma in the Interwar Period" IMF Staff Papers,
Vol. 51, IMF Fourth Annual Research Conference, pp.75-108.

O'Rourke, Kevin. 1991. "Burn Everything British but Their Coal: The Anglo-Irish Economic
War of the 1930s" Journal of Economic History, Vol. 51, No. 2, pp.357-366.

Pastor, Robert A. 1980. Congress and the Politics of U.S. Foreign Economic Policy, 1929-1976.
Berkeley, California: University of California Press.

Ritschl, Albrecht and Nikolaus Wolf. 2011. "Endogeneity of Currency Areas and Trade Blocs:
Evidence from a Natural Experiment" Kyklos, Vol 64, No. 2, pp.291-312.

Santos Silva, J. M. C. and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. "The Log of Gravity" Review of Economics
and Statistics, Vol. 88, No. 4, pp. 641-658.




                                             28
Table 1. Ten largest U.S. trade partners in 1928


                  U.S. Exports to                                       U.S. Imports from
  Trade Partner    Total Exports      Percent of        Trade Partner     Total Imports      Percent of
                   ($ Millions)         Total                              ($ Millions)        Total
                                       Exports                                                Imports
 Great Britain     917.8             18.1               Canada            440.3             11.7
 Canada            811.9             16.0               Japan             351.6             9.3
 Germany           483.2             9.5                Great Britain     303.1             8.0
 Japan             265.0             5.2                British East 234.1                  6.2
                                                        Indies
 France            216.9             4.3                Germany      211.5                  5.6
 Italy             184.4             3.6                Brazil            202.9             5.4
 Argentina         175.0             3.4                Mexico            198.5             5.3
 Australia &       164.5             3.2                Cuba              187.0             5.0
 New Zealand
 Cuba              127.6             2.5                India             158.3             4.2
 Netherlands       127.0             1.2                France            127.7             3.4
Source: Authors' calculations based on domestic country sources. See appendix A. Bold indicates
that a country retaliated, italics indicates that a country petitioned, countries in bold and italics
petitioned and retaliated.




                                                   29
Table 2. Protesters, Retaliators, and U.S. Imports after Smoot-Hawley
                                     Percentage Change        Protester (date of
                                       in U.S. Imports              first        Retaliator
 Country                              (4/1929 ­ 4/1932)       correspondence)
 Ireland                                    -92.3
 Argentina                                  -82.3                  8/20/1929              X
 Uruguay                                    -79.3                   6/8/1929              X

 Latvia                                      -72.0                 7/30/1929
 Great Britain                               -71.3                 2/26/1929
 India                                       -69.5                 6/29/1929
 Germany                                     -68.3                 8/15/1929
 Austria                                     -67.3                  6/8/1929
 Australia and New Zealand                   -67.1                 6/28/1929              X
 Canada                                      -60.1                 3/15/1929              X
 Spain                                       -57.4                 4/26/1929              X
 Czechoslovakia                              -54.2                  7/5/1929
 Mexico                                      -53.8                 6/20/1929              X
 Japan                                       -52.8                 7/25/1929
 British West Indies                         -52.0                 6/22/1929
 Netherlands                                 -51.8                 6/12/1929
 France                                      -47.7                 5/21/1929              X

 Greece                                      -47.1                 6/19/1929
 Cuba                                        -45.9                                        X
 Italy                                       -45.5                 5/27/1929              X
 Iran, Iraq and Afghanistan                  -44.5                 3/12/1929
 Denmark                                     -43.4                 5/14/1929
 Dominican Republic                          -37.0                 4/15/1929
 Turkey                                      -33.5                 6/18/1929
 Belgium and Luxembourg                      -29.5                 5/24/1929
 Switzerland                                 -20.2                 6/10/1929              X
 Sweden                                      -15.7                  7/1/1929
 Portugal                                    -15.5                  8/3/1929
 Finland                                      -5.7                 7/23/1929
 Honduras                                     -2.0                 3/23/1929
 Guatemala                                    11.6                  3/9/1929
 Norway                                       25.6                  6/1/1929
 Romania                                     119.3                 6/27/1929

Note: Protesters filed petitions with the U.S. State Department. Retaliators imposed tariffs in response to Smoot-
Hawley as per Mann (1930) and Jones (1934). Threateners are the subset of protesters who were not retaliators.



                                                       30
Table 3. Predicting who Responded to Smoot-Hawley


 Independent Variable
 Exports to the U.S. as
 share of total exports          2.122*                                                1.903
                                 (1.273)                                              (1.921)

 Trade Balance as share of                         3.436***                           4.085**
 total trade                                        (1.221)                           (1.863)

 Trade Balance versus                                                3.048*            -2.624
 U.S. as share of total                                              (1.557)          (3.363)
 trade

 Most Favored Nation              0.325             -0.074            0.360            -0.017
 Clause                          (0.513)           (0.528)           (0.484)          (0.549)

 Polity Score                   0.139***           0.141***         0.131***         0.145***
                                (0.0395)            (0.044)          (0.041)          (0.040)

 Indebtedness Dummy               -0.404            -0.375            -0.522           -0.297
                                 (0.664)           (0.792)           (0.715)          (0.777)


 Continent Dummies                YES                YES              YES              YES
 Pseudo R2                       0.3401             0.4132           0.3397           0.4222
 Observations                      44                 44               43               43



Notes: The dependent variable takes on a value of 1 when an economy filed a formal complaint
with the U.S. State Department during the debate on Smoot-Hawley or when countries imposed
retaliatory tariffs in response to the passage of Smoot-Hawley. Regression estimates based on
probit analysis. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                              31
Table 4. The Effects of Retaliation on Imports
(Dependent Variable: (Log) Bilateral Imports)


                                                            Estimation Procedure
                                             OLS          PPML        OLS              PPML
 Independent Variable
 Responder                                   -0.287*** -0.194***
                                             (0.102)   (0.061)
 Retaliator                                                             -0.396***      -0.333***
                                                                        (0.109)        (0.084)
 Threatener                                                             -0.248**       -0.157**
                                                                        (0.113)        (0.064)
 Constant                                    12.65***     16.68***      12.65***       16.68***
                                             (0.005)      (0.008)       (0.005)        (0.008)

 Pairwise, time-varying control variables    YES          YES           YES            YES
 Observations                                96,101       105,923       96,101         105,923
 (Pseudo) R-squared                          0.918                      0.918


Notes: All regressions include exporter-time, importer-time, and pair fixed effects, as well as
pairwise, time-varying controls for membership of the sterling, Reichsmark and gold blocs and the
British imperial preference system; the Anglo-Irish trade war; RTAA agreements with the United
States; and simultaneous financial crises. In the OLS specifications, bilateral imports are measured
in logs. Standard errors are clustered at the country-product level and shown in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                32
Table 5. Robustness Checks - The Effects of Retaliation on Imports ­ Sovereign Countries
(Dependent Variable: (Log) Bilateral Imports)



                                                          Estimation Procedure
                                             OLS          PPML          OLS           PPML
 Independent Variable
 Responder                                   -0.537***    -0.634***
                                             (0.089)      (0.049)
 Retaliator                                                              -0.957***    -0.849***
                                                                         (0.087)      (0.063)
 Threatener                                                              -0.372***    -0.502***
                                                                         (0.099)      (0.100)

 Constant                                    12.87***     16.79***       12.87***     16.79***
                                             (0.005)      (0.007)        (0.005)      (0.009)

 Pairwise, time-varying control variables    YES          YES            YES          YES
 Fixed effects                               YES          YES            YES          YES
 Observations                                67671        72754          67671        72754
 (Pseudo) R-squared                          0.875                       0.875


Notes: All regressions include exporter-time, importer-time, and pair fixed effects, as well as
pairwise, time-varying controls for membership of the sterling, Reichsmark and gold blocs and the
British imperial preference system; the Anglo-Irish trade war; RTAA agreements with the United
States; and simultaneous financial crises. In the OLS specifications, bilateral imports are measured
in logs. Standard errors are clustered at the country-product level and shown in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                33
Table 6. Dropping Individual Retaliators from the Sample
(Dependent Variable: (Log) Bilateral Imports)

                                                  Estimation Procedure
                          Independent
 Omitted Country          Variable                OLS            PPML

 Canada                   Retaliator              -0.483***      -0.384***
                                                  (0.12)         (0.11)

 France                   Retaliator              -0.428***      -0.411***
                                                  (0.11)         (0.09)

 Italy                    Retaliator              -0.416***      -0.340***
                                                  (0.11)         (0.09)

 Spain                    Retaliator              -0.397***      -0.340***
                                                  (0.11)         (0.09)

 Switzerland              Retaliator              -0.420***      -0.343***
                                                  (0.12)         (0.09)

 Argentina                Retaliator             -0.373***       -0.327***
                                                 (0.11)          (0.09)

 Mexico                   Retaliator             -0.377***       -0.338***
                                                 (0.11)          (0.09)
 Cuba                     Retaliator             -0.426***       -0.343***
                                                 (0.11)          (0.09)
 Australia &              Retaliator             -0.362***       -0.270***
 New Zealand                                     (0.11)          (0.07)

 Uruguay &                Retaliator             -0.384***       -0.327***
 Paraguay                                        (0.11)          (0.08)

 Argentina, Uruguay,      Retaliator             -0.332***       -0.287***
 & Paraguay combined                             (0.11)          (0.08)

Notes: Regression estimates and extended note are as in Table 4, with the exception of the "omitted
country," which is dropped from the sample in the estimation. See text for details. Results for
additional U.S. trade partners are available from the authors. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                34
Table 7. Robustness Checks - Differentiating the Retaliators
(Dependent Variable: (Log) Bilateral Imports)



                                             Estimation Procedure

 Independent Variable                        OLS          PPML
 Retaliators with Imperial Preferences       -0.549***    -0.553***
                                             (0.202)      (0.145)
 Retaliators in Gold Bloc                    -0.260**     -0.210**
                                             (0.113)      (0.083)
 Remaining Retaliators                       -0.452***    -0.364***
                                             (0.132)      (0.081)
 Threatener                                  -0.252**     -0.156**
                                             (0.114)      (0.062)
 Constant                                    12.65***     16.70***
                                             (0.005)      (0.007)

 Pairwise, time-varying control variables    YES          YES
 Fixed effects                               YES          YES
 Observations                                96101        105923
 (Pseudo) R-squared                          0.918

Notes: All regressions include exporter-time, importer-time, and pair fixed effects, as well as
pairwise, time-varying controls for membership of the sterling and Reichsmark blocs; the Anglo-
Irish trade war; RTAA agreements with the United States; and simultaneous financial crises. In
the OLS specifications, bilateral imports are measured in logs. Standard errors are clustered at the
country-product level and shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                35
Table 8. The Effects of Retaliation on Product Level U.S. Exports
(Dependent Variable: (Log) Bilateral Exports)

Panel A
 Independent Variable                   Coefficient Estimate

 Constant                                14.28***       14.29***
                                         (0.00)         (0.000)
 Responder*Top10                         -0.255***
                                         (0.000)
 Retaliator*Top10                                       -0.396***
                                                        (0.127)
 Threatener*Top10                                       -0.224***
                                                        (0.068)

 Pseudo R-squared                        0.94           0.94

Panel B
 Constant                                14.28***      14.28***
                                         (0.018)       (0.018)
 Responder*Top10                         -0.219***
                                         (0.066)
 Responder*Top10*Automobile              -0.303*
                                         (0.158)
 Retaliator*Top10                                      -0.315**
                                                       (0.125)
 Retaliator*Top10*Automobile                           -0.613***
                                                       (0.262)
 Threatener*Top10                                      -0.191**
                                                       (0.064)
 Threatener*Top10*Automobile                           -0.279*
                                                       (0.144)

 Pseudo R-squared                        0.94          0.94
 Number of Observations                  21,361        21,361

Notes: See variable definitions in the text. All regressions are estimated using PPML and include
country*time, good*time, and good*country fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
country-product level and shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                36
Table 9. Welfare Impact of Smoot-Hawley Trade War



 Average change in welfare for different groups:  = 

                                   Change in Welfare                    Percentage Change in
                                   (percentage points)                     Welfare from:

                            1929 to 1930       1929 to 1931        1929 to 1930       1929 to 1931
 Threateners (15)               0.232             0.138                3.1%              3.4%
 Retaliators (7)               -0.280             -0.559              -8.5%             -17.6%
 US                             0.067             -0.103               9.2%             -14.2%




 Average change in welfare for different groups:  = . 

                                     Change in Welfare                      Percentage Change in
                                     (percentage points)                       Welfare from:

                              1929 to 1930          1929 to 1931      1929 to 1930        1929 to 1931
 Threateners (15)                 0.267                 0.197             3.3%               4.5%
 Retaliators (7)                 -0.310                -0.604            -8.4%              -17.1%
 US                               0.075                -0.114             9.4%              -14.2%

Notes: Calculations are based on the methods outlined in Felbermayr et al. (JIE, 2015).




                                               37
Figure 1. U.S. Exports and Imports before and after passage of Smoot-Hawley

                               US exports by group
               1500
  US exports (in Millions)
    500           1000




                                 S_H
               0




                     1925q1   1930q1            1935q1              1940q1

                               responder        non-responder
                                                                          s

                               US imports by group
               800
   US imports (in Millions)
  200     400          600




                                 S_H
               0




                     1925q1   1930q1            1935q1              1940q1

                               responder        non-responder




                                           38
Figure 2. Imports from the U.S. before and after Smoot-Hawley

                                         Retaliator Imports from the US (million USD)
                                    Canada                                                       France                                                              Italy                                                     Spain
      300




                                                                              100




                                                                                                                                                                                                   30
                                                                                                                                           80
                                                                                                                                           60
      200




                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                              50




                                                                                                                                           40
      100




                                                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                                           20
      0




                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                  1925q1     1930q1       1935q1       1940q1                  1925q1         1930q1    1935q1                   1940q1     1925q1     1930q1                1935q1      1940q1     1925q1                 1930q1    1935q1      1940q1


                                Argentina                                                        Mexico                                                 Switzerland                                     Australia & New Zealand




                                                                                                                                           15




                                                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                              40
      60




                                                                              30




                                                                                                                                           10




                                                                                                                                                                                                   40
      40




                                                                              20




                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
      20




                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                              10
      0




                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                  1925q1     1930q1       1935q1       1940q1                  1925q1         1930q1    1935q1                   1940q1     1925q1     1930q1                1935q1      1940q1     1925q1                 1930q1    1935q1      1940q1


                     Uruguay & Paraguay                                                           Cuba
                                                                              60
      10
      8




                                                                              40
      6
      4




                                                                              20
      2
      0




                                                                              0




                  1925q1     1930q1       1935q1       1940q1                  1925q1         1930q1    1935q1                   1940q1




                                       Threatener Imports from the US (million USD)
                    Iran Iraq Afghanistan                                           Austria                                  Belgium and Luxembourg                          British West Indies                              Czechoslovakia
                                                                                                           0 10 20 30 40




                                                                                                                                                             0 2 4 6 8 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                            10 15
  0 1 2 3 4




                                                       6
                                                       4
                                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




         1925q1            1930q1    1935q1   1940q1                   1925q31928q31931q31934q31937q3             1925q1          1930q1   1935q1   1940q1          1925q1      1930q1    1935q1   1940q1         1925q1       1930q1   1935q1    1940q1


                             Germany                                                Denmark                                    Dominican Republic                                     Egypt                                         Finland
  200




                                                       0 5 10 15 20




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0 2 4 6 8 10
                                                                                                             0 1 2 3 4 5 6




                                                                                                                                                             0 1 2 3 4 5 6
  100
  0




         1925q1            1930q1    1935q1   1940q1          1925q1          1930q1    1935q1    1940q1            1925q1        1930q1   1935q1   1940q1          1925q1      1930q1    1935q1   1940q1         1925q1       1930q1   1935q1    1940q1


                           Great Britain                                            Greece                                         Guatemala                                     Honduras                                            India
  400




                                                       0 2 4 6 8 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0 5 10152025
                                                                                                             0 1 2 3 4




                                                                                                                                                             0 1 2 3 4
  200
  0




         1925q1            1930q1    1935q1   1940q1          1925q1          1930q1    1935q1    1940q1            1925q1        1930q1   1935q1   1940q1          1925q1      1930q1    1935q1   1940q1         1925q1       1930q1   1935q1    1940q1


                              Ireland                                                Japan                                            Latvia                                    Netherlands                                         Norway
                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                 100
  10 15




                                                                                                                                                             0 1020304050




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0 2 4 6 8 10
                                                       0 20406080




                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                             .5
  5
  0




                                                                                                             0




         1925q1            1930q1    1935q1   1940q1          1925q1          1930q1    1935q1    1940q1            1925q1        1930q1   1935q1   1940q1          1925q1      1930q1    1935q1   1940q1         1925q1       1930q1   1935q1    1940q1


                             Portugal                                               Romania                                         Sweden                                         Turkey
                                                                                                             0 5 10152025
  0 1 2 3 4 5 6




                                                       3




                                                                                                                                                             6
                                                       2




                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                             0




         1925q1            1930q1    1935q1   1940q1          1925q1          1930q1    1935q1    1940q1            1925q1        1930q1   1935q1   1940q1          1925q1      1930q1    1935q1   1940q1




                                                                                                                                                      39
Appendix A: Trade Data from Country Sources


Austria: Statistik das Aussenhandles
February 1930 through January 1939, monthly

Belgium: Comptes Speciaux par Pays de Provence et de Destination: Part 1

Brazil: Foreign Trade
1932-1939, quarterly

Bulgaria: Bulletin Statistique Mensuel
June 1920 through December 1939, monthly

Canada: Monthly Report of the Trade of Canada: Imports for Consumption and
Exports. Canada, Dominion Bureau of Statistics
January 1929 through December 1939, monthly

Czechoslovakia: Monthly Summary of Foreign Trade
April 1924 through June 1939, monthly

Denmark: Handelsstatistiske Meddelelser
January 1927 through December 1940, monthly

Egypt: Foreign Trade
January 1919 through September 1940, monthly

Estonia: Eesti Statistika
January 1923 through December 1937, monthly

Finland: Ulkomaankauppa Utrikes Handel, Commerce Extérieur de la Finlande,
Finland, Tilastokeskus, Helsinki.
January 1921 through August 1939, monthly

France: Statistique Mensuelle du Commerce Exterieur de la France,
January 1919- December 1938, monthly

Germany: Monatliche Nachweise über den auswärtigen Handel Deutschlands,
1924 through Quarter 1 1937, quarterly; March 1937 through October 1939,
monthly.




                                           40
Great Britain: Accounts Relating to Trade and Navigation of the United
Kingdom. January 1920-July 1939, monthly. Sir Auckland Geddes, ordered by The
House of Commons, London: Published by his majesty's stationary office.

Greece: Bulletin Mensuel du Commerce Special
January 1925 through August 1940, monthly

Hong Kong: Trade and Shipping Returns
April 1930 through December 1940, monthly

Hungary: Statisztikai Havi Kozlemenyek
1925 through 1936, quarterly.

Iceland: Statistical Yearbook
July 1934 ­ December 1934 and May 1935 ­ November 1941, monthly.

India: Trade and Navigation
January 1922 through December 1940, monthly

Ireland: Trade and Shipping Returns

Italy: Movimento Commerciale del Regno D'Italia, Ministero dello Finanze,
Officion Trattati e Lebislazione Doganale, (1919-1935years?)

Japan: Monthly Return of the Foreign Trade of the Empire of Japan

Latvia: Commerce et Transit
1929 through 1938, monthly

Lithuania: Bulletin Statistique
November 1923 through August 1939, monthly

Malaya: Imports and Exports
July 1921 through December 1936, monthly

Mexico: Commercio Exterior Y Navegacion, January 1928- December 1929 and
Revista de Economia Y Edstadistica, April 1932-Februrary 1940, monthly.

Netherlands: Handelsverkeer
Quarter 1 1934-Quarter 3 1939, quarterly




                                            41
Norway: Statistiske Meddelelser
Quarter 1 1932 through October 1939, quarterly

Palestine: Commercial Bulletin
July 1924 through October 1939, monthly

Poland: Handel z Poszczególnemi Krajami
January 1925 through May 1939, monthly starting in January 1927

Romania: Commerce Exterieur
October-December 1935 and April 1937 ­ January 1939, monthly

Sierra Leone: Royal Gazette Trade Supplement
January 1931 through January 1940, monthly.

South Africa: Monthly Trade
Dates: 1919 through 1934, quarterly

Switzerland: Statistique Mensuelle du Commerce Exterieur
January 1925 through December 1940, monthly

Sweden: Commersiella Meddelanden
January 1933 ­ September 1939, monthly

Turkey: Commerce Exterieur
1934 through 1939, monthly

United States: Monthly Summary of the Foreign Commerce of the United States
January 1917 through September 1941, monthly




                                            42
Appendix B: Grouping of Countries for the Analysis

 Aggregate used in Estimation        Countries/Regions included
 ARABIA                              Bahrein, British Arabia, Hadramout, Hedjaz, Hejaz
                                     Arabia and Mesopotamia, Hejaz-Nejd, Kuwait,
                                     Muscat Territory and Trucial Oman, Muscat Oman
                                     Trucial Oman and Kuwait, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Saudi
                                     Arabia and Yemen, Socotora, Yemen
 ASCENSION FALKLANDS                 Ascension, Ascension and St Helena, Falklands, St
 ST.HELENA                           Helena, Tristan da Cunha
 BELGIAN AFRICA                      Belgian Colonies, Belgian Congo, Congo, Ruanda and
                                     Burundi, Rwanda
 BELGIUM AND LUXEMBURG               Belgium, Luxemburg
 BHUTAN AND NEPAL                    Bhutan, Nepal
 BRITISH EAST AFRICA                 British East and West Equatorial Africa, British East
                                     Equatorial Africa, British Somaliland, Kenya, Kenya
                                     and Uganda, Kenya Uganda and Tanganyika,
                                     Tanganyika, Uganda, Zanzibar, Zanzibar and Pemba
 BRITISH EAST INDIES                 British Borneo, British Malacca, British Malaya,
                                     British North Borneo, Brunei, Federated Malay States,
                                     Malakka, Malay States, Malaysia, North Borneo, other
                                     British East Indies, Sarawak, Singapore, Straits and
                                     FMS, Straits Settlements, Straits Settlements and
                                     Labuan, unfederated Malay States
 BRITISH MEDITERRANEAN               Cyprus, Gibraltar, Gibraltar et Malta, Malta, Malta
                                     and Gozo, Malta Gozo and Cyprus
 BRITISH OCEANIA                     Australasia, Australia, Australia and New Zealand,
                                     Australia Oceania, British Solomon Islands, Cook
                                     Islands, Fiji, Gilberte and Ellice Islands, Nauru, Nauru
                                     and British Samoa, Nauru and Western Samoa, New
                                     Guinea, New Hebrides, New Zealand, New Zealand
                                     and Oceania, other Australia, other British Oceania,
                                     other islands in the Pacific (British), Papua, Papua
                                     New Guinea, Ross Dependency, Samoa, Tonga
 BRITISH SOUTHERN AFRICA             North Eastern Rhodesia, North West Rhodesia,
                                     Northern Rhodesia, Northern Rhodesia/Congo Basin,
                                     Nyasaland, other British South Africa, Rhodesia,
                                     Southern Rhodesia
 BRITISH SUDAN                       Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, Sudan
 BRITISH WEST AFRICA                 British Cameroon, British Togo, British West
                                     Equatorial Africa, Gambia, Gold Coast, Gold Coast
                                     and British Togoland, Nigeria, Nigeria and British
                                     Cameroon, other British West Africa, Sierra Leone
 BRITISH WEST INDIES                 Antigua, Antilles and British Guiana, Bahamas,
                                     Barbados, Bermuda, British Antilles, British Guiana,
                                     British Honduras, Cayman Islands, Grenada, Guiana,


                                           43
                          Jamaica, Jamaica and Antilles, Leeward Islands, other
                          British Caribbean, other British West Indies, St
                          Christopher, St Lucia, St Vincent, Trinidad, Trinidad
                          and Tobago, Union Island, Winward Islands
CHINA                     China and Manchuria, other China
COLOMBIA                  Colombia and Galapagos
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC        San Domingo
DUTCH EAST INDIES         Borneo and Java, Dutch Borneo, Dutch India, Dutch
                          New Guinea, Java and Madura, other Dutch East
                          Indies, other Dutch possessions in the Indian Seas
DUTCH WEST INDIES         Curacao, Dutch Antilles, Dutch Guiana
FRANCE                    Alsace Lorraine
FRENCH EAST AFRICA        French Somali Coast
FRENCH EAST INDIES        Cochin China, French India, French Indochina, Indo-
                          china
FRENCH NORTH AFRICA       Algeria, Algeria and Tunis, French Morocco,
                          French Morocco and Tanger, Morocco, Tunis, Tunisia
FRENCH OCEANIA            New Caledonia, Society Islands
FRENCH WEST AFRICA        Cote d'Ivoire, Dahomey, Dakar, French Cameroon,
                          French Congo, French Equatorial Africa, French
                          Guinea, French Niger, French Sudan, French Togo,
                          French West and Equatorial Africa, French West
                          Equatorial Africa, Mauritania, other French West
                          Africa, Senegal, Togo, Upper Volta
FRENCH WEST INDIES        French Antilles, French Guiana, Guadeloupe,
                          Martinique
GERMANY                   North Sea Free Ports
INDIA                     Aden, British India and Burma, British India and
                          Ceylon, Burma, Ceylon, other British India
IRAN IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN Afghanistan, Iran, Iran and Afghanistan, Iraq, Iraq and
                          Afghanistan, Mesopotamia, Persia Mesopotamia
                          Afghanistan
ITALIAN AFRICA            Cyrenaica, Eritrea, Eritrea and Italian Somali Coast,
                          Italian East Africa, Italian Somaliland, Libya, other
                          Italian Africa, Tripoli, Tripolitania and Cyrenaica
ITALY                     Dodecanese, Italian Aegean Islands, Trieste
JAPAN                     Chosen, Formosa, Japan (including Formosa and
                          Japanese leased territories in China), Japan and
                          Formosa, Japan and Korea, Japanese Islands, Japanese
                          Oceania, Korea, South Sea Mandate
MADAGASCAR AND REUNION    Madagascar, Reunion
MANCHUKUO AND KWANTUNG Manchukuo
MAURITIUS AND SEYCHELLES  Mauritius, Seychelles
NORWAY                    Spitzbergen
PALESTINE                 Palestine and Transjordan, Transjordan
PANAMA                    Panama (including canal zone), Panama Canal Zone


                                       44
PHILIPPINES AND GUAM       Philippines, Guam
POLAND AND DANZIG          Poland, Danzig
PORTUGUESE ASIA            Goa, Macao, other Portuguese Asia, Portuguese
                           possessions in the Indian Seas, Portuguese East Indies,
                           Portuguese India, Portuguese possessions in the
                           Orient, Portuguese Timor
PORTUGAL                   Azores, Azores and Madeira, Madeira
PORTUGUESE AFRICA          Cape Verde, Mozambique, other Portuguese Africa,
                           Portuguese East Africa, Portuguese Guinea,
                           Portuguese West Africa, Sao Thomé, Sao Thomé et
                           Principe
SAMOA                      American Oceania, American Samoa
SOUTH AFRICA               Basutoland, Bechunnaland Protectorate,
                           Bechunnaland Protectorate Basutoland and Swaziland,
                           Swaziland
SPAIN                      Canaries, Ceuta, Melilla
SPANISH NORTH AFRICA       Spanish Fez, Spanish Morocco, Spanish Morocco and
                           Canary Islands
SPANISH WEST AFRICA        Rio de Oro, Spanish Guinea, Spanish West Equatorial
                           Africa
SWITZERLAND                Liechtenstein
SYRIA                      French Syria, Syria Lebanon
TURKEY                     Asia Minor
UNITED KINGDOM             Channel Islands, England, Great Britain, Northern
                           Ireland
URUGUAY AND PARAGUAY       Uruguay, Paraguay
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA   Alaska
VENEZUELA AND GUIANA       Venezuela, Guiana
VIRGIN ISLANDS             American Antilles, St Croix, US Virgin Islands, US
                           West Indies
YUGOSLAVIA AND ALBANIA     Yugoslavia, Albania




                                 45
