                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




FINANCIAL AND TOTAL WEALTH INEQUALITY WITH DECLINING INTEREST RATES

                                     Daniel L. Greenwald
                                      Matteo Leombroni
                                         Hanno Lustig
                                   Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh

                                      Working Paper 28613
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28613


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2021, Revised April 2021




The authors thank Sebas-tian Hanson and Yuan Tian for excellent research assistance. We thank
Adrien Auclert, Ben Moll, Sylvain Catherine, Peter DeMarzo, and seminar participants at
Stanford GSB and Columbia GSB. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Daniel L. Greenwald, Matteo Leombroni, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial and Total Wealth Inequality with Declining Interest Rates
Daniel L. Greenwald, Matteo Leombroni, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 28613
March 2021, Revised April 2021
JEL No. E01,E1,E21,E24,E25,E44,G11,G5

                                         ABSTRACT

Financial wealth inequality and long-term real interest rates track each other closely over the
post-war period. Faced with unanticipated lower real rates, households which rely more on
financial wealth must see large capital gains to afford the consumption that they planned before
the decline in rates. Lower rates beget higher financial wealth inequality. Inequality in total
wealth, the sum of financial and human wealth and the relevant concept for house-hold welfare,
rises much less than financial wealth inequality and even declines at the top of the wealth
distribution. A standard incomplete markets model reproduces the observed in-crease in financial
wealth inequality in response to a decline in real interest rates because high financial-wealth
households have a financial portfolio with high duration.

Daniel L. Greenwald                            Hanno Lustig
MIT Sloan School of Management                 Stanford Graduate School of Business
100 Main Street, E62-641                       655 Knight Way
Cambridge, MA 02142                            Stanford, CA 94305
dlg@mit.edu                                    and NBER
                                               hlustig@stanford.edu
Matteo Leombroni
Department of Economics                        Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Stanford University                            Columbia University
579 Jane Stanford Way                          Graduate school of Business
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                        Uris Hall, office 809
leombm@stanford.edu                            3022 Broadway
                                               New York, NY 10027
                                               and NBER
                                               svnieuwe@gsb.columbia.edu
1   Introduction

Financial wealth inequality has increased substantially over the past several decades in the U.S.
and many other countries. According to the World Inequality Database, the fraction of U.S. finan-
cial wealth held by the top-10% wealthiest households has increased from 63.0% in the 1980s to
71.9% in the 2010s, an increase of 8.9% points. The share of financial wealth held by the top-1% in-
creased from 24.6% to 35.1% over the same period, a 10.5% point increase. Over the same period,
long term nominal rates have declined dramatically. The 10-year U.S. nominal Treasury yield de-
clined from 10.6% in the 1980s to 2.4% in the 2010s. Given that 10-year average expected inflation
fell by much less than 8 percentage points over this period, and not at all since 2003, real rates
declined as well. The 10-year real bond yield averaged 2.1% in 2003 before falling to 0.3% in 2016
and -0.60% in 2020. We argue that these two changes are related. Large changes in the distribution
of financial wealth are to be expected if households want to finance the same consumption stream
in the low rate environment as the one that they had planned prior to the onset of lower rates.
    Consider a simple example to fix ideas. Figure 1 plots the cost of a savings instrument that
provides $1 of consumption in each of the next thirty years. The price of this 30-year real annuity
is about $30 in the early 1950s. The price then falls to a low of $12.5 in 1981.Q3 when long-term real
interest rates peak. As interest rates fall over the next three decades, the price of the consumption
annuity more than doubles to $29.1 in 2012.Q4. A 50-year old in 1982 who wants to spend $10,000
per year for the next 30 years had to set aside $125,000. In 2012, a 50-year old with the same desire
needs $291,000, or 2.5 times as much financial wealth. In contrast, a 30-year old with many more
years left in the labor market is partially hedged against this real interest rate change. The market
value of the 30-year old's human wealth in 2019 is much larger than that of the 30-year old in
1982 as the valuation reflects the lower interest rates. She may not need to adjust financial savings
to the same extent as the 50-year old to afford the same consumption plan. This example also
illustrates how inequality in total wealth, the sum of financial and human wealth, may behave
very differently from that in financial wealth in the face of declining interest rates. The 30-year
old has little financial wealth while the 50-year old has little human wealth. Figure 1 shows that
the top wealth share and the cost of the real annuity comove strongly in the U.S. We find the same
pattern in the U.K and in France.
    This evidence suggests that large changes in the distribution of financial wealth are to be ex-
pected, and even desirable, in the wake of large changes in real rates. To make this point rigor-
ously, we analyze a Bewley-style incomplete markets equilibrium economy with heterogeneous
agents. The decline in long-term real rates in the model arises from a slowdown in the long-
run growth rate of the economy. This slowdown is isomorphic to a decrease in the rate of time
preference of all households in a stationary version of this economy. Since there is no preference
heterogeneity and all households have merely become equally more patient, it is natural to ask


                                                  2
                                Figure 1: Top Inequality and the Cost of Real Annuity

                        74                                                                          30




                                                                                                    28

                        72

                                                                                                    26



                        70
                                                                                                    24




                                                                                                    22
                        68


                                                                                                    20


                        66
                                                                                                    18




                                                                                                    16
                        64



                                                                                                    14

                        62

                                                                                                    12

                             top-10% wealth share
                             Cost 30yr annuity
                        60                                                                           10
                                1950                1960   1970   1980       1990   2000   2010   2020




Note: The figure plots the top-10% financial wealth share for the United States (red line). The data is annual from 1947
until 2019 from the World Inequality Database. It also plots (black line) the price of a 30-year inflation-indexed annuity
which pays $1 in real terms for the next 30 years. A dynamic affine term structure model, estimated on quarterly data
from 1947.Q1-2019.Q4 and spelled out in Appendix D delivers the term structure of real bond yields. The price of the
annuity equals the sum of the prices of the real zero-coupon bonds of maturities 1 through 30.


whether we can implement the same consumption allocation in the economy with low rates as the
one that prevailed when rates were high. We show that the equilibrium consumption allocation
in the model with high rates remains an equilibrium in the model with low rates, provided that
agents' initial financial wealth is adjusted. Conversely, if the financial wealth distribution does
not change in response to changes in long rates, the new equilibrium will result in large changes
in the consumption distribution.
    The key model ingredient behind the increase in financial wealth inequality is a positive cross-
sectional correlation between financial wealth and the duration of the household's excess con-
sumption plan. When households are ex-ante identical and labor income shocks are persistent,
low-wealth households are households who experienced a recent history of bad idiosyncratic in-
come shocks. These households tend to have a high duration of human wealth, reflecting the
expected long-run mean reversion of their labor income. Their consumption plan has a low du-
ration because of consumption smoothing. Their duration of excess consumption, consumption
minus income, is low. These households have low excess consumption duration and low finan-
cial wealth. The converse is true for high-wealth households, households who have been able
to accumulate financial wealth thanks to a sequence of fortunate labor income shocks. With this
positive cross-sectional correlation, the wealth-weighted duration of financial wealth exceeds the
equal-weighted duration, and the right tail of the financial wealth distribution grows larger when
rates decline. The rise in financial top-wealth inequality is exactly what the model predicts should
happen when households' consumption is fully hedged against a decline in real interest rates.


                                                                         3
Since everyone is still able to afford the same consumption plan, nobody is worse off.
   To analyze the quantitative relevance of this mechanism, we calibrate a Bewley model with ex-
ante heterogeneity across households. Households belong to groups defined on age, race, gender,
and education, and face income risk over the life-cycle. The income processes are calibrated using
Panel Study of Income Dynamics data. We add a superstar income state to enable the model to
match the financial wealth gini of the 1980s.
   We calibrate the duration of financial wealth using data on the composition of households'
financial portfolios from the Survey of Consumer Finances. We combine portfolio shares from the
SCF with durations of major asset classes obtained from an auxiliary asset pricing model. We find
that U.S. households have an equally-weighted average duration of financial wealth of 16, which
is below the value-weighted (or aggregate) duration of financial wealth of 25. We also observe
substantial heterogeneity in financial durations by wealth level. Low-wealth households have low
financial durations, driven by their higher share of deposit-like assets, the presence of consumer
debt, and lower shares of housing, private business, and stock market wealth. The reverse is true
for high-wealth households. This heterogeneity in financial duration is a new empirical finding,
and crucial for the response of financial inequality to interest rates.
   We compute the model at a long-term real interest rate of 4.7%, the level that prevailed in the
1980s, and at a 0.1% long-term real rate, the level that prevailed in the 2010s. The interest rate
change is due to an unanticipated decline in the expected growth rate of the economy. We first
ask how much additional financial wealth each household would need to be able to afford the old
consumption plan, as a fraction of aggregate consumption, under the new, lower interest rate. This
compensated financial wealth distribution is a rightward shift of the original wealth distribution.
While all households require more financial wealth to finance the old consumption allocation,
young households require the largest compensation. Since they must save for retirement for many
years, the loss in compound interest hits them particularly hard. While the wealthy see a large
increase in financial wealth under the compensated distribution (as much of 38% of the increase
in aggregate wealth goes to the top-1%), the top-1% and top-10% financial wealth shares and the
gini nevertheless fall since the required increase in financial wealth for the young is greater still.
In other words, the large human wealth of the young does not provide a large enough hedge
against interest rate declines. This shows that the life-cycle aspect is a crucial addition, adding
meaningfully to the intuition coming from the Bewley model with infinitely-lived households.
   Next we ask what actually happens to financial wealth in the calibrated model after rates
decline. When financial wealth durations are heterogeneous as in the data, we find that the model
can account for the entire rise in financial wealth inequality between the 1980s and 2010s. The
repriced financial wealth distribution exactly matches the increases in the observed financial wealth
gini. It features increases in the top-10% and top-1% wealth shares that are close to the data.
   Human wealth inequality is much lower, and rises by much less when rates decline. Young


                                                   4
agents have both high levels of human wealth and high human wealth durations, explaining the
increase in human wealth inequality when rates decline. In sharp contrast to top financial wealth
shares, top human wealth shares fall modestly. Total wealth inequality, which is the welfare-
relevant concept, shows only a modest increase in gini and a small decline in top wealth shares.
The decline in rates has not led to large increases in total wealth inequality.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses the related literature.
Section 3 shows that the share of the top percentiles tracks the cost of an indexed annuity quite
closely in the U.S., U.K., and France. Section 4 shows that the connection between low expected
returns and high financial wealth inequality arises under minimal assumptions. Section 5 sets up
an incomplete markets economy with aggregate uncertainty and infinitely-lived households who
face idiosyncratic income risk. A first insight from this model is that one needs to use the same dis-
count rate for the household's future labor income, financial income, and consumption to arrive at
a measure of household wealth that properly aggregates. The second and main result in this sec-
tion is that financial wealth becomes more concentrated in response to decline in the interest rate if
financial wealth and the duration of financial wealth covary positively. This covariance condition
is naturally satisfied in an incomplete markets economy with persistent labor income shocks. Sec-
tion 6 quantifies the effect of an interest rate change by adding a life-cycle component to the model
as well as heterogeneity across demographic groups. Section 7 concludes. Appendix A contains
details on data sources and construction. Appendix B contains the proofs of the propositions. Ap-
pendix C contains some details of the calibrated model. Appendix D provides an auxiliary asset
pricing model used to infer real interest rates and durations of the components of financial wealth.


2   Related Literature

A large strand of recent literature documents the evolution of income inequality as well as fi-
nancial wealth inequality over the past century (Piketty and Saez, 2003; Piketty, 2015; Alvaredo,
Chancel, Piketty, Saez and Zucman, 2018). Most of the evidence suggests that financial wealth
inequality has increased in many countries over the past decades. Zucman (2019) reviews the
empirical literature on the topic. Benhabib and Bisin (2018) survey economic theories of wealth
inequality.
    Much of the literature on wealth inequality adopts a backward-looking approach and explores
the connection between past returns and current wealth. This literature has argued that high past
rates of return and heterogeneity therein helps account for the increase in financial wealth inequal-
ity (Piketty and Zucman, 2015; Fagereng, Guiso, Malacrino and Pistaferri, 2020; Bach, Calvet and
Sodini, 2020; Hubmer, Krusell and Smith, 2020).
    But wealth is also the current value of the household's future consumption stream. Human
wealth is the value of future labor income and financial wealth is the value of future consumption

                                                  5
minus income. We bring an asset pricing perspective to the discussion on inequality. We impute a
valuation by discounting future cash flows. When rates declines, households need more wealth to
finance the same consumption stream. Households that have mostly human wealth are likely to be
better hedged. Households with mostly financial wealth need enough duration in their portfolio
in order to finance future consumption. To keep consumption shares unchanged, a decline in real
rates needs to entail a reallocation of financial wealth towards those households who rely mostly
on their (current and future) financial wealth to finance future consumption.
   Discount rates matter. In a simple partial equilibrium model, Moll (2020) explains that small
discount rate-induced changes in the wealth distribution may have smaller welfare effects than
cash flow-induced changes. We make a related point in a version of the Bewley-style general
equilibrium model with aggregate and idiosyncratic risk. Recently, Catherine, Miller and Sarin
(2020) show the quantitative importance of valuation effects for measures of wealth inequality.
Their emphasis is on the effects of discounting social security transfers at time-varying discount
rates.
   Greenwald, Lettau and Ludvigson (2019) point to increases in the share of output accruing to
profits as a key source of the rise in equity values since 1989. While we motivate our main exper-
iment using a drop in the real risk-free rate, the decline in expected returns applies more broadly
to other financial assets. This decline could arise either from a highly persistent change in the real
risk free rate or to a decrease in risk premia. To the extent that economic forces have varied these
quantities across time and across different financial assets, our methodology could be extended
to capture these more detailed patterns. The auxiliary asset pricing model in Appendix D indeed
shows declines in expected real returns not only on bonds but also on stocks and housing.
   Our paper is related to recent work by Auclert (2019), who explores the effect of cross-sectional
variation in the duration of households' financial assets for the effectiveness of monetary policy.
We consider a setting with aggregate risk, we develop measures of household duration based
on a no-arbitrage dynamic asset pricing model and household financial portfolios, and we assess
quantitatively the extent to which households have hedged their consumption plan against in-
terest rate innovations. In earlier work, Doepke and Schneider (2006) focus on the distributional
consequences of inflation. Our work instead focuses on the distributional effects of changes in
long-term real rates. Gomez and Gouin-Bonenfant (2020) study the effects of lower interest rate
on the cost of raising new capital for entrepreneurs, linking the decline in interest rates to the rise
in wealth inequality through a different channel.
   There are important normative implications for fiscal policy. The compensated distribution
that allows all households to implement their old consumption plans features substantially less
financial wealth inequality than both the old distribution and the actual repriced distribution.
This suggests that a financial wealth tax may be able to improve on the repriced consumption
distribution. In our life-cycle model, we find that young households are hurt most by a reduction


                                                  6
in rates. In that respect, our model speaks to the inter-generational distribution of the burden of
taxation. A large literature studies optimal labor and capital income taxation in Bewley models
with idiosyncratic risk, endogenous labor supply, and capital formation (Aiyagari, 1995; Panousi
and Reis, 2017; Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante, 2017; Krueger and Ludwig, 2018; Boar and
Midrigan, 2020). We take labor income as given and do not model capital formation, but instead
focus on the distributional implications of lower interest rates.
   As an important aside, our Bewley model resolves an outstanding issue in the literature on
how to compute an individual's human wealth. Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh and Verdelhan (2013)
propose using the same stochastic discount factor (SDF) that prices traded assets to discount an
individual's labor income stream. Huggett and Kaplan (2016) propose using the individual's own
SDF to compute human wealth. For wealth accounting, the aggregate SDF is convenient, because
the aggregate value of individual wealth is consistent with market valuations. Using individual
SDFs results in a wealth measure that does not aggregate.
   By emphasizing total wealth (inequality), of which human wealth (inequality) forms a very
significant component, our work contributes to the literature on measuring wealth (inequality).
Our paper provides new and detailed statistics on the duration of financial wealth for U.S. house-
holds. Related, Kuhn, Schularick and Steins (2020) study how housing and equity portfolio shares
differ across the wealth distribution and result in differing financial wealth dynamics for the mid-
dle class and the top of the financial wealth distribution. Recent work discusses the measurement
of private business income and wealth (Kopczuk, 2017; Saez and Zucman, 2016; Piketty, Saez and
Zucman, 2018; Smith, Yagan, Zidar and Zwick, Working Papers; Kopczuk and Zwick, 2020). In
our theoretical work, we sidestep this issue by recognizing that financial wealth is the present dis-
counted value of the future stream of consumption minus labor income. In our empirical work,
we infer the duration of private business wealth from that of small stocks.
   Our work is agnostic on the underlying reason for the interest rate decline, only hypothesizing
a reduction in the expected rate of growth of the economy. The literature has proposed a long list of
candidates for such a growth slowdown: demographics (Summers, 2014; Eggertsson and Mehro-
tra, 2014; Eichengreen, 2015), a productivity slowdown due to a plateau in educational attainment
or diminishing technological progress (Gordon, 2017), a global saving glut and/or shortage of safe
assets (Bernanke et al., 2005; Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas, 2008), government spending that
leads to depressed future aggregate demand (Mian, Straub and Sufi, 2020), a decline in competi-
tion (Guti´
          errez and Philippon, 2017), a decline in desired investment due to lower relative prices
of capital goods (Rachel and Smith, 2017), among others. Lower tax progressivity could lead to
more saving by the rich, more aggregate wealth, and lower rates (Hubmer et al., 2020). However,
Heathcothe, Storesletten and Violante (2020) argue that once transfers are considered, the U.S. tax
system has not become less progressive. Alternatively, a rise in income inequality could be the
origin of lower interest rates. Mian et al. (2020) argue that the rich have a higher propensity to


                                                  7
save than the poor; Fagereng, Blomhoff Holm, Moll and Natvik (2019) provide empirical evidence
consistent with this from Norway. This reduces aggregate demand and the real rate of interest in
the wake of an exogenous increase in income inequality, for example, due to skill-biased techno-
logical change. While the interest rate is endogenous in the Bewley model of Section 5, our model
features standard homothetic preferences. The model in Section 6 keeps labor income inequality
constant, in order to isolate the effect of a decline in the long-run growth rate of the economy.1
Our conclusions regarding the differing behavior of financial and total wealth inequality are not
sensitive to the source of the decline in interest rates.


3    Empirical Evidence

In this section we document a strong time-series correlation between the evolution of long-term
real interest rates and wealth inequality. While our focus is on the U.S. in most of the paper, this
section documents that this correlation is present also in the United Kingdom and in France. This
evidence suggests that households are partially hedged against changes in long real rates.
    Figure 2 shows the wealth share of the top-10% of the population in the left panels and the
wealth share of the top-1% of the population in the right panels. Wealth shares from the World
Inequality Database. Each panel also plots the price of a thirty-year real annuity, computed from
nominal yields and inflation or alternatively from an affine asset pricing model. Construction
details are in Appendix A.1. The top row is for the U.S., the middle row for the U.K., and the
bottom row for France. The sample is 1947-2019.2
    For both inequality measures, there is a strong positive correlation between financial wealth
inequality and the annuity price. Put differently, there is a strong negative association between
financial wealth inequality and long-term real interest rates. Between 1947 and 1982, the top-
10% (top-1%) wealth share falls from 70% (29%) to 63% (24%) in the U.S. as the annuity becomes
cheaper. From 1982 until 2015, the top-10% (top-1%) wealth share rises from 63% (24%) to 73%
(36%). During this period, the cost of the annuity more than doubles. There is a small decline in
wealth shares from 2015 until 2019, which is expected to have reversed again in 2020.
    The patterns in both wealth inequality and the evolution of the cost of the annuity are similar in
the UK and in France. Rachel and Smith (2017) show that the decline in the real rate has occurred
across a broad set of developed and emerging market countries. While many other factors no
doubt differ across countries, this shared trend in rates should result in a global rise in financial
wealth inequality.
   1 Hubmer et al. (2020) show that a rise in earnings risk actually lowers wealth inequality as it strengthens precau-

tionary savings motives meaningfully for all but the richest households. A rise in top-income inequality, in contrast,
can increase wealth inequality.
   2 For France we start our sample in 1950 since inflation was very high coming out of the WW-II, resulting in implau-

sible real bond yield estimates.



                                                          8
                         Figure 2: Top Financial Wealth Inequality and Cost of Real Annuity

                                     USA, Top 10%                                                                 USA, Top 1%
                         80                                      40                                   40                                     40




                                                                       30 year Annuity




                                                                                                                                                   30 year Annuity
               Top 10%   75                                      30                                   35                                     30




                                                                                             Top 1%
                         70                                      20                                   30                                     20

                         65                                      10                                   25                                     10

                         60                                       0                                   20                                      0
                              1960      1980        2000       2020                                        1960     1980       2000        2020
                                      Top 10% wealth, WID                                                          Top 1% wealth, WID
                                      Top 10% wealth, SCF(+)                                                       Top 1% wealth, SCF(+)
                                      Annuity, Spline Fit                                                          Annuity, Spline Fit
                                      Annuity, Model                                                               Annuity, Model




                                     UK, Top 10%                                                                  UK, Top 1%
                                                                 35                                   50                                     35
                         80
                                                                       30 year Annuity




                                                                                                                                                   30 year Annuity
                         70                                      30                                   40                                     30
               Top 10%




                                                                                             Top 1%


                         60                                      25                                   30                                     25

                         50                                      20                                   20                                     20

                         40                                       15                                  10                                      15
                              1960      1980        2000       2020                                        1960     1980       2000        2020
                                      Top 10% wealth, WID                                                          Top 1% wealth, WID
                                      Top 10% wealth, WAS fit                                                      Top 1% wealth, WAS fit
                                      Annuity, Spline Fit                                                          Annuity, Spline Fit
                                      Annuity, Model                                                               Annuity, Model




                                 France, Top 10%                                                              France, Top 1%
                                                                 50                                   35                                     50
                         70
                                                                 40                                                                          40
                                                                       30 year Annuity




                                                                                                                                                   30 year Annuity




                                                                                                      30
                         65
               Top 10%




                                                                                             Top 1%




                                                                 30                                                                          30
                                                                                                      25
                         60                                      20                                                                          20

                         55                                                                           20
                                                                 10                                                                          10

                         50                                       0                                   15                                      0
                              1960      1980        2000       2020                                        1960     1980       2000        2020
                                         Top 10% wealth                                                              Top 1% wealth
                                         Annuity, Spline fit                                                         Annuity, Spline fit


Note: Each panel plots a financial wealth inequality measure against a measure of the cost of a 30-year real annuity.
The inequality measure in the left panels is the share of financial wealth going to the top-10% of the population. The
right panels plot the share of the top-1% of the population. The wealth shares are from the World Inequality Database.
Inflation and bond yield data are detailed in Appendix A.1.




                                                                                         9
4     Wealth Inequality and Expected Returns: A Model-free Approach

To develop an initial understanding of the relationship between financial wealth inequality and in-
terest rates under minimal assumptions, we derive closed-form expressions using a log-linearization
of the household budget constraint.
     We work in a stationary version of the economy in which the aggregate endowment is con-
stant. The hatted variables denote the stationary economy. Section 5 will show how to map these
hatted variables into the corresponding variables of the stochastically growing economy. In the
stationary economy, investors are computing expectations under the risk-neutral measure. Shocks
to expected growth of the aggregate endowment show up as shocks to the risk-free rate.
           a
     Let wct +1 denote the aggregate log wealth-consumption ratio. Given the constant aggregate
                                       a
endowment in the de-trended economy, wct +1 is also the log price-dividend ratio of a perpetuity.
The Campbell and Shiller (1988) log-linearization of the aggregate budget constraint around the
mean aggregate log wealth-consumption ratio delivers the following expression for the real return
on total wealth:
                                              a           a      a    a
                                             rt +1 =  a wct+1 + k - wct .

The usual aggregate consumption growth term is zero because the aggregate endowment is con-
stant. The linearization coefficient  a depends only on the mean of the log aggregate wealth-
consumption ratio wc a :
                                         a
                                 ewc
                              a
                                  a    ,           k a  log(1 + exp(wc a )) - wc a  a .
                               ewc + 1

The linearization constant  a captures the McCauley duration of the aggregate consumption claim.
                                                                                                     a
By iterating forward on the linearized return equation and imposing a TVC condition, lim j ( a ) j wct +j =
0, and taking expectations, we obtain the standard expression for the aggregate log wealth-consumption
ratio as the PDV of future returns:
                                                            
                                                ka
                                                        t  ( )
                                       a                       a j -1 a
                                     wct =          - E              rt+ j .
                                              1 - a       j =1

                                                                               a
     The wealth-consumption ratio can be linked to the yield on a perpetuity ypt :

                                                                          
                                              + k a = ( 1 -  a )Et  (  a ) j -1 r t + j -1 ,
                            a               a                                         f
                          ypt = -(1 -  a )wct
                                                                         j =1


         f  a in the detrended economy. The unconditional average yield on the perpetuity is
since rt = rt
given by: yp a = E[r f ].3 For simplicity, we assume that the risk-free rate follows and AR(1) process
    3 As shown by Krueger and Lustig (2010), the expectations hypothesis holds in the stochastically detrended economy,




                                                          10
with persistence . Given the AR(1) process for the risk-free rate, the yield on the perpetuity can
be expressed as:
                                           a             1 - a  f      f
                                         ypt = yp a +          r - E[r t ] .
                                                        1 - a  t
The yield on the perpetuity governs the dynamics of the aggregate wealth-consumption ratio.
When the yield increases, the wealth-consumption ratio decreases and vice versa. Lustig et al.
(2013) estimate the wealth-consumption ratio and show that it tracks the inverse of long-term real
bond yields closely.     4

    Aggregate consumption equals aggregate labor income plus aggregate financial income. We
assume that the factor shares are constant. As a result, the aggregate human wealth-labor income
            a                                                      a
ratio hyt is identical to the aggregate wealth consumption ratio wct .
    Next, we turn to the dynamics of the household's wealth-consumption ratio wcit . To focus
on the valuation effects, we assume that consumption shares cit (labor income shares) follow a
                                     y
random walk with drift µic (µi ). We assume that this is the only source of heterogeneity other
                         i .5 The household's log human wealth-income ratio is denoted by hy . The                i
than the initial shares c0                                                                  t
household's log wealth-consumption ratio equals the PDV of future consumption share growth
and risk-free rates:

                                  kc    c                                      
                                   i + µi
                                              t  i                         t  ( i )
                                                                                  c j -1 f
                         wcit =           + E        (  c j -1
                                                         )      c i
                                                                  t+ j - E              r t + j -1 .
                                  1 - ic        j =1                         j =1


where the linearization constants ic and kc
                                          i are defined analogously to their aggregate counterparts
rho a and k a .

Corollary 4.1. The log wealth-consumption ratio (human wealth-income ratio) of household i
relative to the aggregate ratio is given by:

                         kc    c
                          i + µi     ka     E[r f ]( a - ic )   (ic -  a )
     wcit - wct
              a
                =                -       +                    +               a
                                                                           (wct - wc a )
                         1 - ic    1 - a   (1 - ic )(1 -  a )   (1 - ic )
        i    a           kh
                          i + µi
                                h
                                      ka       E[r f ]( a - ih )   (ih -  a )    a
     hyt - wct =               h
                                  -       a
                                            +         h
                                                                 +       h
                                                                              (wct - wc a ),
                         1 - i      1 -       (1 - i )(1 -  )  a   (1 -  i  )
                                                       a     a                                            a      a
                          i - E[r ] + µ i
                         kc                                                             k a - E[r f ] (ypt - yp )
                                 f      c
                                            1 -  a  (ypt - yp )
                wcit =                    -                     ,               a
                                                                              wct =                  -             .
                             1 - ic         1 - ic  (1 -  a )                              1 - a        (1 -  a )



    To develop some intuition, consider a simple cross-section with only "workers" and "capital-
and the yield on the perpetuity will only reflect future risk-free rates.
   4 If we allow for bond risk premia that do not vary over time, the risk premium would add an additional constant to

the expression for the yield on the perpetuity.
   5 This assumption is not essential, but it makes the analysis that follows more tractable. The next section considers

households that choose the optimal consumption path in a dynamic general equilibrium incomplete markets economy.
Here, we want to focus on valuation effects.


                                                            11
                                                                  h >  a >  h . Assume that the
ists." The capitalists have lower duration of their human wealth: w         cap
duration of their consumption claim does not differ: c   a  c
                                                     w =  = cap . Their initial consumption
and total wealth are also identical. Now consider a decrease in long rates that pushes up the ag-
gregate wealth-consumption ratio. The distribution of total wealth does not change in response to
  a by virtue of the equal consumption durations: wcw - wc             cap
wct                                                 t      t                 = 0. However, the human wealth
of the workers goes up by more than the human wealth of the capitalists:

                                                 h - a )     h - a )
                                                           (cap
                 w         cap                 (w                                         a
               hyt   -   hyt     = const +          h
                                                         -      h 
                                                                                       (wct - wc a ),
                                               1 - w       1 - cap

        h > h > h .
because w       cap
   The financial wealth (FW) of the capitalists, which is given by the difference between their
                                        cap       cap            cap         cap
total wealth and human wealth exp(ct          + wct ) - exp(yt         + hyt ), increases when rates decline
   a
(wct - wc a > 0):

   cap              a             cap        cap         E[r f ]( a - cap
                                                                      h )               h - a )
                                                                                       (cap           a
 FWt      =   exp(wct )      exp(ct ) - exp(yt     +          h )(1 -  a )
                                                                                   +        h )
                                                                                                   (wct - wc a )
                                                         (1 - cap                      (1 - cap

The capitalists suffer a relative decline in human wealth that is offset by an increase in their finan-
cial wealth, leaving total wealth unchanged.
   Next, we characterize the cross-sectional variance of total wealth assuming that all households
have the same initial consumption. We use subscript xs to denote cross-sectional moments. The
main result in this section is that there is a negative relationship between long rates and the cross-
sectional dispersion of total wealth.

Proposition 4.2. If there is no initial consumption dispersion and wealth is log-normally dis-
tributed, the cross-sectional coefficient of variation of total wealth (TW) is bounded below by:

                                                                                                               1/2
Std xs ( TW )                                     1/2                                     (ic -  a )
               std xs (w) = Var xs wcit + cit                Var xs wci + Var xs                        a
                                                                                                     (wct )          .
 Exs ( TW )                                                                               (1 - ic )

The cross-sectional coefficient of variation of human wealth (HW) is bounded below by:

                                                                                                               1/2
Std xs ( HW )                        i            1/2                   i                 (ih -  a )    a
               std xs (h) = Var xs hyt + yit                 Var xs hy + Var xs                      (wct )          .
 Exs ( HW )                                                                               (1 - ih )



   It immediately follows from the proposition that when long rates decline and the aggregate
wealth-consumption ratio increases, the cross-sectional dispersion of total wealth and human
wealth increase (at least weakly). The size of the increase in wealth inequality increases in the


                                                        12
cross-sectional variance of the duration of total wealth:

                                                    (ic -  a )
                                          Var xs               .
                                                    (1 - ic )

    To derive results for financial wealth, we need to make an additional assumption, namely that
financial and human wealth vary negatively. We use  to denote the capital income share.

Proposition 4.3. If there is no initial consumption dispersion, human and total wealth are log-
normally distributed, and human wealth and financial wealth covary negatively, then the cross-
sectional coefficient of variation of financial wealth (FW) is bounded below by:

Std xs ( FW )                                                c - a )
                                                           ( i                    2 -2              i                (ih - a )
                        1
                                Var xs wci + Var xs                       a 2
                                                                       (wct ) +             Var xs hy + Var xs                      a 2
                                                                                                                                 (wct )
 Exs ( FW )           (1-  )2                             (1-ic )                 (1-  )2                            (1-ih )




    If the cross-sectional variance of total wealth is smaller than the variance of human wealth,
which seems plausible when financial and human wealth are negatively correlated and given that
households seek to smooth consumption, we also obtain the following bound:

                                                                                                           1/2
 Std xs ( FW )                                     1/2                                 (ic -  a )
                std x ( a) = Var xs wcit + cit                Var xs wci + Var xs                    a
                                                                                                  (wct )         .
  Exs ( FW )                                                                           (1 - ic )

                         a
When rates go down and wct goes up, financial wealth inequality rises.
    This section has shown that there is a tight connection between financial wealth inequality and
total wealth inequality on the one hand and long rates on the other hand under minimal assump-
tions. When long-term real rates decline, we expect measures of inequality to increase simply
because wealth is being marked-to-market and different households have different exposure to
short rates. This is consistent with the evidence in Section 3. Next, we analyze this relationship in
a dynamic general equilibrium model where consumption is optimally determined and interest
rates are set in equilibrium.


5    Incomplete Markets Model

To analyze the effects of changes in discount rates on the distribution of wealth, we use a standard
Bewley (1986) endowment economy in which ex-ante identical agents face idiosyncratic and ag-
gregate risk. We use an endowment economy to isolate the valuation effects. We first show how
to solve this model by transforming the problem into a stationary model without aggregate risk.
Next, we use the model to arrive at a method of valuing individual human wealth that is consis-
tent with aggregation. Third, we let the economy undergo a decline in the interest rate, arising


                                                         13
from a slowdown in expected economic growth, and show that this increases the inequality in
financial wealth.


5.1     Endowments

Time is discrete, infinite, and indexed by t  [0, 1, 2, ...). The aggregate endowment e follows the
stochastic process:
                                           e t ( z t ) = e t -1 ( z t -1 )  t ( z t )

where (zt ) denotes the stochastic growth rate of the aggregate endowment and zt the aggregate
state. The history of aggregate shocks is denoted by zt = {zt , zt-1 , · · · }. A share t (zt ) of the
aggregate endowment is financial income, the remaining 1 - t (zt ) share represents aggregate
labor income.
      Household labor income y follows the stochastic process:

                                  yt (st ) = yt (zt ,  t )(1 - t (zt ))et (zt ),

Households are subject to idiosyncratic income shocks, whose history is denoted by  t . The ratio
of individual to aggregate labor income, which we refer to as the labor income share, is given by
yt (zt ,  t ). The t shocks are i.i.d. across households and persistent over time. The idiosyncratic
shock process is assumed to be independent from the aggregate shock process. We use st = (zt ,  t )
to summarize the history of aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks, and  (st ) =  (zt ,  t ) to denote
the unconditional probability that state st will be realized. If the aggregate and idiosyncratic states
are independently distributed, then we can decompose state transition probabilities into an aggre-
gate and idiosyncratic component:

                              ( z t +1 ,  t +1 | z t ,  t ) =  ( z t +1 | z t )  (  t +1 |  t ).


5.2     Preferences

Households maximize discounted expected utility:

                                                      
                                                                            c ( s t )1- 
                                    EU (c) =           t  (st )               1-
                                                                                         ,
                                                    t =1 s t


where the coefficient of relative risk aversion  > 1, and the subjective time discount factor 0 <
 < 1.




                                                               14
5.3   Technology

Households trade state-contingent bonds at (st , zt+1 ) at prices qt (zt , zt+1 ) and shares in the Lucas
tree t (st ) at price t (zt ) satisfying the budget constraint:

                       ct (st ) +      at (st , zt+1 )qt (zt , zt+1 ) + t (st )t (zt )  Wt (st ).
                                      z t +1


Household cash on hand W evolves according to:

Wt+1 (st+1 ) = at (st , zt+1 ) + yt+1 ( t+1 , zt+1 )(1 - (zt+1 ))et+1 (zt+1 ) + (zt+1 )et+1 (zt+1 ) + t+1 (zt+1 ) t (st ).

Households are subject to state-uncontingent and state-contingent solvency constraints:


                              at (st , zt+1 )qt (zt , zt+1 ) + t (st )t (zt )  Kt (st )
                             z t +1


                  at (st , zt+1 ) + (zt+1 )et+1 (zt+1 ) + t+1 (zt+1 ) t (st )  Mt (st , zt+1 )

where K and M denote generic borrowing limits. Incomplete risk sharing arises from two sources:
the lack of an asset whose payoff depends on the idiosyncratic income shock  t and the borrowing
constraints.


5.4   Transformation into Stationary Economy

We can transform the stochastically growing economy into a stationary economy with a constant
aggregate endowment following Alvarez and Jermann (2001); Krueger and Lustig (2010). To that
end, define the deflated consumption allocations:

                                                              ct (st )
                                                 ct (st ) =             , st ,
                                                              et ( zt )

the deflated transition probabilities and the deflated subjective time discount factor::

                                                           ( s t +1 | s t )  t +1 ( z t +1 )1- 
                              ( s t +1 | s t ) =                                                          ,
                                                        s t +1  ( s t + 1 | s t )  t + 1 ( z t + 1 ) 1 - 
                                          ( s t ) =    t ( s t +1 | s t )  t +1 ( z t +1 )1-  .
                                                         s t +1


Agents in the deflated economy with these preferences:

                                          c ( s t )1- 
                      U (c)(st ) =                     +  (st+1 , st ) (st+1 |st )U (c)(st+1 , st )           (1)
                                            1-           s t +1




                                                                  15
rank consumption plans identically as in the original economy. Under the maintained assumption
of independence of aggregate and idiosyncratic risk, the deflated aggregate transition probabilities
and the deflated time discount factor are:

                                                                  ( z t +1 | z t )  t +1 ( z t +1 )1- 
                                     ( z t +1 | z t ) =                                                          ,
                                                               z t +1  ( z t + 1 | z t )  t + 1 ( z t + 1 ) 1 - 
                                          (zt ) =                  ( z t +1 | z t )  t +1 ( z t +1 )1-  .
                                                                z t +1


These are risk-neutral probabilities. When there is predictability in aggregate consumption growth,
shocks to expected growth manifest themselves as taste shocks in the deflated economy. If aggre-
gate growth shocks are i.i.d. over time, then the deflated time discount factor is constant and given
by:

                                           =           ( z t +1 )  t +1 ( z t +1 )1-  .
                                                     z t +1


This i.i.d. assumption on aggregate growth shocks is the assumption we will make, noting that it
can easily be relaxed. In what follows, we also assume that aggregate factor shares are constant:
t (zt ) = , t. By definition, labor income shares average to one across households:


                                                        (  t | 0 ) y t (  t ) = 1
                                                        t


5.5   Equilibrium in the Stationary Economy

Agents trade a single risk-free bond and a stock. The stock yields a dividend  in each period.
Given initial financial wealth 0 , interest rates Rt and stock prices t , households choose consump-
tion {ct (0 ,  t )}, bond positions { at (0 ,  t )}, and stock positions {t (0 ,  t )} to maximize expected
utility (1) subject to the budget constraint:

                         at ( t )
            ct ( t ) +              + t ( t )t = (1 - )yt ( t ) + at-1 ( t-1 ) + t-1 ( t-1 )(t + ),
                           Rt

and subject to borrowing constraints:

                                             at ( t )
                                                        + t ( t )t  Kt ( t ),                    t
                                                Rt

                                       at ( t ) + t ( t )(t+1 + )  Mt ( t ),                            t .

Definition 1. For a given initial distribution of wealth 0 , a Bewley equilibrium is a list of con-
sumption choices {ct (0 ,  t )}, bond positions { at (0 ,  t )}, and stock positions {t (0 ,  t )} as well
as stock prices t , and interest rates Rt such that each household maximizes its expected utility,

                                                                         16
and asset markets and goods markets clear.


                                             ( t |0 )at (0 ,  t )d0 = 0,
                                             t



                                             ( t |0 )t (0 ,  t )d0 = 1.
                                             t


                                             ( t |0 )ct (0 ,  t )d0 = 1.
                                             t

      In the deflated economy without aggregate risk, the return on the aggregate stock equals the
risk-free rate:
                                                               t+1 + 
                                                      Rt =            .                                              (2)
                                                                 t
The equilibrium stock price equals the present discounted value of the dividends:

                                                             
                                                    t =      R- 1
                                                              t  t +  ,
                                                             =0


discounted at the cumulative gross risk-free rate, defined as: Rtt+T = k
                                                                       T R
                                                                         =0 t+k . Note that
Rtt = Rt and define Rtt-1 = 1.


5.6     Equilibrium in the Growing Economy

We can map the equilibrium in the detrended economy into an equilibrium in the stochastically
growing economy.

Proposition 5.1. If {ct (0 ,  t ), at (0 ,  t ), t (0 ,  t )} and {t , Rt } are a Bewley equilibrium, then
{ct (0 , st ), at (0 , st , zt+1 ), t (0 , st )} as well as asset prices {t (zt ), qt (zt , zt+1 )} are an equilibrium of
the stochastically growing economy with:

                                               c t ( 0 , s t ) = c t ( 0 ,  t ) e t ( z t )
                                       a t (  0 , s t , z t +1 ) = a t (  0 ,  t ) e t ( z t )
                                              t (0 , st ) = t (0 ,  t )
                                                   t (zt ) = t et (zt )
                                                                        ( z t +1 ) 1
                                           q t ( z t , z t +1 ) =                      .
                                                                        ( z t +1 ) R t

      The proof is provided in Krueger and Lustig (2010). The last equation implies the following




                                                                17
relationship between the interest rate in the growing economy and the stationary economy:

                                                            -1                               -1
                                                                               ( z t +1 )
                             Rt =    q t ( z , z t +1
                                                 t
                                                                 =             ( z t +1 )
                                                                                                  Rt .       (3)
                                    z t +1                           z t +1


5.7     Wealth Accounting

What is the right discount rate when measuring household wealth? If we want a measure that can
be aggregated, we have to use the same discount rate for all claims.

Proposition 5.2. At time 0, the financial wealth of each household equals the present discounted
value of future consumption minus future labor income.

                                       
                                                     (  )
                             0 =      R                      (c (  ) - (1 - )y (  ))
                                       =0            0  -1


As the proof in the appendix shows, the proposition follows easily from iterating forward on the
one-period budget constraint. In this iteration, we take expectations over financial wealth in all
future states using the objective probabilities of the idiosyncratic events (  ), and discount by
the cumulative risk-free rate R0 -1 .
      Aggregate financial wealth in the economy in period 0 is given by:

                            0 d 0 =          ( a-1 (0 ) + -1 (0 )0 )d0 = 0 + 10 ,

where we have used market clearing in the bond and stock markets at time 0.
      Aggregating the cost of the excess consumption plan across all households, using the fact that
labor income shares average to 1, and imposing goods market clearing at time 0, we get:

                                                                                            
                      -1
                     R0  -1   (  ) ( c (  ) - (1 -  ) y (  )) d 0 =
                                                          
                                                                                             R0
                                                                                              -1
                                                                                                 -1  = 0 .
                =0                                                                           =0


The aggregate cost of households' excess consumption plan, or households' aggregate financial
wealth, exactly equals the stock market value 0 , the only source of net financial wealth in the
economy. This result relies on market clearing:


                                 (  ) (c (  ) - (1 - )y (  ))d0 = ,
                                 


at each time t, because          (  )c (  )d0 = 1 from market clearing, and the labor income
shares sum to one as well.
      The choice of the actual probability measure (·) and rate R to compute an individual's human
capital, the expected present discounted value of her labor income stream, may seem arbitrary. Af-

                                                             18
ter all, claims to labor income are not traded in this model and markets are incomplete. The key
insight is that, using any other pricing kernel to discount individual labor income and consump-
tion streams may result in a value of aggregate financial wealth different from the value of the
Lucas tree. To see this, consider using an arbitrary measure (  ) (  ) different from the actual
measure (  ), where the household-specific wedges satisfy E0 [t ] = 1, t. Under this differ-
ent measure, the goods markets do not clear and the labor shares do not sum to one, unless the
household-specific wedges do not covary with consumption and income shares:

Proposition 5.3. Wealth measures aggregate if and only if the following orthogonality conditions
holds for the househehold-specific wedges and household consumption and income:

                             Cov0 (t , ct ) = 0,     Cov0 (t , yt ) = 0.

For all other wedge processes t (  ), the resource constraint is violated:


                           (  ) (  ) (c (  ) - (1 - )y (  ))d0 = ,
                          




   It is common in the literature to use the household's own IMRS to compute human capital (e.g.,
Huggett and Kaplan, 2016). The household's IMRS is a natural choice because it ties the valuation
of human wealth directly to welfare. However, this approach does not lend itself to aggregation.
The wedges
                                                    u (c(t+1 ,  t ))
                                      (  t +1 ) =                    ,
                                                      u (ct (0 ))
do not satisfy the zero covariance restrictions of the proposition. Imperfect consumption insurance
implies that:
                               Cov0 (t , ct )  0,        Cov0 (t , yt )  0.

Proposition 5.4. When the cross-sectional covariance between the household-specific wedges and
consumption is negative (Cov0 (t , ct )  0), then the aggregate valuation of individual wealth is
less than the market's valuation of total wealth.

   Since the factor shares are constant, the consumption claim is in the span of traded assets. The
value of the Lucas tree is  times the value of a claim to total consumption. When aggregating,
this pricing functional undervalues human wealth and total wealth. In sum, while pricing claim to
consumption and labor income using the household's IMRS is sensible from a welfare perspective,
this approach does not lend itself to wealth accounting and aggregation.




                                                    19
5.8      Interest Rate Decline

We now analyze the main exercise of the paper, which is to let the economy undergo an unex-
pected and permanent decrease in the interest rate ("MIT shock"). Since interest rates are endoge-
nously determined, we generate this decrease through a decrease in the expected growth rate of
the economy:
                                  E[  ] =     ( z t +1 )  ( z t +1 )  E [  ] =   ( z t +1 )  ( z t +1 )
                                            z t +1                                z t +1

where E[] < E[]. A lower expected growth rate manifests itself as a higher subjective time
discount factor in the stationary economy, provided that the coefficient of relative risk aversion
 > 1, or, equivalently, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is smaller than one:

                                            =          ( z t +1 )  t +1 ( z t +1 )1-  >  .
                                                     z t +1


In the transformed incomplete markets economy, the size of the decline in the rate of time prefer-
ence is governed by the EIS (1/), exactly as the risk-free rate is determined in the representative
agent economy: the larger the EIS, the smaller the effect of a decline in the expected growth rate
of aggregate consumption on the risk-free rate.
      In the simple case of log-normally distributed aggregate consumption growth, we obtain the
following expression for the rate of time preference in the stationary economy:

                                                           1
                                    log  = log  - E[log ] - (1 - )Var [].                                 (4)
                                                           2

Hence, the change in the transformed rate of time preference in response to the growth shock is
                      d log 
given by:         d log E[log ]
                                  = - .
      It is natural to ask whether we can still implement the equilibrium consumption allocation
{ct (0 ,  t )} from the economy with high rates in the economy with low rates. Given that the
time discount factor of all agents increased by the same amount, there should be no motive to
trade away from these allocations. The following proposition shows that the old consumption
allocation is indeed still an equilibrium in the low interest rate economy, provided that initial
financial wealth is scaled up for every household.

Proposition 5.5. If the allocations and asset market positions {ct (0 ,  t ), at (0 ,  t ), t (0 ,  t )} and
asset prices {t , Rt } are a Bewley equilibrium in the economy with  and natural borrowing limits
{ K t (  t ) },
                                                     
                                     Kt (  t ) =      R-
                                                       t   -1 
                                                         1
                                                                         (  | t )(1 - )y (  ),
                                                      =t           | t

then the allocations and asset market positions {ct (0 ,  t ), at (0 ,  t ), t (0 ,  t )} and asset prices


                                                                    20
{t , Rt } will be an equilibrium of the economy with  and natural borrowing limits {Kt ( t )},

                                           
                             Kt (  t ) =    R-
                                             t   -1 
                                               1
                                                             (  | t )(1 - )y (  ),
                                            =t         | t


asset prices are given by

                                                                  
                                     Rt =  Rt , and t =           R- 1
                                                                   t  t +  ,
                                                                  =0


and every household's initial wealth is adjusted as follows:

                                         -1
                                    =0 R 0      (  ) ( c  (  ) - (1 -  ) y  (  )
                                                                              
                         0 = 0                                                       .
                                         -1
                                    =0 R 0      (  ) ( c  (  ) - (1 -  ) y  (  )
                                                                              


   The proof is in the appendix. Aggregate financial wealth undergoes an adjustment equal to
the ratio of the price of two perpetuities:

                                                        -1
                                                   =0 R 0   v0
                                                        -1
                                                           = .
                                                   =0 R 0   v 0


Intuitively, with lower interest rates, all asset prices are higher than in the high-rate economy. The
Lucas tree becomes more valuable. A fraction 1 -  of this tree reflects aggregate human wealth,
the remaining fraction is aggregate financial wealth. Each individual's financial wealth adjustment
differs, and depends on the expected discounted value of the same future excess consumption plan
discounted at different rates. The higher one's expected future excess consumption, the larger the
initial financial wealth adjustment needed to implement the old equilibrium allocation.
   To a first-order approximation, i.e., for a small change in the interest rate, the adjustment in
initial financial wealth needed for agents to keep their initial consumption plan is given by the
duration of their planned consumption in excess of labor income. This is the duration households
will need in their financial assets and liabilities in order to be fully hedged.


Characterizing Interest Rate Sensitivity Using Duration of Excess Consumption                  Define the
duration of a household's excess consumption plan at time 0, following the realization of the
idiosyncratic labor income shock 0 , as follows:

                                              -1   t
                                    =0   |0  R0  (  | 0 ) ( c (  | 0 ) - (1 -  ) y (  | 0 ))
                                                                                     
            D c - y (  0 , 0 ) =
                                                       -1
                                    =0   |0  (  | 0 ) R0 ( c (  | 0 ) - (1 -  ) y (  | 0 ))
                                               t                                    


The duration measures the sensitivity of the cost of its excess consumption plan to a change in the
interest rate. This is the duration households need in their financial asset portfolio in order to be


                                                       21
fully hedged against interest rate risk.6,7 In our endowment economy, aggregate consumption is
fixed. We are interested in the valuation effects of interest rate changes.
    The duration of the excess consumption claim equals the value-weighted difference of the
duration of the consumption claim and that of the labor income claim:

                                                         c                 y
                                                        P0               P0
                                        D c-y =              c
                                                        c-y D -           c-y D
                                                                                  y
                                                                                      .
                                                      P0                 P0

            c-y                                                 y             c is total household
where P0          = 0 is household financial wealth, P0 is human wealth, and P0
wealth, the sum of financial and human wealth. Households with a high positive duration of
excess consumption face a large increase in the cost of their consumption plan when interest rates
go down, insofar that this increased cost is not offset fully by the increase in their human wealth.
    The duration of the aggregate excess consumption claim, the aggregate duration for short,
equals:

                                                           -1
                                                     =0  R 0 
                                             Da =
                                                          -1
                                                     =0 R 0 


This is the duration of a claim to aggregate consumption minus aggregate labor income, or equiv-
alently to aggregate financial income. It is the duration of a perpetuity in the stationary economy.
Recall that 0 = 0 =       -1
                      =0 R0 denotes aggregate financial wealth.

Proposition 5.6. The aggregate duration equals the wealth-weighted average duration of house-
holds' excess consumption claims:

                                                                         0
                                          Da =      D c - y (  0 , 0 )     d 0 .
                                                                         0

    The proof follows directly from the definition of the household specific duration measure and
market clearing.
    The next proposition shows that, when households that are richer than average tend to have
excess consumption plans of higher duration, then the (equally-weighted) average household's
excess consumption plan duration is smaller than the aggregate duration, the duration of the
aggregate excess consumption.

Proposition 5.7. If cov(0 , D c-y (0 )) > 0 then

                                              D c - y (  0 , 0 ) d  0  D a .

   6 Note that households in the detrended economy's equilibrium face a deterministic path for risk-free rates, and do
not anticipate interest rate shocks.
   7 Auclert (2019) was the first to conduct this type of duration analysis in a model with endogenous labor supply to

gauge the effects of monetary policy on consumption.


                                                           22
Given this condition, lower interest rates increase financial wealth inequality. In other words, if
all households are perfectly hedged in their portfolio, then wealth inequality should increase.

     The proof follows from recognizing the following relationship between (cross-sectional) ex-
pectations and covariances:

                            0 c - y                               0 c - y
                  Da = E    a D (0 , 0 ) = E D c-y (0 , 0 ) + cov   , D (  0 , 0 ) ,
                            0                                     0

     In this class of Bewley models, agents with low financial wealth have encountered a bad his-
tory of labor income shocks. If labor income is highly persistent, their labor income is low today
and in the near future relative to labor income in the distant future (because of mean-reversion).
This pattern makes the duration of their labor income stream high. But since the household is
smoothing consumption inter-temporally, D c < D y . As a result, low-wealth agents tend to have
low duration of their excess consumption plan. Conversely, rich agents have high labor income
and high excess consumption duration. Consumption smoothing is the force that makes the co-
variance assumption satisfied in a Bewley model where the only source of heterogeneity is in-
come shock realizations. It follows immediately that, under the stated covariance restriction, the
increase in the cost of the excess consumption plan for the average household is smaller than the
aggregate (per capita) wealth increase. Put differently, financial wealth inequality should increase
when rates go down if households want to afford their old consumption plans.
     Low-financial wealth households in a Bewley model have high-duration human wealth, which
provides a natural interest rate hedge. High financial-wealth households have low-duration hu-
man wealth and need to increase financial wealth by more when rates decline to be able to afford
the old consumption plan.
     The insights of this normative proposition apply more broadly. The covariance condition can
be verified in a richer model with ex-ante heterogeneity across households, like the one discussed
in the next section. It can also be tested in the data, with the additional observation that house-
holds' financial portfolios may not have the same duration as their excess consumption-plans. In
other words, real-world households may not be fully hedged, unlike the households in the Bewley
model.
     Next, we measure the actual duration of the household's financial assets in the data, denoted
D f in ,   which can differ from the duration of the excess consumption claim D c-y . If they differ,
the household is not hedged. We use a calibrated version of the Bewley model with overlapping
generations to assess how well these households are really hedged against interest rate risk.




                                                    23
6     Calibrated Model with Ex-ante Heterogeneity

The previous section showed that in a Bewley model a rise in financial wealth inequality is re-
quired when interest rates decline when agents are fully hedged. In this section, we aim to quan-
tify this effect in a model with realistic heterogeneity. It introduces overlapping generations of
finitely-lived agents, generating heterogeneity by age. We also allow for additional heterogeneity
by gender, race, and educational attainment. We investigate how the financial, human, and total
wealth distributions change with low versus high interest rates.


6.1     Calibration

6.1.1    Income Process

The income process consists of a regular component and a superstar component.


Regular Income Component The income process for household i in group g of age a at time t is
standard in the literature and given by:

                                         i, g             i
                                   log yt,a     = m t +  Xt + zit ,                                  (5)
                                        zit+1 = i + it+1 + ti+1 ,                                    (6)
                                        it+1 = it + t
                                                    i
                                                      +1 ,                                           (7)

                                     i is a vector of household characteristics that includes a cubic
where mt is a year-fixed effect and Xt
function of age, an indicator variable for education that is one for college completion, an indicator
variable for race that is one for whites, and an indicator variable for gender that is one when
male. The vector also includes the interaction of the age function with the groups dummies. Thus,
there are eight groups with their own deterministic income profile: the interactions of college and
non-college (C/N), white and non-white (W/O), and male and female (M/F).
      The stochastic income component zit contains a household-fixed effect i , a persistent com-
ponent it+1 , and an i.i.d. component ti+1 . We have: E[zi ] = E[i ] = E[i ] = E[i ] = 0 and
Var [i ] = 2 , Var [  i ] = 2 , Var [ i ] = 2 , and Var [ i ] = 2 . Note that the income risk parameters
                                                          0     ,0
are common across groups. The parameters are estimated by GMM using PSID data from 1970
until 2017, as detailed in Appendix A.2. Figure A5 in that appendix plots the deterministic income
profile of the different groups.
      The literature typically estimates (5)-(7) on labor income for white males between ages 25 and
55. We deviate from this practice in three ways, all of which are important for our purposes. First,
we consider a broader income concept. Second, we consider the entire life-cycle from age 18 to 80.
Third, we focus on households rather than individuals.


                                                   24
   First, from the model's perspective, the relevant notion of income includes transfers. It is the
risk in this income that the household is hedging by trading in financial markets (borrowing and
saving). To that end, we measure income in the data as income from wages and salaries, the
labor income component of proprietor's income, and government transfers (unemployment ben-
efits, social security, other government transfers), and private defined-benefit pension income.8
Obtaining consistent data on the various components of transfers is involved because successive
waves of the PSID use different variable codes for the same concepts. Appendix A.2 provides the
details. Catherine et al. (2020) also focuses on after-transfer income.
   Second, we are interested in the entire life-cycle. We start at age 18 and go until age 80. Because
our income concept includes transfers such as unemployment benefits and retirement income
from public or private defined-benefit pension plans, we do not have to model labor force partic-
ipation decisions or retirement decisions. Our approach captures the average decisions made in
the data. For example, we do not need to make the assumption that retirement starts at age 65,
that income in retirement is some constant fraction of pre-retirement income, or that income risk
disappears in retirement. We can let the data speak on these issues. Since our income concept
includes income from part-time work, it captures income earned by students, for example. We
assign to students the educational achievement they will attain even before they have completed
their education, so that they are classified in the correct group.
   Third, we focus on households, aggregating income across its adult members. This absolves
us from having to model demographic changes such as getting married, getting divorced, getting
widowed. We simply follow households identified by the head of household as designated in the
data. If women who get married are less likely to be the head of households than men who get
married, then the income profile for women will be lower than that for men since there will be
fewer two-earner households headed by women than by men.


Superstar Income Component                 To help the model match the level of wealth inequality in the
high-interest rate regime, we enrich the income process in (5)-(7) with a superstar income state.
                                                                                                sup
This state has a high income level Y sup . Households enter in this state with probability p12 when
                                                                                          sup
they are in the normal income state, and return to the normal state with probability p21 when they
currently are in the superstar income state. The income level Y sup is chosen to match the wealth
gini in the 1980s exactly, which requires a value equal to 75 times average income. The transition
                                sup                    sup
probability parameters p12 = 0.0002 and p21 = 0.975 are taken from Boar and Midrigan (2020).
There is about a 1% probability of entering in the superstar income state over one's life-time.
Conditional on entering, the state has an expected duration of 40 years.
   In the computations, we discretize the stochastic income process z, with the extra superstar
state, as a markov chain. Since the groups differ by deterministic income profile (but not by risk
  8 In   future versions, we plan to also subtract taxes using NBER taxsim software.


                                                             25
parameters), we simulate agents from all eight demographic groups in numbers proportional to
their empirical frequency.


6.1.2   Mortality Risk

Households face mortality risk which differs by gender, and which is calibrated to the data. For
simplicity, we assume that households in each age-gender group share mortality risk within their
cohort.9


6.1.3   Financial Asset

We model a stationary economy with a single risk-free assets. As the previous section explained,
having only safe assets is without much loss of generality since a model with aggregate risk in total
income maps into a stationary economy without aggregate risk as long as the idiosyncratic and
aggregate risk are uncorrelated. The presence of aggregate risk in the growing economy affects the
time discount factor and hence the equilibrium risk-free rate in the stationary economy. As before,
we envision that the source of the decline in interest rates is a decline in the expected growth rate
of the aggregate endowment (GDP).
     The risk-free asset is long-lived, modeled as a zero-coupon bond. Therefore, its duration equals
its maturity. Agents start life at age 18 with zero financial assets.


6.1.4   Duration of Financial Wealth

The real world's counter-part to the model's financial asset is a portfolio of various financial and
real assets that households own. As Table 1 shows, household assets consist of (i) cash, deposits,
and money market instruments, (ii) stocks held directly and indirectly in mutual funds and pen-
sion accounts, (iii) real estate, (iv) private business wealth, and (v) fixed income assets (directly
and indirectly held). Household liabilities consist of mortgage, student, and consumer debt. The
duration of a financial portfolio is the weighted average duration of the components of the fi-
nancial portfolio, where the weights are the portfolio weights  (k ) of the various financial assets
k:
                                                           ti (k) Dt (k).
                                                 f in
                                               D t ,i =                                                               (8)
                                                          k

     To measure the duration of each of the components of financial wealth, Dt (k), we build a rich
asset pricing model, detailed in Appendix D. It prices bonds of various maturities, both nominal
and real, the aggregate stock market, several cross-sectional stock market factors including small
stocks, and aggregate housing wealth. For these assets, the model provides a McCauley duration
  9 This is implemented as a tontine system, where all agents of a certain age pool resources to eliminate mortality risk.

Our results are not sensitive to this assumption.



                                                              26
in each quarter from 1947.Q1 until 2019.Q4. We use the durations for the 1980s, averaged across
the 40 quarters in that decade.
    We use the model-implied duration of the aggregate stock market to proxy for the duration
of households' directly- and indirectly-held stocks. We use the duration of small stocks to proxy
for the duration of household business wealth. We use the duration of owner-occupied housing
wealth to measure the duration of households' real estate assets. For cash and deposits, we assume
a duration of 0.25 years. For fixed income, we assume a duration of 4 years.10
    For student debt, we assume a duration of 4.5 years. Student loans are typically 10 year an-
nuities. At an interest rate of 5.8%, the average rate on outstanding student loans in 2017, the
duration is 4.56. At higher the interest rates that prevailed in the 1980s, the duration would be
slightly smaller. For consumer debt, we assume a duration of 1 year. Much of this debt is revolv-
ing debt, while some of it is 24-month personal loans. The personal loans are amortizing.11 For
mortgage debt, we obtain data for the Bloomberg-Barclays Aggregate MBS Index. It is a repre-
sentative portfolio of all outstanding U.S. pass-through mortgage-backed securities. The average
McCauley duration of this representative mortgage portfolio in 1989 and 1990 was 5.2 years. Most
mortgage debt in the U.S. is 30-year fixed-rate mortgages. The reasons for this much lower du-
ration than 30 are several: amortization, high interest rates, and prepayment.12 The resulting
durations are reported in the first column of Table 1.
    Next, we collect data from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) on household portfolio
            i ( k ) in (8). The wealth-weighted portfolio weights are reported in the remaining
shares, the t
columns of Table 1, first when pooling all agents ("All") and then for each group separately. The
details are in Appendix A.3.
    We calculate the duration for each household separately, combining the household-level port-
folio weights with the asset-specific durations listed in the first column. The last two rows of
Table 1 report the wealth-weighted (aggregate) and equally-weighted (average) financial dura-
tion among households. When pooling all households, the average financial duration is 15.96.
This is the value we use in the version of the model below with homogenous financial duration.
    As shown in Proposition 5.7, if the aggregate duration exceeds the average duration of finan-
cial wealth, then a reduction in interest rates leads to a rise in financial wealth inequality. This
condition, which results from a positive cross-sectional covariance between duration of financial
wealth and financial wealth itself, is clearly satisfied in the U.S. data. It occurs because richer
   10 For reference, the maturity of outstanding U.S. Treasury marketable securities averages 62 months between 2000

and 2020. The duration is strictly smaller than the maturity since bonds pay coupons. For example, if the coupon rate
is 4.65% and the bond pays semi-annual coupons, then the duration is 4.5 years. Other corporate and international
bonds and loans held by U.S. households tends to have somewhat lower duration than U.S. Treasuries because there
are fewer long-term bonds and coupons are higher.
   11 We exclude auto debt since we also exclude vehicles from assets. The reason is that our consumption measure

includes durable consumption.
   12 The average maturity of the outstanding MBS portfolio in 1989-1990 was 9.8 years and the average coupon rate was

9.35%.


                                                         27
                 Table 1: Duration of the Household Financial Wealth Portfolio 1980s


                                                                             Portfolio Shares
                            Duration            All     MWC          MWN       MOC      MON     FWC     FWN     FOC      FON
 Assets
 Cash and Deposits            0.25              11.51    9.33        12.34      9.40     9.66   14.50   23.08    12.55    5.55
 Equities                     28.70             11.52   17.25         7.32      7.92     1.78   13.57    6.41     3.16    2.07
 Real Estate                  14.70             48.38   38.60        50.09     52.81    95.58   55.50   61.27   102.25   109.27
 Private Business Wealth      61.10             24.37   26.33        26.77     37.33    14.17    6.94    7.65     2.52    0.96
 Fixed Income                  4.00             17.62   21.00        15.65     12.92    14.70   20.04   11.57     6.04    7.04
 Liabilities
 Mortgage Debt                 5.20             12.03   11.09        11.10     18.25    33.48   9.26    8.86    15.73    20.83
 Student Debt                  4.50              0.27    0.26         0.15      0.29     0.40   0.92    0.23     4.33    1.58
 Other Debt                    1.00              1.10    1.16         0.92      1.83     2.01   0.38    0.88     6.47     2.48
 Aggregate Duration                             25.39   26.97        25.88     32.40    22.05   16.60   15.56   16.67    16.36
 Average Duration                               15.96   20.40        17.19     15.84    15.15   12.61   10.63   11.33    10.55

Note: The column "Duration" reports the duration of the asset, again averaged over all quarters in the 1980s. For Eq-
uities, Private Business Wealth, and Real Estate, the durations are computed form the asset pricing model in Appendix
D, averaging across the 40 quarters in the 1980s. The column "All" reports the wealth-weighted average or aggregate
portfolio weights. Liabilities receive negative portfolio weights. The next eight columns also report wealth-weighted
average portfolio shares, but for the eight demographic groups. M stands for male, F for female; W stands for white, O
for all other races; C stands for college, N for non-college. These weights are based on the 1989 SCF.


households tend to hold more private business wealth, equities, and housing wealth, which are
long-duration assets, hold fewer short-duration assets (cash), and hold less debt (negative dura-
tion). The goal of this section is to analyze how much financial wealth inequality the model can
generate given the observed decline in real interest rates.
    In the data, financial duration is strongly correlated with the level of financial wealth. Using
the SCF data, the dots in Figure 3 plots the average duration by wealth group. The first wealth
group contains the lowest-wealth households who collectively own 5% of financial wealth. The
next group contains the next-lowest-wealth households who combined own the next 5% of finan-
cial wealth. Together with the first group, they account for 10% of total financial wealth. The
last group contains the richest households who together hold 5% of financial wealth. Because of
the unequal distribution of financial wealth, the last group is the smallest in terms of number of
members. The figure shows that wealthier households hold longer-duration financial portfolios.
    We consider a version of the model with heterogeneous duration of financial wealth. For this
version, we assume that the duration of household i in group g is given by:

                                         f in     LB
                                       Di , g = D g  + ( DUB    LB
                                                          g - D g ) Lorenzi                                               (9)

where Lorenzi is the value of the Lorenz curve at household i, equal to the share of total wealth
held by households in that group with wealth less than or equal to that of household i. This



                                                                28
                                                 Figure 3: Duration by Net Worth, SCF Data


                                            45        Approximation
                                                      Data
                                            40


                         Average Duration
                                            35
                                            30
                                            25
                                            20
                                            15
                                                 0      20         40        60         80   100
                                                             Wealth-Weighted Percentile

Note: This plot compares durations in the data against the model approximation (9). The scatterplot displays average
durations from the Survey of Consumer Finances, binned by net wealth. Households are sorted by their net wealth and
allocated to different bins in such a way that the share of total wealth held by each bin is equal. Data are from the SCF
survey in 1989. The solid red line displays the model's approximation (9).


specification is equivalent to a linear interpolation over Figure 3 by group, varying from duration
 LB at the least wealthy household in the group to duration DUB at the most wealthy household in
Dg                                                           g
                      LB and DUB to exactly match both the average duration and the aggregate
the group. We choose Dg       g
duration that we found in the data, reported in the last two rows in Table 1. We do this separately
                                                                      LB , DUB ). To illustrate this
for each demographic group, resulting in eight pairs of parameters ( Dg     g
procedure, the red line in Figure 3 shows the model-implied duration heterogeneity when pooling
all households.


6.1.5   Preferences

Households have CRRA preferences with risk aversion  equal to 2. We set  = 1/ R. They max-
imize life-time expected utility subject to a budget constraint and subject to a natural borrowing
constraint. The Bellman equations for this model are in Appendix C.


6.1.6   Size of Decline in Real Yields

According to the auxiliary asset pricing model in Appendix D, the ten-year real bond yield av-
eraged 4.70% in the 40 quarters of the 1980s decade and 0.12% in the 2010s decade.13 The asset
pricing model shows similarly large declines in expected returns on stocks and on real estate, as
  13 The asset pricing model matches the available data on Treasury Inflation-Indexed Securities over the period for

which they are available. The model-implied yield changes are similar for real bonds of different maturities. The one-
quarter real bond yield fell from 4.21% in the 1980s to -0.84% in the 2010s. The five-year real bond yield fell from 4.65%
in the 1980s to -0.31% in the 2010s. The thirty-year real bond yield fell from 4.76% to 1.40%.



                                                                      29
shown in Table 2. In other words, the decline in expected returns was broad-based.

                            Table 2: Expected Real Returns Decade Averages


                           Asset                             1980s   2010s    Decline
                           Aggregate stock market            8.0%    2.0%      6.0%
                           Small stocks                      3.6%    3.2%      0.4%
                           Housing wealth                    8.2%    4.8%      3.6%
                           Ten-year real bond yield          3.7%    0.1%      3.6%

Note: The table reports model-implied real expected real returns and average them over the 40 quarters in the 1980s
and the 40 quarters of the 2010s. The model is described in Appendix D.

      We calibrate the model to a decline in real rates of 4.6%. In the stationary model, interest
rates must be adjusted for growth. The adjusted risk-free rates decline from 2.7% to -1.8%. This
change in R is the result of an unexpected and permanent decline in the expected aggregate growth
rate of the economy (an MIT shock). We rely on the case of log-normally distributed aggregate
consumption growth. The decline in expected aggregate growth needed to generate this decline
in the risk-free rate is governed by the EIS 1/, as shown in eqn. 4. In the case of  = 2, we need a
decline in E[log ] of 2.25% to get a decline in r of 4.5%. Following Proposition 5.5, we also adjust
the discount factor to preserve the relation ~R
                                              ~ =   ^R^ = 1.
      To study the impact of the change in interest rates, we first simulate the model to generate an
initial draw from the model's stationary distribution. We then change the interest rate, re-solve
the model at the new interest rate, and simulate forward 50 periods (years). To isolate the effect
of the rate change, we subtract out the results of the simulation with the same idiosyncratic shock
realizations under the old interest rate. We do not clear the bond market in this exercise. As a
result, when interest rates decline, the economy produces excess savings. We rebate those savings
to households so as to keep the total resources of the economy unchanged before and after the
interest rate change. Appendix C explains the details.


6.2     High Interest-Rate Regime

We begin by describing the properties of the model in its stationary distribution under the high
interest rate regime. Figure 4 displays the life cycle profiles of income, consumption, financial
wealth, and human wealth. The plot is for all agents in all groups, and the axes are normalized
such that average income is 1 in the population. Income inequality is increasing over the life cycle
because of the accumulation of income shocks and because of the increase in average income over
the life cycle profile. The income inequality drops after retirement but is still nonzero since agents
have heterogeneous retirement income and still face some income risk.
      The top-right panel shows that both the level and dispersion of consumption are rising over
the life cycle, with dispersion falling in retirement when income risk reduces. This is consistent

                                                        30
with the data which show that consumption inherits the hump-shaped profile from income (e.g.,
Krueger and Perri, 2006).

                                                   Figure 4: Life Cycle Profiles


                               Income                                                     Consumption
      2.5
                                                                     2.0
      2.0
                                                                     1.5
      1.5
                                                                     1.0
      1.0

      0.5                                                            0.5

      0.0                                                            0.0
            20   30   40      50      60      70      80   90              20   30   40     50    60     70   80   90


                           Financial Wealth                                               Human Wealth
                                                                     60
     17.5
                                                                     50
     15.0
     12.5                                                            40
     10.0                                                            30
      7.5
                                                                     20
      5.0
      2.5                                                            10
      0.0                                                             0
            20   30   40      50      60      70      80   90              20   30   40     50    60     70   80   90



Note: This figure plots the life cycle profiles by age for the all agents of all groups combined. The axes are normalized
so that the average income across all agents of all ages is equal to unity. The center line displays the median, while the
dark and light bands represent 66.7% and 95% percentile bands. Although agents in the model have a maximum age
of 100, we truncate the plot at age 90 due the relatively small sample of agents surviving past this age.

    Financial wealth in the bottom left panel increases in preparation for retirement, and is sub-
sequently run down during retirement. Financial wealth inequality rises and falls over the life
cycle.
    Human wealth in the bottom right panel is decreasing in age. There are two effects at play.
Human wealth rises as the households' highest-earning periods are brought closer to the present.
Human wealth falls due to the overall decrease in the remaining periods of work. The latter
effect dominates. Total wealth consists almost exclusively of human wealth when young. As
households age and accumulate financial wealth, a larger share of total wealth becomes financial
wealth. However, human wealth remains a large component of total wealth throughout the life-
cycle.
    Figure 5 displays the Lorenz curves for consumption and wealth for all households (in all


                                                                31
groups), and reports the gini coefficients. The model generates a gini coefficient for (after-transfer)
household income of 0.612. Consumption inequality closely tracks income inequality and has a
gini coefficient of 0.575. Financial wealth is much more unequally distributed than human wealth
or total wealth. The gini coefficients of human and total wealth are 0.484 and 0.506, compared to
the gini of financial wealth of 0.804. The low total wealth inequality arises from (i) the importance
of human wealth in total wealth, and (ii) the negative cross-sectional correlation between financial
and human wealth.
                                                        Figure 5: Lorenz Curves


                               Income                                                   Financial Wealth
      1.0                                                               1.0

      0.8                                                               0.8

      0.6                                                               0.6

      0.4                                                               0.4

      0.2                                                               0.2
                                         Gini = 0.612
                                                                                                     Gini = 0.804
      0.0                                                               0.0
         0.0    0.2      0.4            0.6         0.8      1.0           0.0    0.2    0.4       0.6          0.8   1.0


                         Human Wealth                                                    Total Wealth
      1.0                                                               1.0

      0.8                                                               0.8

      0.6                                                               0.6

      0.4                                                               0.4

      0.2                                Gini = 0.484                   0.2                          Gini = 0.506

      0.0                                                               0.0
         0.0    0.2      0.4            0.6         0.8      1.0           0.0    0.2    0.4       0.6          0.8   1.0



Note: This figure plots the Lorenz curve for each variable, obtained from a long simulation of the model.


    Figure 6 displays the duration of human and total wealth by age. Human wealth represents a
claim on lifetime income whereas total wealth represents a claim on lifetime consumption. Both
of these durations are similar because of the importance of human wealth in total wealth. These
durations are high when young, around 30, and drop rapidly as age increases, since there are
fewer years of life remaining to earn labor/pension income. The duration of financial wealth is
fixed at 15.96 in this exercise and not shown.




                                                                   32
                                                  Figure 6: Wealth Durations


                         (a) Human Wealth                                          (b) Total Wealth



        30                                                          35
                                                                    30
        25
                                                                    25
        20
                                                                    20
        15
                                                                    15
        10                                                          10

         5                                                           5
             20     30    40     50    60    70     80   90              20   30   40    50    60     70   80     90



Note: This figure plots the durations of labor income (human) wealth (left panel) and consumption (right panel).
The plots display durations computed for many agents simulated from the stationary equilibrium of the model. The
economy is normalized so that the average income is equal to unity. The center line displays the median, while the
dark and light bands represent 66.7% and 95% percentile bands.


6.3     Change to Low Interest Rates

In this section we apply the main experiment of an unanticipated, permanent decline in the real
interest rate from 4.7% to 0.1% in the growing economy, corresponding to a decline from 2.7%
to -1.8% in the stationary economy. Before turning to the response of households' actual wealth
portfolios, we first note that agents' prior consumption plans may no longer be budget feasible.
Thus, even if financial wealth were unchanged, the change in interest rates could have large effects
on lifetime consumption and welfare.


6.3.1        The Compensated Wealth Distribution

To establish an intuitive baseline that is consistent with the theoretical analysis in Proposition 5.5
of Section 5.8, we compute the change in financial wealth that would be required to maintain the
household's prior consumption plan in the high interest-rate economy. We refer to the counter-
factual wealth allocation in which "fully hedged" households receive this financial wealth as the
compensated financial wealth distribution (defined as  in the theory above).
      The resulting distribution of financial wealth, alongside the original (pre-shock) distribution,
is displayed in Figure 7. To ensure that the full distribution is visible, we display transformed
variables log(1 + x ) on the x-axis.14 This comparison shows two major differences between the
pre-shock and compensated distribution. First, the compensated distribution is shifted substan-
tially to the right. Households in this economy mostly save (ct < yt ) earlier in life before dissaving
  14 Because      many agents have zero financial wealth, a standard log transform would be inappropriate in this context.


                                                              33
           Figure 7: Histogram, Compensated vs. Original Financial Wealth Distribution


                                1.2                         Fin. Wealth (Original), Log Scale
                                                            Fin. Wealth (Compensated), Log Scale
                                1.0
                                0.8
                                0.6
                                0.4
                                0.2
                                0.0
                                      0   1    2      3        4     5         6        7
                                                          log(1 + x)


Note: This plot displays the distribution of financial wealth under the stationary distribution and under the com-
pensated distribution drawn from the stationary distribution of the economy. The x-axis displays a transformation
log(1 + x ) of the original data. Each distribution is top coded at the top 0.1% of the pre-shock wealth distribution.


(ct > yt ) in old age. When rates are much lower, households lose much of the effect of compound
interest on their retirement savings. As a result, the aggregate amount of financial wealth in the
compensated distribution exceeds the pre-shock total by 327%. As can be seen from the plot, this
rightward shift extends up to the very top, implying that even the wealthiest individuals must be
compensated with additional financial assets to attain their old consumption plans. Indeed, more
than one third (37%) of new financial wealth accrues to top-1% financial wealth holders under the
compensated distribution.
    Second, although the wealthiest gain under this compensated distribution, the financial wealth
gini falls substantially in the compensated distribution, as the less wealthy gain proportionally
more. Visually, while the original high interest-rate distribution of financial wealth is heavily
right-skewed, the compensated distribution is actually left-skewed. Quantitatively, the share of
financial wealth held by the top-1% decreases from 54% in the baseline economy to 41% in the
compensated economy.
    To see why inequality falls in the compensated distribution, we can turn to Figure 8. Panel (a)
compares the original (horizontal axis) and compensated financial wealth distributions (vertical
axis) by age. The youngest agents (light/yellow) in the top left have close to zero financial wealth
in the original distribution, but require the most financial wealth in the compensated distribution.
As households age, their actual wealth initially increases, but their compensated wealth falls.
Finally, late in life, both actual and compensated wealth fall rapidly toward zero, with the actual
and compensated distributions close to coinciding for these older households.
    This result is perhaps surprising, since the young have virtually their entire asset portfolio
invested in human wealth. Because human wealth has a very long duration (left panel of Figure



                                                          34
                                               Figure 8: Scatterplots, Compensated vs. Original Financial Wealth Distribution


                                                                (a) By Age                                                                                 (b) By Fin. Wealth

                                         4.0




                                                                                                            Fin. Wealth (Compensated), Log Scale
  Fin. Wealth (Compensated), Log Scale




                                         3.5                                                                                                       4
                                         3.0
                                         2.5                                                                                                       3
                                         2.0
                                                                                                                                                   2
                                         1.5
                                         1.0                                                                                                       1
                                         0.5
                                         0.0                                                                                                       0
                                               0.0   0.5      1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0              3.5   4.0                                               0     1           2            3        4
                                                           Fin. Wealth (Original), Log Scale                                                               Fin. Wealth (Original), Log Scale


Note: Panel (a) plots the distribution of original financial wealth against the distribution of compensated financial
wealth by age. Each dot represents one year of age, with the lightest (yellow) dots representing the youngest agents
and the darkest (purple) dots representing the oldest agents. Both variables are plotted using the transform log(1 + x ).
The dashed line represents equality between the original and compensated distributions. Panel (b) plots the same
distribution by bins of original financial wealth in place of age.


6), it is well-hedged against interest rate changes. The key challenge the young face in a low
interest rate environment, however, is not from their current portfolio, but their future portfolios.
Due to the life cycle profile of income, the young plan to save during middle age, then dissave
during retirement. Under a low interest rate, the young will be unable to accumulate enough
interest on their future savings, making their original consumption plans unattainable without
large infusions of financial wealth today. In contrast, older agents have already benefited from
the higher rate of return in accumulating their retirement assets, while the oldest are dissaving,
consuming principal rather than interest. These households are less affected by the loss of high-
return investment opportunities, and require little compensation.
                    Panel (b) aggregates over ages to present the total compensation required for various levels of
pre-shock financial wealth. The lowest levels of financial wealth mix young agents who have not
begun saving with old agents who are spending down assets late in life. As a result, this group
mixes over agents requiring the largest and smallest amounts of compensation. Quantitatively,
the young make up a disproportionate share of this group and dominate the aggregate result, so
that the least wealthy agents in this economy require the most compensation, measured as the
vertical distance from the dot to the dashed 45-degree line. As wealth increases, we move toward
the middle-aged individuals in the economy, who require a non-zero level of compensation, but
less than those at the bottom of the wealth distribution. Finally, the wealthiest agents in the top
bin, whose wealth is more driven by their income realizations than by demographics, also require
a strictly positive level of compensation, but less than that of the least wealthy.


                                                                                                           35
                          Figure 9: Histograms, Repriced Financial Wealth Distribution


                    (a) Repriced vs. Original                                               (b) Repriced vs. Compensated

   1.2                                   Fin. Wealth (Original), Log Scale        1.2                      Fin. Wealth (Compensated), Log Scale
                                         Fin. Wealth (Repriced), Log Scale                                 Fin. Wealth (Repriced), Log Scale
   1.0                                                                            1.0
   0.8                                                                            0.8
   0.6                                                                            0.6
   0.4                                                                            0.4
   0.2                                                                            0.2
   0.0                                                                            0.0
         0      1     2      3          4        5         6         7                  0   1   2    3        4     5         6        7
                                 log(1 + x)                                                              log(1 + x)


Note: This plot displays the distribution of financial wealth under the repriced distribution, compared to the original
distribution and compensated distribution. All distributions are drawn from the stationary distribution of the economy.
The x-axis displays a transformation log(1 + x ) of the original data. Each distribution is top coded at the top 0.1% of
the pre-shock wealth distribution.


6.3.2        The Repriced Wealth Distribution - Homogenous Financial Duration

Having computed the financial wealth distribution required to keep consumption plans constant,
we can compare it to the financial wealth distributions that actually results under low interest
rates. We refer to this distribution as the repriced distribution. Unlike the compensated distribu-
tion, it depends on the duration of financial wealth. To begin, we consider an economy in which
all households hold financial portfolios with the same duration, which we set to 15.96 following
our results in Table 1. We implement assets with this duration as zero coupon bonds with the
same maturity, and compute the actual change in financial asset values following our assumed
change in interest rates.15 The repriced distribution is displayed in Figure 9. Panel (a) shows that
repricing shifts the financial wealth distribution to the right. Lower interest rates increase aggre-
gate financial wealth by 105%. While this is a large amount, it is insufficient to compensate all
agents. Panel (b) shows that the repriced distribution largely fails to reproduce the compensated
distribution for all but the wealthiest agents.
    Further comparisons can be seen in Figure 10, which plot the effects by age in Panel (a) and
by wealth in Panel (b). Panel (a) shows that repricing delivers virtually no additional financial
wealth to the young, despite their large need for compensating transfers. In contrast, the old are, if
anything, slightly over-hedged, receiving more wealth under repricing than needed to afford their
former consumption plan. These are the points above the 45-degree line. Panel (b) reinforces this
  15 While  the duration is sufficient to compute the change in portfolio value as the shock size approaches zero, for
large shocks this local approximation breaks down, making the exact timing of the cash flows relevant for the change
in portfolio value. Using zero-coupon assets eliminates this complexity.



                                                                             36
                                                      Figure 10: Scatterplots, Repriced Financial Wealth Distribution


                                              (a) Compensated vs. Repriced                                                               (b) Scatter: Repriced Gain

                                       4.0                                                                                   0.0         Binscatter
   Fin. Wealth (Repriced), Log Scale




                                       3.5
                                                                                                                             0.5




                                                                                                  Net Fin. Gain, Log Scale
                                       3.0
                                                                                                                             1.0
                                       2.5
                                       2.0                                                                                   1.5
                                       1.5                                                                                   2.0
                                       1.0                                                                                   2.5
                                       0.5                                                                                   3.0
                                       0.0                                                                                   3.5
                                             0.0   0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5             4.0                                     0.0     0.5      1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0              3.5
                                                    Fin. Wealth (Compensated), Log Scale                                                         Fin. Wealth (Original), Log Scale


Note: This plot displays the distribution of financial wealth under the repriced distribution, compared to the com-
pensated distribution. Panel (a) displays the change in financial wealth relative to the original distribution for the
compensated (x-axis) and repriced (y-axis) distributions. Both axes display a transformation log(1 + x ) of the original
data. Each dot represents one year of age, with the lightest (yellow) dots representing the youngest agents and the
darkest (purple) dots representing the oldest agents. Panel (b) displays original financial wealth on the x-axis and the
net financial gain (repriced minus compensated wealth) on the y-axis. The x-axis displays the transform log(1 + x ),
while the y-axis displays the difference in transformed values. Each dot represents one bin from the original wealth
distribution. All distributions are drawn from the stationary distribution of the economy.


finding, showing that only the wealthiest are approximately hedged. The least wealthy experience
a large net loss from the interest rate change, as repricing fails to appropriately compensate these
households.


6.3.3                                    The Repriced Wealth Distribution - Heterogeneous Financial Duration

Next, we consider the role of duration heterogeneity. While our results in Figures 9 and 10 as-
sumed a constant economy-wide duration, Figure 3 showed that duration varies widely across the
wealth distribution, with wealthier agents holding longer-duration portfolios. As a result, these
households will receive, on average, larger increases in wealth from repricing following a decline
in interest rates. To investigate the quantitative importance of this heterogeneous repricing, we
extend the model to allow for variation in durations, computed from equation (9).
                The repriced distribution under heterogeneous financial durations is plotted in Figure 11.
Panel (a) compares the histogram of the repriced financial wealth distributions under heteroge-
nous and homogenous durations. Incorporating heterogeneous durations causes the distribution
to spread out, with less density in the middle, but more at both the upper and lower ends. While
the difference might appear modest, the log scale of the x-axis implies large wealth gains for the
top of the financial wealth distribution. Under heterogeneous durations, financial wealth thus in-
creases more following a drop in interest rates -- by 216%, more than twice the 105% increase un-


                                                                                                 37
                          Figure 11: Repriced Distribution with Duration Heterogeneity


             (a) Histogram: Het. vs. Const. Duration                                                                                (b) Scatter: Repriced Gain

                                                                                                                        0.5




                                                                             Net Fin. Gain (Het. Duration), Log Scale
   1.2                             Fin. Wealth (Repriced), Log Scale                                                                Binscatter
                                   Fin. Wealth (Het. Duration), Log Scale                                               0.0
   1.0
                                                                                                                        0.5
   0.8                                                                                                                  1.0
                                                                                                                        1.5
   0.6
                                                                                                                        2.0
   0.4                                                                                                                  2.5
   0.2                                                                                                                  3.0
                                                                                                                        3.5
   0.0
         0      1     2     3      4       5         6        7        8                                                      0.0     0.5      1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0              3.5
                                log(1 + x)                                                                                                  Fin. Wealth (Original), Log Scale


Note: This plot displays the distribution of repriced financial wealth from the model with duration heterogeneity. Panel
(a) displays a histogram of repriced wealth under the baseline model and heterogeneous duration models, respectively.
Panel (b) compares the net financial gain (repriced minus compensated wealth) for the heterogeneous duration econ-
omy, binned by original financial wealth. The x-axis displays a transformation log(1 + x ) of the original data, while
the y-axis in Panel (b) displays the difference of these transformations. All distributions are drawn from the station-
ary distribution of the economy. Each distribution in Panel (a) is top coded at the top 0.1% of the pre-shock wealth
distribution.


der equal durations. Panel (b) shows that heterogeneous financial duration results in the wealthy
being even more "over-hedged" while the poor are even more under-hedged than under homoge-
nous financial durations.
    The decline in interest rates increases financial wealth inequality. The share of financial wealth
held by the top 1% rises from 54% to 66% following the drop in rates.


6.3.4        Financial and Total Wealth Inequality

Our model's combined implications for inequality following a fall in interest rates are summa-
rized in Table 3. Each row of the table displays a different statistic measuring inequality. The first
two columns display the statistics from the data. We take the 1980s to be the period preceding the
interest rate decline, and the 2010s to be the period following the interest rate decline. These mea-
sures are computed from the SCF+, as detailed in Appendix A.3.6. The next four columns display
the results from the model. They report results for the initial pre-shock, high-interest rate distribu-
tion, and results for the various distributions after the interest rate decline: the compensated, the
repriced with homogenous duration, and the repriced with heterogeneous duration distributions.
    The top panel of Table 3 shows that our model is able to produce a realistic level of financial
wealth inequality for the pre-shock period, matching the 0.804 gini and coming close to matching
the top-10% wealth share. It overstates the top-1% financial wealth share.
    Turning to the last column, corresponding to the repriced distribution under heterogeneous


                                                                            38
                                     Table 3: Inequality, Model Comparison

                                       Data                                         Model
                             Before           After           Initial        Comp         Repriced       Het Dur
 Gini FW                      0.804           0.873           0.804          0.640          0.804          0.871
 Top-10% share FW             68.6%           77.4%           71.5%          55.1%          71.5%          80.7%
 Top-1% share FW              31.7%           37.2%           54.4%          40.8%          54.4%          66.0%
 Gini HW                         ­              ­             0.484          0.516          0.516          0.516
 Top-10% share HW                ­              ­             40.3%          38.4%          38.4%          38.4%
 Top-1% share HW                 ­              ­             23.7%          17.3%          17.3%          17.3%
 Gini TW                         ­              ­             0.506          0.542          0.510          0.544
 Top-10% share TW                ­              ­             44.7%          42.5%          41.2%          45.2%
 Top-1% share TW                 ­              ­             29.7%          23.5%          22.6%          27.9%

Note: Top 1%, Top 10% financial wealth shares as well as financial wealth gini coefficients are estimated using SCF
surveys. For the Before period we use the average values in 1983 and 1989. For the After period we use the aver-
age values in 2010, 2013 and 2016. More details on the computations are provided in Appendix A.3.6. For model
results, the columns represent the pre-shock wealth distribution ("Initial"), the compensated distribution ("Comp"),
the repriced distribution with homogeneous duration ("Repriced"), and the repriced distribution with heterogeneous
duration ("Het Dur").


durations, we see that this model can explain nearly all of the 0.069 increase in the financial wealth
gini over the intervening period, even though this was not a target of the calibration. The model
also produces an increase in the top-10% financial wealth share of 9.2% points, which is close to
the observed increase in the data of 8.8% points. The model produces a large increase in the top-
1% financial wealth share of 11.6% point increase. This overstates the 5.5% point increase in the
SCF+ measure but is close to the 10.5% points increase in the WID measure listed in the opening
paragraph of the paper.16 In short, lower expected returns on financial assets explain the entire
rise in financial wealth inequality in the data.
    At the same time, the top panel of Table 3 shows that a compensated distribution, allowing
agents to afford their prior consumption plans, would have corresponded to a major decrease in in-
equality, with top wealth shares and the gini coefficient all falling substantially compared to their
pre-shock levels. This suggests that the actual allocations in the data failed to fully compensate
younger and less wealthy individuals, leaving them less well off than they were prior to the rate
shock. Abstracting from incentive effects­which may well be very important--progressive finan-
cial wealth taxation would help move the economy under the repriced distribution closer to that
under the compensated distribution.
  16 As noted in Section 3, the rise in the top-1% financial wealth share in the United States was even larger, at 12%

points, when measured between 1982 and 2015 according to the World Inequality Database. This is nearly identical to
what the model produces. The SCF+ generates an increase in the top-1% financial wealth share of 7.2% between the
1983 and 2016 surveys. The WID generates a 8.9% point increase in the top-10% share between the 1980s and the 2010s,
which is nearly identical to the 8.8% point increase in the top-10% share in the SCF+ over the same period. Hence, the
disagreement between data sources is concentrated in the top-1% only.


                                                         39
    Turning to the center panel of Table 3, we observe that all three human inequality indicators are
much lower than their financial wealth inequality counterparts in the initial distribution. Lower
interest rates modestly increase the human wealth gini from 0.484 to 0.516 . Younger households
own most of the human wealth, and have a high duration of human wealth. The interest rate
decline generates the largest increase for the highest-human wealth households, explaining the
rise in human wealth inequality. However, the 0.032 increase in the human wealth gini is less than
half as large as the 0.067 increase in the financial wealth gini. The model predicts a substantial
decline in the top-1% human wealth share, which spills over to a modest decline in the top-10%
share. The top percentile of human wealth contains many households who currently are in the
superstar income state. Since that state arrives at random times in the life-cycle, ends with 2.5%
probability each period, and certainly ends at death, the human wealth duration of the superstars
is lower than that of typical young households.17 Hence, a decline in interest rates lowers the
top-1% human wealth share.
    The bottom panel of Table 3 reports on total wealth inequality, where total wealth is the sum of
financial and human wealth. Since human wealth is by far the largest component of total wealth
for most households, the total wealth gini (0.506 ) is close to the human wealth gini (0.484 ) and
much lower than the financial wealth gini (0.804 ). When interest rates decline, the total wealth gini
rises by 0.038, substantially less than the rise in the financial wealth gini. The differences are even
larger at the top of the wealth distribution. The top-10% total wealth share increase by only 0.5%
points, far less than the 9.2% point rise in the corresponding financial wealth share. The top-1%
total wealth share falls by 1.8% points compared to the 11.6% point increase in the top-1% financial
wealth share. The behavior of the top total wealth percentile in response to an interest rate decline
depends on the composition of wealth of the households in that top percentile. These households
are made up of two clusters. Some have most of their wealth in financial wealth. These are older
households who have saved for a long time and households who transitioned out of the superstar
state. The second cluster are households who currently are in the superstar state. They have
much lower ratios of financial to total wealth.18 The wealth dynamics of the former cluster are
governed by the dynamics of the top-1% financial wealth share--which increases sharply,--while
the wealth dynamics of the second cluster are governed by the dynamics of the top-1% human
wealth share--which fall sharply. The effect of the second cluster dominates, and on net, there is
a modest decline in the total wealth share of the top-1%. The main take-away is that total wealth
inequality does not rise nearly as much when rates decline. Since consumption is ultimately what
matters to the households in the model, and total wealth is the present value of consumption, the
  17 The average human wealth duration of households in the superstar state is 12.0 compared to 17.5 for those not in

the superstar state. Intuitively, the exit rate acts as an additional discount rate which lowers the duration. Moreover,
when younger agents enter in the superstar state, it pulls forward their income profile, again lowering its duration.
  18 The first cluster has an average ratio of financial to total wealth of 0.95 whereas the second cluster has an average

ratio of 0.30.



                                                           40
most relevant measure of wealth inequality has changed little.
    Finally, we note tat the total wealth gini under the repriced (Het Dur) and compensated distri-
butions are nearly identical. That implies that the total wealth distribution that enables households
to afford their old consumption plans after the rate change has the same level of inequality as the
actual distribution. However, the former faces less top-wealth inequality than the latter.


7   Conclusion

A persistent decline in real interest rates, like the one experienced in much of the world between
the 1980s and the 2010s, naturally leads to a rise in financial wealth inequality. Households whose
wealth is predominantly made up of financial rather than human wealth, and particularly those
with short-maturity assets, must increase savings to be able to afford the same consumption plan.
We show how a standard incomplete markets Bewley model predicts that a decline in rates in-
creases financial wealth inequality. We quantify the effect of declining rates on inequality by
adding rich heterogeneity by age, race, gender, and education. Once the positive correlation
between financial wealth and financial wealth duration is taken into account, the model with
declining interest rates explains all of the increase in financial wealth inequality. Human wealth
inequality is much lower than financial wealth inequality, and increases by much less when rates
decline. Since human wealth represents a majority of total wealth, the effect of lower rates on total
wealth inequality is small, and even reverses at the top of the total wealth distribution. While most
households have been made worse off by the decline in interest rates, due to imperfectly hedged
portfolios of human and financial wealth, the costs have fallen disproportionately on young and
low-wealth households.




                                                 41
References

Aiyagari, S.R., 1995. Optimal capital income taxation with incomplete markets, borrowing con-
  straints, and constant discounting. Journal of political Economy 103, 1158­1175.

Alvaredo, F., Chancel, L., Piketty, T., Saez, E., Zucman, G., 2018. World inequality report 2018.
  Belknap Press.

Alvarez, F., Jermann, U.J., 2001. Quantitative asset pricing implications of endogenous solvency
  constraints. Rev. Financ. Stud. 14, 1117­1151.

Auclert, A., 2019. Monetary policy and the redistribution channel. Am. Econ. Rev. 109, 2333­2367.

Bach, L., Calvet, L.E., Sodini, P., 2020. Rich Pickings? Risk, Return, and Skill in Household Wealth.
  American Economic Review 110. doi:10.1257/aer.20170666.

Benhabib, J., Bisin, A., 2018. Skewed wealth distributions: Theory and empirics. Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature 56, 1261­91.

Bernanke, B.S., et al., 2005. The global saving glut and the US current account deficit. Technical
  Report.

Bewley, T., 1986. Stationary monetary equilibrium with a continuum of independently fluctu-
  ating consumers, in: Hildenbrand, W., Mas-Collel, A. (Eds.), Contributions to Mathematical
  Economics in Honor of Gerard Debreu. North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Boar, C., Midrigan, V., 2020. Efficient redistribution. Working Paper.

Caballero, R.J., Farhi, E., Gourinchas, P.O., 2008. An equilibrium model of" global imbalances"
  and low interest rates. American economic review 98, 358­93.

Campbell, J.Y., Shiller, R.J., 1988. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future dividends
  and discount factors. Review of Financial Studies 1, 195­227.

Catherine, S., Miller, M., Sarin, N., 2020. Social security and trends in inequality.

Doepke, M., Schneider, M., 2006. Inflation and the redistribution of nominal wealth. J. Polit. Econ.
  114, 1069­1097.

Eggertsson, G.B., Mehrotra, N.R., 2014. A model of secular stagnation. Technical Report. National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Eichengreen, B., 2015. Secular stagnation: the long view. American Economic Review 105, 66­70.



                                                   42
Fagereng, A., Blomhoff Holm, M., Moll, B., Natvik, G., 2019. Saving behavior across the wealth
  distribution: The importance of capital gains. NBER Working Paper No. 26588.

Fagereng, A., Guiso, L., Malacrino, D., Pistaferri, L., 2020. Heterogeneity and Persistence in Re-
  turns to Wealth. Econometrica 88, 115­170. doi:10.3982/ecta14835.

Gomez, M., Gouin-Bonenfant, E., 2020. A q-theory of inequality. Working Paper Columbia Uni-
  versity.

Gordon, R.J., 2017. The rise and fall of American growth: The US standard of living since the civil
  war. volume 70. Princeton University Press.

Greenwald, D.L., Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S.C., 2019. How the Wealth was Won: Factor Shares as
  Market Fundamentals. Technical Report. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gupta, A., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2021. Valuing private equity strip by strip. The Journal of
  Finance .

Guti´
    errez, G., Philippon, T., 2017. Declining Competition and Investment in the US. Technical
  Report. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Heathcote, J., Perri, F., Violante, G.L., 2010. Unequal we stand: An empirical analysis of economic
  inequality in the united states, 1967­2006. Review of Economic dynamics 13, 15­51.

Heathcote, J., Storesletten, K., Violante, G.L., 2017. Optimal tax progressivity: An analytical frame-
  work. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1693­1754.

Heathcothe, J., Storesletten, K., Violante, G.L., 2020. How should tax progressivity respond to
  rising income inequality. NBER Working Paper No. 28006.

Hubmer, J., Krusell, P., Smith, A.A., 2020. Sources of u.s. wealth inequality: Past, present, and
  future, in: NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

Huggett, M., Kaplan, G., 2016. How large is the stock component of human capital? Review of
  Economic Dynamics 22, 21­51.

Jiang, Z., Lustig, H., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., Xiaolan, M., 2019. The u.s. public debt valuation
  puzzle. NBER Working Paper No. 26583.

Jiang, Z., Lustig, H., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., Xiaolan, M., 2021. Public debt valuation: The uk over
  the long run. Working Paper.

Jord`  ` Schularick, M., Taylor, A.M., 2017. Macrofinancial history and the new business cycle
    a, O.,
  facts. NBER macroeconomics annual 31, 213­263.

                                                 43
Kopczuk, W., 2017. Us capital gains and estate taxation. The Economics of Tax Policy .

Kopczuk, W., Zwick, E., 2020. Business incomes at the top. Journal of Economic Perspectives 34,
  27­51.

Krueger, D., Ludwig, A., 2018. Optimal taxes on capital in the OLG model with uninsurable
  idiosyncratic income risk. Technical Report. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Krueger, D., Lustig, H., 2010. When is market incompleteness irrelevant for the price of aggregate
  risk (and when is it not)? J. Econ. Theory 145, 1­41.

Krueger, D., Perri, F., 2006. Does income inequality lead to consumption inequality? evidence and
  theory. The Review of Economic Studies 73, 163­193.

Kuhn, M., Schularick, M., Steins, U.I., 2020. Income and wealth inequality in america, 1949­2016.
  Journal of Political Economy 128, 000­000.

Lustig, H., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., Verdelhan, A., 2013. The wealth-consumption ratio. Review of
  Asset Pricing Studies 3(1), 38­94. Review of Asset Pricing Studies.

Meghir, C., Pistaferri, L., 2004. Income variance dynamics and heterogeneity. Econometrica 72,
  1­32.

Mian, A., Straub, L., Sufi, A., 2020. The saving glut of the rich and the rise in household debt.
  NBER Working Paper No. 26941.

Moll, B., 2020. Comment on "sources of U.S. wealth inequality: Past, present, and future", in:
  Martin Eichenbaum And (Ed.), NBER Macro Annual.

Panousi, V., Reis, C., 2017. A unified framework for optimal taxation with undiversifiable risk.
  Macroeconomic Dynamics , 1­15.

Piketty, T., 2015. About capital in the twenty-first century. American Economic Review 105, 48­53.

Piketty, T., Saez, E., 2003. Income inequality in the united states, 1913­1998. The Quarterly journal
  of economics 118, 1­41.

Piketty, T., Saez, E., Zucman, G., 2018. Distributional national accounts: methods and estimates
  for the united states. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, 553­609.

Piketty, T., Zucman, G., 2015. Chapter 15 - wealth and inheritance in the long run, in: Atkinson,
  A.B., Bourguignon, F. (Eds.), Handbook of Income Distribution. Elsevier. volume 2, pp. 1303­
  1368.



                                                 44
Rachel, L., Smith, T., 2017. Are low real interest rates here to stay? International Journal of Central
  Banking 13.

Saez, E., Zucman, G., 2016. Wealth inequality in the united states since 1913: Evidence from
  capitalized income tax data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, 519­578.

Smith, M., Yagan, D., Zidar, O., Zwick, E., Working Papers. The rise of pass-throughs and the
  decline of the labor share. [Preliminary] .

Summers, L.H., 2014. Us economic prospects: Secular stagnation, hysteresis, and the zero lower
  bound. Business economics 49, 65­73.

Wachter, J., 2005. Solving models with external habit. Finance Research Letters 2, 210­226.

Zucman, G., 2019. Global wealth inequality. Annual Review of Economics 11, 109­138.




                                                  45
A       Data Appendix

A.1     Inequality Data

The top wealth shares presented in 2 are from the World Inequality Database. The data for the
U.S. are available until 2019, for the U.K. until 2012, and for France until 2014.
    We construct the price of a real 30 year annuity by estimating the historical real yield curve for
each country. Letting yr
                       t ( h ) denote the real yield at maturity h at time t the cost of the annuity is
calculated as:

                                           30
                                                     1
                                                (1 + yr        h
                                           h =1       t ( h ))


Due to varying availability of data and for robustness, we use three different approaches to esti-
mate the real yield curve that lead to broadly consistent estimates.
    First, for the UK post 1985 we use historical time series of real yields of various maturities
available from the Bank of England. We fit a spline through these points and construct the real
yield curve directly.
    Second, for the U.S. and France we use the time series of historical nominal yields and infla-
tion provided by Global Financial Data, augmented with data from the Macrohistory database
constructed by Jord`
                   a, Schularick and Taylor (2017), to estimate real yields at different maturities
and then fit a spline through the estimated real yields to construct the real yield curve. We con-
struct real yields for each year by estimating an AR(1) process for inflation on a rolling sample of
50 years of past data, and then subtracting forecasted inflation from nominal yields at all available
maturities. Those are 3-month treasury yields and 10-year government bond yields for all periods,
as well as 30-year government bond yields for later years.
    Third, for the U.K. and U.S. we also use model estimates of the real yield curve. The U.S.
estimates are from the model in Section D. The U.K. estimates are from a similar model estimated
for the U.K. in Jiang, Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh and Xiaolan (2021).


A.2     Income Data

A.2.1    Data Source: PSID

The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) is a household panel survey that began in 1968. The
PSID was originally designed to study the dynamics of income and poverty. Thus, the original
1968 PSID sample was drawn from two independent samples: an over-sample of 1,872 low in-
come families from the Survey of Economic Opportunity (the "SEO sample") and a nationally
representative sample of 2,930 families designed by the Survey Research Center at the University
of Michigan (the "SRC sample"). A total of approximately 500 post-1968 immigrant families were


                                                    46
added in 1997/1999 to update the PSID by adding a representative sample of recent immigrants to
the United States: this sample is called the 1997 PSID Immigrant Refresher Sample. A total of 615
post-1997 immigrant families were added in 2017 to update the PSID by adding a representative
sample of recent immigrants to the United States: this sample is called the 2017 PSID Immigrant
Refresher Sample. We use data from the SRC sample starting in 1970 and ending with the 2017
wave.


A.2.2       PSID Income variables

We construct the following income variables: labinc2f is labor income excluding transfers but in-
cluding the labor part of business and farm income for both head and eventual spouse, transf
which are total households transfer (including Social Security Income and other transfers). These
two variables are then summed to labinc3f which is our measure of total household income for
both head and eventual spouse. Here we detail the construction of these variables.                      19



labinc2f

   · 1970 - 1993.

            ­ Total labor income of head, including wages and salaries, labor part of business income
              and farm income (1993:V23323).
            ­ Spouse's total labor income, including labor part of business income and farm income
              (1993:V23324)

   · 1993 - 2017

            ­ Reference Person's total labor (including wages and other labor) excluding Farm and
              Unincorporated Business Income, (2017:ER71293)
            ­ Labor Part of Business Income from Unincorporated Businesses (2017:ER71274)
            ­ Reference Person's and Spouse's/Partner's Income from Farming (2017:ER71272)
            ­ Wife's Labor Income, Excluding Farm and Unincorporated Business Income (2017:ER71321)
            ­ Wife's Labor Part of Business Income from Unincorporated Businesses (2017:ER71302)

    Note that farm's income includes both labor and asset portions of income.
  19 Notethat PSID variables tickers changed in each survey so here in order to indicate a specific ticker we define it as
follow (YYYY:Ticker).




                                                           47
transf

   · 1970-1993

                       ­ Total Transfer Income of Head and Wife/"Wife" (1993:V22366)
                       ­ Total Transfer Income of Others (1993:V22397)

   · 1994-2003

                       ­ Head's and Wife's Total Transfer Income, Except Social Security (2017:ER71391)
                       ­ Other Total Transfer Income, Except Social Security (2017:ER71419)
                       ­ Total Family Income from Social Security (1994:ER4152)

   · 2004-2017

                       ­ Head's and Wife's Total Transfer Income, Except Social Security (2017:ER71391)
                       ­ Other Total Transfer Income, Except Social Security (2017:ER71419)
                       ­ Reference Person's Income from Social Security (2017:ER71420)
                       ­ Spouse's/Partner's Income from Social Security (2017:ER71422)
                       ­ Others Income from Social Security (2017:ER71424)


labinc3f                  We then construct labinc3f by summing labinc2f and total family transfers transf.
   Figure A1 plots the three variables described above averaged across all households. All vari-
ables are deflated to 2016 dollars using the CPI index.
                                  labinc2f                            transf                                labinc3f
                  75                                   13                                    85


                                                       12                                    80
                  70

                                                       11
                                                                                             75
                  65
                                                       10
    Thousands $




                                                                                             70
                  60                                    9
                                                                                             65
                                                        8
                  55
                                                                                             60
                                                        7

                  50
                                                        6                                    55


                  45                                    5                                    50
                   1970    1980   1990   2000   2010    1970   1980   1990     2000   2010    1970   1980   1990   2000   2010


                                                       Figure A1: PSID average


   We then split the sample in different cohorts: those age from 20 to 40 (Young), 40 to 60 (Middle)
and 60 to 80 (Elderly). Figure A2 plots the same set of variables for these cohorts.

                                                                      48
                                 labinc2f                              transf                                labinc3f
                  110                                   35                                    110
                            Young                                Young                                  Young
                  100       Middle                               Middle                                 Middle
                                                        30                                    100
                            Elderly                              Elderly                                Elderly
                  90
                                                                                              90
                  80                                    25

                                                                                              80
    Thousands $




                  70
                                                        20
                  60                                                                          70
                                                        15
                  50
                                                                                              60
                  40                                    10
                                                                                              50
                  30
                                                        5                                     40
                  20

                  10                                    0                                     30
                   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010     1970   1980   1990      2000   2010    1970   1980   1990   2000   2010


                                                      Figure A2: PSID by Cohorts



A.2.3               Aggregation: NIPA vs PSID

We compare the PSID aggregates to the NIPA table aggregates from NIPA Table 2.1. We use
NIPA Wages and salaries and compare to labinc2f. We then use the Census data on US number of
households to compute Wages and salaries per households (note that our PSID measures are at the
household level). In Figure A3, the left-hand side plot exhibits the nominal amount (thousands
$ per households) for the NIPA aggregates, the PSID simple average and PSID weighted average
using the longitudinal weights. The right-hand side plot exhibits the real variables (deflated using
the CPI index). The variables are indexed such that the index are equal to 100 in 2000. While the
two definitions of income (NIPA Wages and salaries vis-a-vis our measure labinc2f ) are not strictly
identical, we find that they evolve quite closely over our sample.


A.2.4               Group Definitions

Our groups are defined based on gender, race and education. Here we detail the variables used
from the PSID. Sex. We use the sex of the head of the household (2017:ER66018).
   Race. We use the variable race (2017:ER70882). We only have an indicator function if the head
is white and zero for all other races.
   Education. We use a measure of years completed of education (2017:ER34548). The question in
the survey is: "What is the highest grade or year of school that (you/he/she) has completed?". We
make the following assumption: Education is based on highest level of educational achievement
with perfect foresight. So, income of an 18 year old who goes to college later should be part of
the college income profile. We define an individual to be college educated if they have 16 years of
schooling or more. This definition is consistent with Heathcote, Perri and Violante (2010). Before


                                                                      49
                                               PSID vs NIPA (Nominal)                                               PSID vs NIPA (Real)
                                      70                                                                105
                                              PSID Avg                                                           PSID Avg
                                              PSID Weighted                                             100      PSID Weighted
         Thousands $ per households   60      NIPA                                                               NIPA

                                                                                                        95
                                      50




                                                                                    Index: 2000 = 100
                                                                                                        90
                                      40
                                                                                                        85
                                      30
                                                                                                        80

                                      20
                                                                                                        75

                                      10                                                                70


                                      0                                                                 65
                                       1970   1980     1990   2000      2010                              1970   1980     1990    2000    2010



                                                              Figure A3: PSID vs NIPA Income



1975, we use the variable (1975:V4198).
   Based on the above variables we measure the labor income for different groups. Figure A4
plots the variable labinc3f averaged across all households in each group.


A.2.5   Estimating Income Process

We estimate the income profile for different groups following Meghir and Pistaferri (2004). The
income process for household i in group g of age a at time t is given by (5)-(7). The estimation
proceeds in two steps. In the first step, we estimate the year-fixed effects and the coefficients on
the deterministic income profile  from (5). In the second stage, we estimate the risk parameters
using the residuals zit from the first step. This estimation is done by GMM as detailed below.
   Figure A5 plots the deterministic income profile of the different groups, evaluated at the 2016
year-fixed effects. The graph plots the expected income profile for the average person in each
group who is 18 years old in 2016, expressed in thousands of 2016 dollars.
   Figure A6 plots the income at different age, expressed relative to the level at age 18.




                                                                               50
                                                            MWC                                                MWN
                                            140                                                140

                                            120                                                120
                              Thousands $




                                                                                 Thousands $
                                            100                                                100

                                            80                                                 80

                                            60                                                 60

                                            40                                                 40

                                            20                                                 20
                                             1970   1980   1990   2000   2010                   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010


                                                            MOC                                                MON
                                            140                                                140

                                            120                                                120
                              Thousands $




                                                                                 Thousands $
                                            100                                                100

                                            80                                                 80

                                            60                                                 60

                                            40                                                 40

                                            20                                                 20
                                             1970   1980   1990   2000   2010                   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010


                                                            FWC                                                FWN
                                            140                                                140

                                            120                                                120
                              Thousands $




                                                                                 Thousands $




                                            100                                                100

                                            80                                                 80

                                            60                                                 60

                                            40                                                 40

                                            20                                                 20
                                             1970   1980   1990   2000   2010                   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010


                                                            FOC                                                FON
                                            140                                                140

                                            120                                                120
                              Thousands $




                                                                                 Thousands $




                                            100                                                100

                                            80                                                 80

                                            60                                                 60

                                            40                                                 40

                                            20                                                 20
                                             1970   1980   1990   2000   2010                   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010



                                                    Figure A4: Labor Income by Group

Note: Average total labor income (labinc2f ) of each group. Variables are in 2016 thousands dollars. M stands for male,
F for female; W stands for white, O for all other races; C stands for college, N for non-college.




                                                                                51
                                                MWC                                 MWN
                              120                                    80

                              100
                                                                     60
                               80

                               60                                    40
                               40
                                                                     20
                                    20     40         60   80             20   40         60   80
                                                Age                                 Age
                                                MOC                                 MON
                              100                                    60

                               80                                    50

                               60                                    40

                               40                                    30

                               20                                    20
                                    20     40         60   80             20   40         60   80
                                                Age                                 Age
                                                FWC                                 FWN
                               80
                                                                     30

                               60                                    25

                                                                     20
                               40
                                                                     15

                               20                                    10
                                    20     40         60   80             20   40         60   80
                                                Age                                 Age
                                                FOC                                 FON
                               60                                    30

                               50                                    25

                               40                                    20

                               30                                    15

                               20                                    10
                                    20     40         60   80             20   40         60   80
                                                Age                                 Age


                                         Figure A5: Income Profile by Group

Note: This figure displays the life cycle income profile of households within different groups. M stands for male, F for
female; W stands for white, O for all other races; C stands for college, N for non-college. We use the 2016 year fixed
effects. The figure is in thousands of 2016 dollars. The model is estimated according to Equation (5)-(7) on PSID data
from 1970 to 2017.




                                                                52
                                              MWC                                       MWN
                           5                                           3

                           4                                       2.5

                           3                                           2

                           2                                       1.5

                                                                       1
                           1
                                20       40         60   80                20      40         60    80
                                              Age                                       Age
                                              MOC                                       MON
                           5                                           3

                           4                                       2.5

                           3                                           2

                           2                                       1.5

                           1                                           1
                                20       40         60   80                20      40         60    80
                                              Age                                       Age
                                              FWC                                       FWN
                           4                                       2.5


                           3                                           2


                           2                                       1.5


                           1                                           1
                                20       40         60   80                20      40         60    80
                                              Age                                       Age
                                              FOC                                       FON
                          2.5                                      2.5


                           2                                           2


                          1.5                                      1.5


                           1                                           1
                                20       40         60   80                20      40         60    80
                                              Age                                       Age


                                     Figure A6: Income Profile by Group



   Using Equation (5)-(7), and define j as equal to the age of the households minus the minimum
age (18), we find that:

                                                                   2
                                 E[zij , zij+h ] = 2
                                                     + E[ij ] + 2
                                                                                         if h = 0        (10)


                                                                               2
                                     E[zij , zij+h ] = 2
                                                         + h E[ij ]                 if h > 0             (11)


                                                                           j
                                                2
                                          E[ij ] = 2 j 2
                                                        0
                                                          +             2( j-k) 2
                                                                                                         (12)
                                                                       k =1

   We then use a GMM estimation to estimate  = (,  ,  ,  ,  0 ). We use a Minimum Distance
Estimator, where the weighting matrix is the identity matrix.
   Sample Selection. We use PSID data from 1970 to 2017. We only include households whose
head is 18 to 80 years old. We only include households which were in the survey for three or more
periods. We exclude households with zero or negative income. In each year, we trim the top 2.5%
of households by their income.
   We pool all households together, after removing group-specific year-fixed effects and cubic
age-profiles, and estimate the idiosyncratic risk parameters  . The point estimates are displayed

                                                              53
in Panel A in Table A1. These are the parameters used in the main text.

                             Table A1: Idiosyncratic Risk Parameter Estimates

                                                2        2         2       2     N. Obs.
                                                                            0
                            All    0.950    0.023    0.195     0.066   0.194      10638

           Note: , 2 , 2 , 2 , 2 are estimated using Equation Equation (5)-(7). Data runs from 1970 to 2017.
                         0




A.3     Portfolio Shares

The Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) is a statistical survey of the balance sheet, pension, in-
come and other demographic characteristics of families in the United States. We use data from
the Summary Extract Data ­ that is, the extract data set of summary variables used in the Federal
Reserve Bulletin. It includes data from the triennial surveys beginning in 1989.20


A.3.1      Variables

We collect the following variable:
    Total Financial Assets. This includes:

   1. All types of transaction account (liquid assets)

   2. Certificates of deposit

   3. Directly held pooled investment funds (exc. money mkt funds)

   4. Savings bonds

   5. Directly held stocks

   6. Directly held bonds (excl. bond funds savings bonds)

   7. Cash value of whole life insurance

   8. Other managed assets

   9. Quasi-liquid retirement accounts

 10. Other misc. financial assets

    Cash & Deposits This includes all types of transaction account (liquid assets) and certificated
of deposits. The list of variables are:
  20 TheSCF Flow Chart provides information on how variables are constructed https://www.federalreserve.gov/
econres/files/networth%20flowchart.pdf. The code on how different variables in the Summary Extract Data are
constructed can be found here: https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/files/bulletin.macro.txt


                                                          54
   1. Money market accounts

   2. Checking accounts (excl. money market)

   3. Savings accounts

   4. Call accounts

   5. Prepaid cards

   6. Certificates of deposit

   Equities (direct & indirect). Total value of financial assets held by household that are invested
in stock. That includes:

   1. directly-held stock

   2. Stock mutual funds: full value if described as stock mutual fund, 1/2 value of combination
      mutual funds

   3. RAs/Keoghs invested in stock: full value if mostly invested in stock, 1/2 value if split be-
      tween stocks/bonds or stocks/money market, 1/3 value if split between stocks/bonds/money
      market

   4. Other managed assets with equity interest (annuities, trusts, MIAs): full value if mostly in-
      vested in stock, 1/2 value if split between stocks/MFs & bonds/CDs, or "mixed/diversified",
      1/3 value if "other"

   5. Thrift-type retirement accounts invested in stock: full value if mostly invested in stock,1/2
      value if split between stocks and interest earning assets

The allocation rules for mixed investments in 3), 4), and 5) do not apply to 2004 since new ques-
tions in 2004 directly ask the share of stock in those assets.
   Real Estate. The real estate variable includes:

   1. Primary residence

   2. Residential property excluding primary residence (e.g., vacation homes)

   Private Business Wealth. Businesses (with either an active or nonactive interest). Businesses
include both actively and nonacitvely-managed business(es). Value of active business(es) calcu-
lated as net equity if business(es) were sold today, plus loans from the household to the busi-
ness(es), minus loans from the business(es) to the household not previously reported, plus value
of personal assets used as collateral for business(es) loans that were reported earlier. Value of
nonactive business(es) is calculated as the market value of the business(es).

                                                  55
    Fixed Income. Fixed income is calculated as the residual of Total financial assets minus Cash
& Deposits and Equity (direct & indirect).
    Mortgage Debt. This includes:

   1. Debt secured by prim. resid. (mortgages, home equity loans, HELOCs)

   2. Debt secured by other residential property

    Student Debt. Total value of education loans held by household. This includes education
loans that are currently in deferment and loans in scheduled repayment period. We exclude in-
stallment loans: these are mostly student loans (which we accounts for separately), vehicle loans
(which we do not account as debt as vehicles are part of consumption).
    Consumer and Other Debt. This includes:

   1. Other lines of credit (not secured by resid. real estate)

   2. Credit card balances after last payment

    Net Wealth. We calculate net wealth for each household as the difference between total assets
(Cash & Deposits, Equities (direct & indirect), Real Estate, Private Business Wealth and Fixed
Income) and total liabilities (Mortgage Debt, Student Debt and Consumer and Other Debt).


A.3.2     Groups

From the SCF data, we extract the sex of the reference person, the education attainment and the
race. Using the education attainment we divide the sample into households with college degree
and households without college degree. We only include households older than 25 years old.
Table A2 provides information on the different groups.

                                     Table A2: Summary Statistics by Group


 Groups     Population Share (%)      Median Age      Median NW       Average NW       Std NW     Negative NW       Zero NW
 MWC                         16.82              42          292.69           830.41    3434.78              3.44         0.00
 MWN                         41.20              46          114.33           310.68    1181.03              4.68         3.32
 MOC                          2.61              41           87.95           458.48    1771.98             10.41         1.02
 MON                         12.26              42           28.48            91.57     279.31              8.56        12.92
 FWC                          3.62              51          167.92           321.48     645.08              8.17         0.00
 FWN                         14.12              63           54.90           138.66     341.28              6.36         5.89
 FOC                          0.79              40           20.54            97.58     159.10             31.34         5.89
 FON                          8.57              49            0.37            35.94     112.66             10.79        33.73
 All                        100.00              46           87.95           325.97    1657.30              6.20         6.75

Note: Groups Information. SCF 1989. Column 1 is in percentage. Column 3, 4 and 5 in 2016 thousands dollars, Column
6 and 7 are in percentage. M stands for male, F for female; W stands for white, O for all other races; C stands for college,
N for non-college.



                                                            56
A.3.3   Holdings

We compute the holdings for each of the assets and liabilities for each household. Table A3 shows
summary statistics for the distribution of asset holdings. Note that Private Business Wealth is
a measure net of loans from the business to the households and hence may also be a negative
number.
                                        Table A3: Portfolio Holdings


                               Mean      std       Min        25%    50%     75%      90%       95%       Max
    Cash and Deposits         37.51    241.24      0.00       0.75    4.11    22.09    82.90    158.70    67785
    Equities                   37.54    327.22     0.00       0.00    0.00     5.00    52.28    142.83   103857
    Real Estate               157.69    292.74     0.00       0.00   84.02   199.78   382.76    560.13    65343
    Private Business Wealth    79.45   1226.34   -1334.98     0.00    0.00     0.00     9.34    186.71   258164
    Fixed Income               57.43    459.29     -0.00      0.00    3.73    27.63   103.06    223.49   171190
    Mortgage Debt              39.22     96.42     0.00       0.00    0.00    50.41   123.23    192.31    30004
    Student Debt                0.87      5.57     0.00       0.00    0.00     0.00     0.00     3.73      166
    Other Debt                  3.58     45.20     -0.00      0.00    0.00    1.68     5.88      11.20     3780
    Net Wealth                325.95   1657.20   -3034.51     9.58   87.94   272.60   645.92   1208.02   290271

Note: Data are based on SCF 1989 and are reported in 2016 thousands dollars. Note that Private Business Wealth is a
measure net of loans from the business to the households. For this reason some observations are negative.




A.3.4   Financial Duration

For the purpose of our duration calculation, we exclude households with zero net-wealth. These
households account for roughly 7% of the population (see Table A2). We then compute house-
hold's portfolio share in each asset by dividing the dollar holdings in the asset by the households
net wealth. Using the portfolio shares, we compute the durations of the household's financial
portfolio by multiplying the asset duration of an asset (assets durations are reported in the first
column of Table 1) by the portfolio share of that asset, and summing over all assets in the portfo-
lio. We trim household financial durations by excluding the top and bottom 2.5% of observations.
In the last row of Table 1, we report the average duration, by averaging over all households (us-
ing the SCF sampling weights). Similarly, we compute average durations by group by averaging
durations among the households in a group (using the SCF sampling weights).
    Table 1 also reports value-weighted portfolio shares for each asset. They are obtained by sum-
ming dollar holdings of an asset among all households (households in a group) by the total dollar
holdings of all assets among all households (households in a group). Aggregate durations are
then obtained by multiplying the value-weighted portfolio weights for each asset by the duration
of that asset, and summing over assets. They are reported in the last but one row of Table 1.
    Figure A7 shows portfolio shares by age in the 1989 SCF. We bundle households into different
cohort groups: 25-35, 35-45, 45-55, 55-65, 65-75, 75-85. Figure A7a uses the value-weighted port-


                                                         57
folio shares. Figure A7b plots the median portoflio share in each asset category, and then rescales
the resulting shares so that they sum to 100%.

                                                                Figure A7: Portfolio Shares by Cohorts


                              (a) Wealth-Weighted Portfolio Shares                                                                    (b) Median Portfolio Shares

                                      Cash and Deposits    Private Business Wealth   Student Debt                                        Cash and Deposits    Private Business Wealth   Student Debt
                                      Equities             Fixed Income              Other Debt                                          Equities             Fixed Income              Other Debt
                                      Real Estate          Mortgage Debt                                                                 Real Estate          Mortgage Debt
                        150                                                                                                150



                        100                                                                                                100




                                                                                                     Portfolio Share (%)
  Portfolio Share (%)




                         50                                                                                                 50



                          0                                                                                                  0



                        50                                                                                                 50
                               30


                                      40


                                                     50


                                                                60


                                                                              70


                                                                                        80




                                                                                                                                 30


                                                                                                                                          40


                                                                                                                                                        50


                                                                                                                                                                   60


                                                                                                                                                                                  70


                                                                                                                                                                                           80
                                                          Age                                                                                                Age

Note: Portfolio shares by age in the 1989 SCF. We bundle households into different cohort groups: 25-35, 35-45, 45-55,
55-65, 65-75, 75-85. The top panel uses the value-weighted portfolio shares. The bottom panel uses the median portfolio
share in each asset category, and then rescales the resulting shares so that they sum to 100%. We exclude households
with zero net wealth as the portfolio shares are undefined.

               Figure A8 provides further information on the distribution of durations across households.
Figure A8a plots the average duration by cohort. We bundle households into cohort groups and
estimate the average duration. Figure A8b bundles households in wealth-weighted percentile and
estimate the average duration of households in each bin.21 Figure A8c and A8d rank households
according to their wealth and income percentile, respectively, and estimate the average duration
of each group.
               Figure A8e and Figure A8f also rank households according to their wealth and income. Then
plot the average duration of each group against the average net-wealth or income.
               We also evaluate more formally the correlation between financial duration and some covari-
ates of interest. First, we regress household financial duration on household position in the Lorenz
Curve. To calculate households' positions, we rank households by their net-wealth, then calculate
the cumulative sum of net-wealth and divide by the aggregate net-wealth. We then add a dummy
for each group, a quadratic function of age and the log of household income. We exclude house-
  21 Households are ranked according to their net-wealth and allocated to different bins. Each bin is designed such that

the share of total wealth held by the households in each bin is the same across different bins.


                                                                                                    58
holds with zero net-wealth and trim the bottom/top 2.5% of households ranked by their duration.
The regression estimate take into account survey weights. Table A4 reports the estimation results.

                   Table A4: Determinants of Household-level Financial Duration


                                         (1)       (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)
                       Lorenz          0.23                    0.19       0.23       0.19
                                       (25.85)                 (19.70)    (23.32)    (16.34)

                       MWC                       9.98          5.82       3.66        1.60
                                                 (16.23)        (8.79)     (5.33)     (2.30)

                       MWN                       6.72          4.80       3.78       2.31
                                                 (12.43)        (9.00)     (6.75)     (4.05)

                       MOC                       5.41          3.29         1.20      -0.33
                                                  (4.68)        (3.03)     (1.08)    (-0.30)

                       MON                       4.67          4.19       2.85        1.72
                                                  (6.79)        (6.21)     (4.07)     (2.47)

                       FWC                       2.14          -0.096      -0.79     -2.10
                                                 (2.35)        (-0.11)    (-0.89)    (-2.38)

                       FWN                        0.21          -0.65       0.45      -0.25
                                                 (0.36)        (-1.15)     (0.74)    (-0.42)

                       FOC                        0.86          -0.11      -1.18     -2.47
                                                 (0.70)        (-0.09)    (-1.02)    (-2.20)

                       Age                                                 0.077     -0.025
                                                                           (1.23)    (-0.41)

                       Age Squard                                        -0.0023     -0.0010
                                                                           (-4.26)    (-1.92)

                       Log-Income                                                    1.87
                                                                                      (9.90)

                       Constant        13.2      10.5          10.0       13.0        -3.73
                                       (72.62)   (21.07)       (20.50)     (7.32)    (-1.44)
                       Observations     13784     13784         13784      13784     13784
                       R2               0.087     0.064         0.118      0.160      0.170
                       Adjusted R2

Note: Data based on SCF 1989. T-stats in parentheses ( p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01)



A.3.5   Financial Duration - Robustness

To make sure our results are robust we replicate Figure 3 using different samples and different
duration estimates for business wealth.
    Figure A9a includes households with negative net-worth and households with zero income
(that we excluded from the original sample in Figure 3), Figure A9b uses a different trimming:
trim the bottom/top 1%. Figure A9c plots the median duration instead of the average duration,

                                                          59
Figure A9d uses as duration of business wealth, the same duration used for equity (28.7).


A.3.6    Wealth Shares, Income Shares, and Gini Coefficients

We estimate the net-wealth shares held by the top-10% and top-1%. We also estimate gini coeffi-
cients. We use the SCF+ database developed by Kuhn et al. (2020) in order to have a longer time
series of wealth and income. We slightly modify their definition of total financial net-wealth by
subtracting vehicles and other non-financial wealth.
    Figure A10 plots the top shares and the gini coefficient for financial (net) wealth. Table A5
computes averages for these moments, computed over all surveys in the 1980s and all surveys in
the 2010s, for both financial wealth and income. The income moments in this table are from the
SCF. We define household income as SCF total household income minus capital income.

                  Table A5: Summary Statistics Wealth and Income Inequality in SCF

                                         SCF                 WID
                                     1980s 2010s         1980s 2010s

   Wealth: Top 1 Share (%)            28.8   37.2         25.3   35.1
   Wealth: Top 10 Share (%)           67.6   77.3         63.2   71.8
   Wealth: gini (×100)                79.4   87.2         77.8   83.6
                                          SCF                 WID                PSID           PSID (ex transf.)
                                     1980s 2010s         1980s 2010s        1980s 2010s         1980s    2010s
   Income: Top 1 Share (%)            11.5   18.3         12.2   18.6        6.4      9.5         8.1     11.8
   Income: Top 10 Share (%)           36.3   45.5         36.3   45.1        29.2    34.3        35.4     41.7
   Income: gini (×100)                48.2   56.1         48.7   57.9        42.8    47.8        56.9     62.7
 Note: Shares and Gini coefficients estimated using the SCF+ developed by Kuhn et al. (2020), the WID database and
the PSID. We use our income variable labinc3f from the PSID as well the income variable excluding transfers (labinc2f ).
 From the SCF+ we use the total income variable excluding capital gain. SCF+ 1980s average over the surveys in 1977,
                                                   1983 and 1989.




                                                          60
                                                                           Figure A8: Distribution of Durations


                                                                                                                        (b) Average Duration by Wealth-
                                      (a) Average Duration by Cohort                                                    Weighted Percentiles

                                                                                                                                                 45

                                          18                                                                                                     40

                                                                                                                                                 35
                       Average Duration




                                                                                                                              Average Duration
                                          16

                                                                                                                                                 30
                                          14
                                                                                                                                                 25

                                          12                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                 15
                                          10
                                               30             40          50            60          70          80                                        5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95100
                                                                               Cohort                                                                           Net Wealth Cumulative Holdings Percentile
                 (c) Average Duration by Net-Wealth (d) Average Duration by Income Per-
                 Percentile                         centile
                                                                                                                                                 24

                                          25                                                                                                     22

                                                                                                                                                 20
                                          20
                       Average Duration




                                                                                                                              Average Duration




                                                                                                                                                 18
                                          15
                                                                                                                                                 16

                                          10                                                                                                     14

                                                                                                                                                 12
                                           5
                                                                                                                                                 10

                                           0                                                                                                      8
                                                   5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95100                                             5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95100
                                                                      Net Wealth Percentile                                                                                  Income Percentile
                                               (e) Duration vs Net-Wealth                                                                                    (f) Duration vs Income
                                                                                                                                           24

                                    25                                                                                                     22

                                                                                                                                           20
                                    20
                 Average Duration




                                                                                                                        Average Duration




                                                                                                                                           18
                                    15
                                                                                                                                           16

                                    10                                                                                                     14

                                                                                                                                           12
                                      5
                                                                                                                                           10

                                      0                                                                                                      8
                                               0        500        1000   1500     2000      2500        3000   3500                                  0             100           200            300         400
                                                              Average Net Wealth (Thousands $)                                                                       Average Income (Thousands $)


Note: Data are based on SCF 1989. We exclude households with zero net wealth (as their portfolio shares would be
undetermined) and we trim the data based on households' overall duration: we exclude the top/bottom 2.5%. We
only include households with positive income. Panel (a) plots the average duration by cohort. We bundle households
into cohort groups and estimate the average duration. Panel (b) bundles households in wealth-weighted percentile and
estimate the average duration of households in each bin. Panel (c) and Panel (d) rank households according to their
wealth and income percentile, respectively, and estimate the average duration of each group. Then plot the average
duration of each group against the average net-wealth (Panel (e)) or income (Panel (f)).



                                                                                                                       61
                                                      Figure A9: Duration by Net Worth, Robustness


           (a) Include Negative Wealth and Zero In-
           come                                                                                                                   (b) Trim bottom/top 1%

                                                                                                                         45
                               40

                                                                                                                         40
                               35
                                                                                                                         35
            Average Duration




                                                                                                      Average Duration
                               30
                                                                                                                         30

                               25
                                                                                                                         25

                               20                                                                                        20


                               15                                                                                        15
                                    5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95100                                5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95100
                                                  Wealth-Weighted Percentile                                                                Wealth-Weighted Percentile
                                           (c) Median Duration                                             (d) Modified Business Wealth Duration
                               55
                                                                                                                         24
                               50

                               45                                                                                        22

                               40
                                                                                                      Average Duration
            Median Duration




                                                                                                                         20
                               35

                               30                                                                                        18

                               25
                                                                                                                         16
                               20

                               15                                                                                        14

                                    5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95100                                5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95100
                                                  Wealth-Weighted Percentile                                                                Wealth-Weighted Percentile


Note: Data are based on SCF 1989. We always exclude households with zero net wealth (as their portfolio shares would
be undetermined). Figure A9a includes households with negative net-worth and households with zero income (that
we excluded from the original sample in Figure 3), Figure A9b uses a different trimming: trim the bottom/top 1%.
Figure A9c plots the median duration instead of the average duration, Figure A9d uses as duration of business wealth,
the same duration used for equity (28.7).




                                                                                                 62
                                                 Figure A10: Financial Wealth Inequality in the SCF+


                    (a) Top 10% Share                                                         (b) Top 1% Share                                                            (c) gini
                  SCF                                                         0.400     SCF                                                        0.88     SCF
                  WID                                                                   WID                                                                 WID
        0.775
                                                                              0.375
                                                                                                                                                   0.86
        0.750
                                                                              0.350

        0.725                                                                                                                                      0.84
                                                                              0.325
Share




                                                                      Share




                                                                                                                                            Gini


        0.700                                                                 0.300                                                                0.82

        0.675                                                                 0.275
                                                                                                                                                   0.80
        0.650                                                                 0.250

                                                                              0.225                                                                0.78
        0.625
           1950   1960   1970   1980      1990   2000   2010   2020              1950   1960   1970   1980      1990   2000   2010   2020            1950   1960   1970    1980      1990   2000   2010   2020
                                       Year                                                                  Year                                                                 Year



Note: Data are based on SCF+ database developed by Kuhn et al. (2020) and WID database.




                                                                                                        63
B     Proofs

B.1   Proof of Corollary 4.1

Proof. Next, we analyze the household's wealth-consumption ratio. A Campbell and Shiller (1988)
log-linearization of the return equation around the mean log wealth-consumption ratio wci for
household i delivers the following expression for the log returns on a claim to household i's con-
sumption stream:
                                                            i             i
                                           +1 =  ct+1 + i wct+1 + k i - wct ,
                                         i        i     c           c
                                        rt                                                                 (13)

where the linearization coefficient ic depends only on the mean of the log wealth-consumption
                      i
                   ewc
ratio wci : ic       i   .   By taking unconditional averages of the return in Equation 13, we obtain:
                  ewc +1


                                         (1 - ic )wci = µic - E[rt
                                                                 i          c
                                                                   +1 ] + k i ,


where µic denotes the household's average consumption growth rate. We obtain the following
expression for the average wealth-consumption ratio:

                                                   µic - E[rt
                                                            i ]
                                                                     kc
                                           wci =              +1
                                                                 +    i
                                                                          .
                                                       1 - ic      1 - ic

By iterating forward on the linearized return equation and imposing a no-bubble condition,

                                                 lim (ic ) j wcit+ j = 0,
                                                 j


we obtain an expression for the log wealth-consumption ratio:

                                        kc                                  
                             wcit =      i
                                      1 - ic
                                             +    (ic ) j-1 cit+ j    -      (ic ) j-1 rti + j    .
                                                 j =1                       j =1


We take expectations at time t to obtain:

                                     kc                                            
                          wcit =      i
                                   1 - ic
                                          + Et    (ic ) j-1 cit+ j    - Et          (ic ) j-1 rta+ j   .
                                                 j =1                              j =1


In our baseline model, the expected one period returns on the consumption-claim have to be
equal to the return on the aggregate consumption claim. As shown in section 5 , in this incom-
plete markets economy, to compute measures of wealth that can be aggregated, we discount all
consumption claims using the discount rate on the aggregate consumption claim. If the expecta-
tions hypothesis holds, then the household's log wealth-consumption ratio is determined by the




                                                           64
PDV of future consumption growth and risk-free rates:

                                  kc                                        
                                                                          
                                                                                          f
                       wcit =      i
                                     c + E t      (  c j -1
                                                     i )     c i
                                                               t+ j - E t      (ic ) j-1 rt+ j-1 .
                                1 - i        j =1                         j =1


As a result, we obtain the following expression for :

                                              kc    c         
                                               i + µi
                                                          t  ( i )
                                                                 c j -1 f
                                    wcit =            - E              r t + j -1 .
                                              1 - ic        j =1


   Using the autoregressive process for the risk-free rate, we obtain the following expression for
the log wealth-consumption ratio:

                                                                       f
                                            kc - E[r f ] + µic  r - E[r f ]
                                    wcit   = i          c      + t          .
                                                1 - i             1 - ic 

   Hence, we obtain the following expression for the household's consumption wealth ratio in
deviation from the average:

                                                         1 - a 
                                    wcit - wci =                    a
                                                                 (wct - wc a ).
                                                         1 - ic 

   As a result, we have that the log household wealth-consumption ratio can be stated as:

                                                                         a     a
                                           kc       f     c
                                            i - E [r ] + µi   1 -  a  (ypt - yp )
                             wcit   =                       -
                                               1 - ic         1 - ic  (1 -  a )

   By the same token, the aggregate wealth consumption ratio can be stated as:

                                                                    a      a
                                       a          k a - E[r f ] (ypt - yp )
                                     wct =                     -
                                                     1 - a        (1 -  a )

   We can apply the same approach to derive an expression for the log human wealth-income
ratio. The household's log human wealth-income ratio is determined by the PDV of future income
growth and risk-free rates:

                         i        kc                                        
                                                                          
                                                     h j -1                               f
                       hyt =       i
                                     h
                                       + E t      (  i )     y i
                                                               t+ j - E t      (ih ) j-1 rt+ j-1 .
                                1 - i        j =1                         j =1


   Given the AR(1) process for the risk-free rate, when log household income i follows a random
walk with drift µih , the household's log human wealth-income ratio can be expressed as:

           i     a     kh    h
                        i + µi     ka     E[r f ]( a - ih )   (ih -  a )    a
         hyt - wct =           -       +                    +            (wct - wc a ).
                       1 - ih    1 - a   (1 - ih )(1 -  a )   (1 - ih )


                                                           65
B.2     Proof of Proposition 4.2

Proof. In the economy without consumption dispersion, the cross-sectional standard deviation of
log household wealth is bounded below by:

                                                                   c - a )
                                                                 ( i                   1/2
                           wcit + cit     Var x wci + Var x     (1-ic )
                                                                                a
                                                                             (wct )          .

As the wealth/consumption ratio increases, the lower bound on the cross-sectional standard devi-
                                                            a
ation of wealth increases. As interest rates declines and wct increases, the cross-sectional variance
of the log wealth distribution increases. We know that the household's log wealth-consumption
ratio can be stated as:

                                                 E[r f ]( a - ic )   (ic -  a )
                wcit - wct
                         a
                           = wci - wc a +               c          +               a
                                                                                (wct - wc a ).
                                                (1 - i )(1 -  a )    (1 - ic )

Hence, the cross-sectional variance of log wealth is given by the cross-sectional variance of con-
sumption, plus the cross-sectional variance of wealth-consumption and the cross-sectional covari-
ance:

                   Var x wcit + cit   = Var x cit + Var x wcit + 2Cov x wcit , cit ,

                                      = Var x cit + Var x wci + 2Cov x wci , cit
                                                                             (ic -  a )
                                                              a
                                      + 2Cov x wci , cit + 2wct Cov x              c    , wci
                                                                             (1 -  i  )
                                                 (ic -  a )    a 2
                                      + Var x               (wct ) .
                                                 (1 - ic )

     Assume that there is no dispersion in initial consumption shares. Then the cross-sectional
variance of log wealth is given by:

                                                        (ic -  a )                (ic -  a )
     Var x wcit + cit      = Var x wci + 2wct
                                            a
                                              Cov x                , wc i
                                                                          + Var x
                                                                                                a 2
                                                                                             (wct ) .
                                                        (1 - ic )                 (1 - ic )
                                                                                         c - a )
                                                                                       ( i
     Since µic is the only source of heterogeneity, this implies that Cov x           (1-ic )
                                                                                                 , wci    0, because
ic   depends on   µic .
     We can use the cumulant-generating function to back out the moments of wealth in levels. Let




                                                      66
w denote the log of wealth. The cross-sectional coefficient of variation of wealth is given by:

                                           1/2                     
             Ex [exp 2w] - (Ex [exp w])2
                    (Ex [exp w])2
                                                 =         exp      2 j -1  j,t +1 ( w t +1 ) / j !   -1 ,
                                                                   j =2


where  j,t+1 (wt+1 ) denotes the j-th cumulant.
    We can use the cumulant-generating function to back out the moments of wealth in levels. Let
w denote the log of wealth. The first moment of wealth in levels is given by:

                                                                      
                       Ex [exp w] = exp(1,t+1 (wt+1 ) +   j,t+1 (wt+1 )/ j!),
                                                                     j =2


where  j,t+1 denotes the j - th cumulant of the log wealth distribution. Similarly, the second
moment of wealth in levels is given by:

                                                                       
                     Ex [exp 2w] = exp(21,t+1 (wt+1 ) +  2 j  j,t+1 (wt+1 )/ j!).
                                                                     j =2


As a result, the cross-sectional variance of wealth is

                                                                                  
             Ex [exp 2w] - (Ex [exp w])2 = exp 21,t+1 (wt+1 ) +  2 j  j,t+1 (wt+1 )/ j!
                                                                                 j =2
                                                                                     
                                           - exp 21,t+1 (wt+1 ) + 2   j,t+1 (wt+1 )/ j! .
                                                                                   j =2


As a result, the cross-sectional variance of wealth is given by:

                                                                                     
             Ex [exp 2w] - (Ex [exp w])2 = exp 21,t+1 (wt+1 ) + 2   j,t+1 (wt+1 )/ j!
                                                                                    j =2
                                                            
                                                     exp     2 j -1  j,t +1 ( w t +1 ) / j !    -1 .
                                                            j =2


Hence, if we scale the cross-sectional variance of wealth by the cross-sectional mean we obtain:

                                           1/2                      
             Ex [exp 2w] - (Ex [exp w])2
                    (Ex [exp w])2
                                                 =         exp      2 j -1  j,t +1 ( w t +1 ) / j !   -1
                                                                   j =2


In the case of log-normal wealth distribution, all of the higher-order cumulants drop out ( j,t =
0, k > 2).




                                                       67
B.3    Proof of proposition 4.3

Proof. The cross-sectional variance of financial wealth A = W - H can be stated as:

           Var x ( A)   Ex (W )2 Var x (W ) Ex ( H )2 Var x ( H )    E x ( H ) E x (W )
                      =                      +                    -2                    Cov x (W , H ).
           Ex ( A)  2   E x ( A ) E x (W )
                                 2         2   Ex ( A) Ex ( H )
                                                      2         2        E x ( A )2

1 -  denotes the capital share. The previous equation can be restated as follows:

              Var x ( A)       1      Var x (W )      2     Var x ( H )       
                         =                       +                      -2          Cov x (W , H ).
              E x ( A )2   ( 1 -  ) 2 E x (W ) 2   (1 -  )2 E x ( H )2     (1 -  )2

   Note that Cov x (W , H ) = Cov x ( A, H ) + Var x ( H ). We assume that Cov x ( A, H ) < 0. As a result,
using Cov x (W , H )  Var x ( H ), we obtain:

                 Var x ( A)      1     Var x (W )      2     Var x ( H )       
                                                  +                      -2          Var x ( H ).
                 Ex ( A)  2  ( 1 -  ) E x (W )
                                     2         2    (1 -  ) E x ( H )
                                                           2          2     (1 -  )2

   If human wealth and financial wealth covary negatively, the cross-sectional variance of finan-
cial wealth is bounded below (approximately) by the following expression

                                  Var x ( A)     1                   2 - 2
                                                       Var x ( w ) +          Var x (h).
                                  E x ( A )2  (1 -  )2               (1 -  )2

provided that Cov x ( A, H ) < 0. If Var x (wt )  Var x (ht ) for all t, which seems plausible given that
households seek to smooth consumption, we also obtain:

                                                   Var x ( A)
                                                               Var x (w).
                                                   E x ( A )2




B.4    Proof of proposition 5.2

Proof. The one-period budget constraint:

                           at ( t )
              ct ( t ) +              + t ( t )t = (1 - )yt ( t ) + at-1 ( t-1 ) + t-1 ( t-1 )(t + ),
                             Rt

can be restated, using equation (2), as:

                                          at ( t ) + t ( t )(t+1 + )
      c t (  t ) - (1 -  ) y t (  t ) +                                = at-1 ( t-1 ) + t-1 ( t-1 )(t + ).   (14)
                                                     Rt




                                                             68
Rewriting (14) one period later:

                                                     at+1 ( t+1 ) + t ( t+1 )(t+2 + )
  c t +1 (  t +1 ) - (1 -  ) y t +1 (  t +1 ) +                                                 = at ( t ) + t ( t )(t+1 + ).
                                                                      R t +1

Multiply this equation by (t+1 | t ) and sum across all states t+1 to obtain:

                                                                                     at+1 ( t+1 ) + t ( t+1 )(t+2 + )
               (  t +1 |  t )      c t +1 (  t +1 ) - (1 -  ) y t +1 (  t +1 ) +
                                                                                                        R t +1
              t +1

       = at ( t ) + t ( t )(t+1 + ),

where we used the fact that t+1 (t+1 | t ) = 1 on the right-hand side. Next, substitute this
expression back into (14) to obtain:

     c t (  t ) - (1 -  ) y t (  t ) + R -
                                         t
                                           1
                                                   (  t +1 |  t )     c t +1 (  t +1 ) - (1 -  ) y t +1 (  t +1 )
                                                  t +1

     + R- 1
        t  t +1        (  t +1 |  t )    at+1 ( t+1 ) + t ( t+1 )(t+2 + ) = at-1 ( t-1 ) + t-1 ( t-1 )(t + ).
                      t +1


Define financial wealth, scaled by the aggregate endowment, as:

                                           t = at-1 ( t-1 ) + t-1 ( t-1 )(t + ).

Continuing the forward substitution, we end up with the following expression:

                                        
                             t =          t   -1 
                                         R- 1
                                                                 (  | t ) (c (  ) - (1 - )y (  )).
                                         =t                | t


where ( t | t ) = 1. Financial wealth must equal the cost of the household's excess consumption
plan, where excess refers to the part not paid for with labor income. Noting that e0 = 1 so that
0 = 0 , writing this expression at time zero:

                                              
                              0 =           R0
                                             -1
                                                -1   (  ) ( c (  ) - (1 -  ) y (  ))
                                                                                 
                                            =0               


recovers the statement of the proposition.




                                                                     69
B.5      Proof of Proposition 5.3

Proof. We note that the cross-sectional expectation of the product can be decomposed in the stan-
dard way:


                (  )(  ) (c (  )) d0 = E0 [ c ] = Cov0 [ , c ] + E0 [ ] E0 [c ] .
               


If the orthogonality condition is satisfied, then the following result obtains:


                 (  )(  ) (c (  )) d0 = E0 [ c ] = E0 [ ]E0 [c ] = E0 [c ] = 1,
                 


because E0 [t ] = 1.


B.6    Proof of Proposition 5.4

Proof. This inequality 0  Cov(t , ct ) directly implies that the following inequalities obtain:

                                                                                   
       R0
        -1
            -1   (  )  (  ) c  (  ) d  0 
                                 
                                                   R0
                                                    -1
                                                        -1   (  ) c  (  ) d  0 =  R 0  -1 ,
                                                                                    -1
       =0                                          =0                              =0
                                                                                   
       R0
        -1
            -1   (  )  (  ) y  (  ) d  0 
                                 
                                                   R0
                                                    -1
                                                        -1   (  ) y  (  ) d  0 =  R 0  -1 .
                                                                                    -1
       =0                                          =0                               =0




As a result, this new measure implies an aggregate value of individual wealth that falls short of
total wealth,      -1
               =0 R0 -1 . Note that even though this claim to total consumption is itself not
traded, the Lucas tree is a claim to  of the same cash flow stream. The market value of the Lucas
tree is       -1                                                        -1
          =0 R0 -1 , and hence the value of total wealth has to be  =0 R0 -1 .



B.7    Proof of proposition 5.5

Proof. An unconstrained household's Euler equation in the high-growth economy is given by:

                                                          u (c(t+1 ,  t ))
                             1 =  Rt     (  t +1 |  t )     u (ct ( t ))
                                                                           .
                                        t +1


This Euler equation is satisfied because the allocations and prices constitute a Bewley equilibrium
in the high-growth economy. This household's Euler equation in the new economy with lower
interest rates is still satisfied at the old consumption allocation. This can be seen by plugging in
the new equilibrium interest rates:
                                               Rt  =  Rt ,



                                                   70
to recover the unconstrained household's Euler equation in the low-growth economy:

                                                                     u ( c (  t ,  t +1 )
                              1 =  Rt               (  t +1 |  t )
                                                                       u (ct ( t ))
                                                                                          .
                                            t +1


We allocate the following amount of financial wealth at time 0 to ensure the household can afford
the same consumption plan:

                                     
                    0 (  0 , 0 ) =    R0
                                       -1
                                          -1   (  ) ( c (  ) - (1 -  ) y (  )).
                                                 t                         
                                      =0                  


Aggregating this initial financial wealth across households:

                                                                  
                                        0 d 0 =                    R0
                                                                    -1
                                                                       = ~0 ,
                                                                 =0


where we have used the goods market clearing condition and the definition of labor income
shares. The last equation shows that the new allocation of initial financial wealth uses up all
aggregate financial wealth in the economy. Finally, note that the natural borrowing constraints
are not binding in the high-growth economy. They remain non-binding in the low-growth econ-
omy because consumption is nonnegative. Hence, the allocations are feasible, and they satisfy the
sufficient conditions for optimality.




                                                             71
C    Life-Cycle Model Details

Each agent in the life-cycle model with age j, portfolio of financial assets { ak,t }, and idiosyncratic
labor income state z solves the Bellman equation:

                                                             1- 
                                                            ct
                           Vj ( at ; zt ) = max                + s j Et Vj+1 ( at+1 ; zt+1 )        (15)
                                               a t +1       1-

subject to the budget constraint:

                                                        K
                                    ct  yt +          (qk + k )s- 1
                                                                j a k ,t - q k a k ,t +1            (16)
                                                     k =0


where y is after-tax income as specified in equations (5) and (6), s j is the probability of surviving to
age j + 1, qk and k are the prices and cash flows, respectively, of the set of risk free financial assets
available to the household. The term s- 1
                                      j in the budget constraint (16) represents that households
enter an annuity or tontine system in which surviving households receive the assets of households
in their age cohort who died, proportional to their asset holdings. This assumption ensures a
sufficiently strong savings motive for older households in the absence of a bequest motive.
    We can generalize the problem through some convenient variable substitutions. First, we can
simplify the asset structure. In a stationary equilibrium, without aggregate shocks or changes to
the interest rate, the specific form of the financial assets is arbitrary, although it will be relevant
for repricing assets following an interest rate shock. As a result, we can define x to be the start-of-
period value of the entire portfolio, including both its cash flow and continuation value:

                                                               K
                                                  t =          (qk + k )ak,t .
                                                              k =0


By no arbitrage, we have

                                                             qk + k
                                                                    =R
                                                                qk

for all k, which implies

                             K                          K
                                   q k a k ,t +1 =    (qk + k ) R-1 ak,t+1 = R-1 t+1 .
                            k =0                     k =0


Substituting now yields the simplified the budget constraint

                                                c t  y t +  t - R -1  t +1 .                        (17)




                                                                     72
Under a constant interest rate, the problem can therefore be solved as if the agents held one-
period debt with face value  in each period, allowing us to use a single solution to characterize
economies with portfolios over many possible assets.


Compensated Distribution. To compute the compensated distribution under a change from in-
                 ~ , we first compute total wealth under the original and new interest rates:
terest rate R to R

                                                    
                                            t =      R- ct+
                                                    =0
                                                   
                                            ~t=     R
                                                    ~ - ct+ .
                                                    =0


We next compute human wealth under the original and new interest rates:

                                                    
                                            t =     R- yt+
                                                    =0
                                                   
                                            ~t =   R
                                                   ~ - yt+ .
                                                    =0


The implied amount of financial wealth that makes the original consumption plan affordable is
therefore

                                comp
                               t       =~t-~t

                                       = t + (~ t - t ) + (~ t - t )


where t is pre-shock financial wealth.


Repriced Distribution. To compute the repriced distribution following a change from interest
          ~ , we will need to specify the specific asset structure. We assume that agents hold zero
rate R to R
coupon bonds with maturity m, which implies qm = R-m . At the moment of the interest rate
                                                             repriced
change, the repriced (post-shock) financial wealth t                    is related to pre-shock financial wealth
t according to the formula

                                                                   ~     -m
                                 repriced          ~m
                                                   q               R
                                 t          =            t =                  t                             (18)
                                                   qm              R

for a household with bonds of maturity (duration) m. For our computations, we set m equal to
financial wealth duration, and apply (18).




                                                        73
D       Affine Asset Pricing Model

This appendix develops a reduced-form asset pricing model. The asset pricing model is used
for three main purposes. First, to compute long-term real bonds yields and the cost of a 30-year
real annuity. Second, to compute the McCauley duration of the aggregate stock market, small
stocks, and real estate wealth in a manner that is consistent with the history of bond and stock
prices. Third, the model delivers the price and duration of a claim to aggregate consumption and
to aggregate labor income.
    The asset pricing model in the class of exponentially-affine SDF models. A virtue of the
reduced-form model is that it can accommodate a substantial number of aggregate risk factors.
We argue that it is important to go beyond the aggregate stock and bond markets to capture the
risk embedded in households' financial asset portfolios as well as the aggregate risk in consump-
tion and labor income claims. Similar models are estimated in Lustig et al. (2013); Jiang, Lustig,
Van Nieuwerburgh and Xiaolan (2019); Gupta and Van Nieuwerburgh (2021).


D.1     Setup

D.1.1    State Variable Dynamics

Time is denoted in quarters. We assume that the N × 1 vector of state variables follows a Gaussian
first-order VAR:
                                                           1
                                         z t =  z t -1 +  2  t ,                                  (19)

with shocks t  i.i.d. N (0, I ) whose variance is the identity matrix. The companion matrix  is
a N × N matrix. The vector z is demeaned. The covariance matrix of the innovations to the state
variables is ; the model is homoscedastic. We use a Cholesky decomposition of the covariance
                1   1
matrix,  =  2  2 , which has non-zero elements only on and below the diagonal. The Cholesky
decomposition of the residual covariance matrix allows us to interpret the shock to each state
variable as the shock that is orthogonal to the shocks of all state variables that precede it in the
VAR. We discuss the elements of the state vector and their ordering below. The (demeaned) one-
quarter bond nominal yield is one of the elements of the state vector: y$      $
                                                                        t,1 = y0,1 + eyn zt , where
 $
y0,1 is the unconditional average 1-quarter nominal bond yield and eyn is a vector that selects
the element of the state vector corresponding to the one-quarter yield. Similarly, the (demeaned)
inflation rate is part of the state vector: t = 0 + e zt is the (log) inflation rate between t - 1 and
t. Lowercase letters denote logs.




                                                   74
D.1.2   Stochastic Discount Factor
                 $            $
The nominal SDF Mt +1 = exp( mt+1 ) is conditionally log-normal:

                                                1
                                m$        $
                                 t+1 = - yt,1 - 2 t t - t t+1 .                                        (20)


Note that y$            $                  $                               $
           t,1 = -Et [ mt+1 ] - 0.5Vart [ mt+1 ]. The real log SDF mt+1 = mt+1 + t+1 is also condi-
tionally Gaussian. The innovations in the vector  t+1 are associated with a N × 1 market price of
risk vector t of the affine form:
                                                t = 0 + 1 z t .                                        (21)

The N × 1 vector 0 collects the average prices of risk while the N × N matrix 1 governs the time
variation in risk premia. Asset pricing amounts to estimating the market prices of risk (0 , 1 ).
We specify the moment conditions to identify the market prices of risk below.


D.1.3   State Vector Elements

The state vector contains the following N = 20 variables, in order of appearance: (1) GDP price
inflation, (2) real GDP growth, (3) the nominal short rate (3-month nominal Treasury bill rate),
(4) the spread between the yield on a five-year Treasury note and a three-month Treasury bill, (5)
the log price-dividend ratio on the CRSP value-weighted stock market, (6) the log real dividend
growth rate on the CRSP stock market. Elements 7, 9, 11, and 13 are the log price-dividend ratios
on the first size quintile of stocks (small), the first book-to-market quintile of stocks (growth), the
fifth book-to-market quintile of stocks (value), and a listed infrastructure index (infra). Elements
8, 10, 12, and 14 are the corresponding log real dividend growth rates. Element 15 is the log price-
dividend ratio on housing wealth, element 16 is log real dividend growth on housing wealth.
Finally, the state vector contains the log change in the consumption/GDP ratio cx in 17th, the
log change in the log labor income/GDP ratio lx in 18th, the log level of the consumption/GDP
ratio cx in 19th, and the log level of the labor income/GDP ratio lx in 20th position.



                     zt =       t , xt , y$      $       $
                                          t,1 , yt,20 - yt,1 , pdt ,  dt , pdt
                                                                 m     m     small
                                                                                   , dsmall
                                                                                      t     ,          (22)
                                    growth      growth                          in f ra      in f ra
                               pdt           , dt        , pdvalue
                                                             t     , dvalue
                                                                      t     , pdt         , dt
                                 hw
                               pdt  , dt
                                       hw
                                          , cxt+1 , lxt+1 , cxt+1 , lxt+1 .

   This state vector is observed at quarterly frequency from 1947.Q1 until 2019.Q4 (292 observa-
tions). This is the longest available time series for which all variables are available. We use the
average of daily Constant Maturity Treasury yields within the quarter. All dividend series are


                                                          75
deseasonalized by summing dividends across the current month and past 11 months. The infras-
tructure stock index is measured as the value-weighted average of the eight relevant Fama-French
industries (Aero, Ships, Mines, Coal, Oil, Util, Telcm, Trans).
    Dividend growth on housing wealth is measured as housing services consumption growth
from the Bureau of Economic analysis Table 2.3.5. The price-dividend ratio is the ratio of owner-
occupied housing wealth from the Financial Accounts of the United States Table B.101.h divided
by housing services consumption. We subtract inflation from dividend growth on housing wealth
and we also subtract 0.6% per quarter to reflect the fact that the size of the housing stock is growing
and we are only interested in the rental price change. The resulting real rental growth rate is 1.7%
per year, which is in line with (and still on the higher end of the numbers reported in) the literature.
    Aggregate consumption is measured as non-durables plus services plus durable services con-
sumption. Durable services consumption is constructed as the depreciation rate (20%) multiplied
by the stock of durables. The stock of durables itself is computed using the perpetual inventory
method. This series is divided by nominal GDP and logs are taken. Aggregate labor income is
measured as wages and salaries plus business income (Proprietors' income with inventory val-
uation and capital consumption adjustments) plus transfer income (Personal current transfer re-
ceipts) minus taxes (Personal current taxes and Contributions for government social insurance,
domestic). This series is divided by nominal GDP and logs are taken. Real consumption growth
can then be written as the sum of real GDP growth plus the change in the consumption/GDP
ratio:
                                        ct
                                         a
                                           +1 = xt+1 +  cxt+1

and similar for labor income growth.
    All state variables are demeaned with the observed full-sample mean. The first 18 equations
of the VAR are estimated by OLS equation by equation. We recursively zero out all elements of
                                                                                                      1
the companion matrix  whose t-statistic is below 2.2. The resulting point estimates for  and  2
are reported below.
    The dynamics of cx are pinned down by the dynamics of cx:

                                                                           1
                       cxt+1 = cxt + cxt+1 = ecx + ecxgr  zt + ecxgr  2  t+1

Therefore the 19th row of  is identical to the 17th row, except that (19, 19) = (17, 19) + 1.
Similarly, the 20th row of  is identical to the 18th row, except that (20, 20) = (18, 20) + 1.
The innovations to the 19th and 20th row are not independent innovations but determined by the
innovations that precede it. Essentially, the level variables cx and lx are only added to the VAR
to enforce cointegration between consumption and GDP and between labor income and GDP. As
a result of this cointegration, the aggregate consumption and labor income claims will have the
same aggregate risk as the GDP claim.

                                                  76
D.2     Estimation

D.2.1    Bond Pricing

In this setting, nominal bond yields of maturity  are affine in the state variables:

                                            1 $ 1
                                     y$
                                      t, = - A  -  B$
                                                               zt .
                                                  

The scalar A$ ( ) and the vector B$ follow ordinary difference equations (ODE) that depend on

the properties of the state vector and on the market prices of risk. Real bond yield are also ex-
ponentially affine with coefficients that follow their own ODEs. We will price the cross-section of
nominal and real bond yields (price levels), putting more weight on matching the time series of
one- and twenty-quarter nominal bond yields since those yields are part of the state vector zt . We
also fit the dynamics of 20-quarter nominal bond risk premia (price changes).
   Figure D1 plots the nominal bond yields on bonds of maturities 1 quarter, 1 year, 5 years,
and 10 years. Those are the most relevant horizons for the private equity cash-flows. The model
matches the time series of bond yields in the data closely. It matches nearly perfectly the 1-quarter
and 5-year bond yield which are part of the state space. Figure D2 shows that the model also does
a good job matching real bond yields. The top panels of Figure D3 show the model's implications
for the average nominal (left panel) and real (right panel) yield curves at longer maturities. These
long-term yields are well behaved. The bottom right panel shows a decomposition of the yield
on a five-year nominal bond into the five-year real bond yield, annual expected inflation over the
next five years, and the five-year inflation risk premium. The importance of these components
fluctuates over time. The bottom left panel shows that the model matches the dynamics of the
nominal bond risk premium, defined as the expected excess return on five-year nominal bonds.
The compensation for interest rate risk varies substantially over time, both in data and in the
model.


D.2.2    Equity and Real Estate Pricing

The VAR contains both the log price-dividend ratio and log dividend growth for five equity risk
factors (the aggregate stock market, small stocks, growth stocks, value stocks, and infrastructure
stocks) and residential real estate. Together these two time-series imply a time-series for log stock
returns. The VAR implies linear dynamics for the expected excess stock return, or equity risk
premium, for each equity risk factor. We chose market prices of risk to match these dynamics
(price changes).
   The price of a stock equals the present-discounted value of its future cash-flows. By value-
additivity, the price of the aggregate stock index, Ptm , is the sum of the prices to each of its future
            m . These future cash-flow claims are the so-called market dividend strips or zero-
cash-flows Dt


                                                  77
                                               Figure D1: Dynamics of the Nominal Term Structure of Interest Rates

                                        Nominal yield on 1-qtr bond                                                                   Nominal yield on 1-yr bond                                                               Nominal yield on 2-year bond
              15                                                                                            15                                                                                           15
                                                                                    model                                                                                        model                                                                                       model
                                                                                    data                                                                                         data                                                                                        data


              10                                                                                            10                                                                                           10
 % per year




                                                                                               % per year




                                                                                                                                                                                            % per year
              5                                                                                             5                                                                                            5




              0                                                                                             0                                                                                            0
                   1950   1960   1970         1980         1990       2000   2010       2020                     1950   1960   1970         1980        1990       2000   2010       2020                     1950   1960   1970       1980        1990        2000   2010       2020



                                    Nominal yield on 3-year bond                                                                  Nominal yield on 5-year bond                                                                 Nominal yield on 7-year bond
              15                                                                                            15                                                                                           15
                                                                                    model                                                                                        model                                                                                       model
                                                                                    data                                                                                         data                                                                                        data


              10                                                                                            10                                                                                           10
 % per year




                                                                                               % per year




                                                                                                                                                                                            % per year
              5                                                                                             5                                                                                            5




              0                                                                                             0                                                                                            0
                   1950   1960   1970         1980         1990       2000   2010       2020                     1950   1960   1970         1980        1990       2000   2010       2020                     1950   1960   1970       1980        1990        2000   2010       2020



                                    Nominal yield on 10-year bond                                                                 Nominal yield on 20-year bond                                                                Nominal yield on 30-year bond
              15                                                                                            15                                                                                           15
                                                                                    model                                                                                        model                                                                                       model
                                                                                    data                                                                                         data                                                                                        data


              10                                                                                            10                                                                                           10




              5                                                                                             5                                                                                            5




              0                                                                                             0                                                                                            0
                   1950   1960   1970         1980         1990       2000   2010       2020                     1950   1960   1970         1980        1990       2000   2010       2020                     1950   1960   1970       1980        1990        2000   2010       2020




Note: The figure plots the observed and model-implied 1-, 4-, 20-, 40-quarter nominal bond yields.

                                                                 m:
coupon equity (Wachter, 2005). Dividing by the current dividend Dt

                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                    Ptm
                                                                                                                                                                    Dtm =  Ptd,                                                                                               (23)
                                                                                                                                                                           =1
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                               exp pd + e pdm zt =                                        exp                        Am   m
                                                                                                                                                                       + B zt ,                                                                                               (24)
                                                                                                                                         =0


where Ptd
        , denotes the price of a  -period dividend strip divided by the current dividend. The
log price-dividend ratio on each dividend strip, pd         d
                                                  t, = log Pt, , is affine in the state vector and
                        m
the coefficients ( Am
                     , B ) follow an ODE. Since the log price-dividend ratio on the stock market
is an element of the state vector, it is affine in the state vector by assumption. Equation (24) re-
states the present-value relationship from equation (23). It articulates a non-linear restriction on
the coefficients {( Am   m 
                      , B ) } =1 at each date (for each state zt ), which we impose in the estimation
(price levels). Analogous present value restrictions are imposed for each of the other traded eq-
uity factors, whose price-dividend ratios and dividend growth rates are also included in the state
vector.
                   If dividend growth were unpredictable and its innovations carried a zero risk price, then divi-
dend strips would be priced like real zero-coupon bonds. The strips' dividend-price ratios would
equal yields on real bonds with the coupon adjusted for deterministic dividend growth. All vari-
ation in the price-dividend ratio would reflect variation in the real yield curve. In reality, the dy-
namics of real bond yields only account for a small fraction of the variation in the price-dividend
ratio, implying large prices of risk associated with shocks to dividend growth that are orthogonal



                                                                                                                                             78
                                                                      Figure D2: Dynamics of the Real Term Structure of Interest Rates

                                                      Real yield on 5-yr TIIS                                                                                                           Real yield on 7-yr TIIS                                                                                                                             Real yield on 10-yr TIIS
                    5                                                                                                                            5                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                              model                                                                                                                                        model                                                                                                                         model
                                                                                                              data                                                                                                                                         data                                                                                                                          data
                    4                                                                                                                            4                                                                                                                                                 4


                    3                                                                                                                            3                                                                                                                                                 3


                    2                                                                                                                            2                                                                                                                                                 2
 % per year




                                                                                                                                    % per year




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      % per year
                    1                                                                                                                            1                                                                                                                                                 1


                    0                                                                                                                            0                                                                                                                                                 0


                    -1                                                                                                                           -1                                                                                                                                                -1


                    -2                                                                                                                           -2                                                                                                                                                -2


                    -3                                                                                                                           -3                                                                                                                                                -3
                    2000       2002    2004    2006   2008     2010      2012        2014     2016       2018       2020                         2000        2002   2004         2006   2008     2010      2012    2014                         2016    2018        2020                           2000       2002      2004      2006      2008      2010     2012    2014    2016   2018     2020




                                                      Real yield on 20-yr TIIS                                                                                                          Real yield on 30-yr TIIS
                    5                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                              model                                                                                                                                        model
                                                                                                              data                                                                                                                                         data
                    4                                                                                                                            4


                    3                                                                                                                            3


                    2                                                                                                                            2
 % per year




                                                                                                                                    % per year




                    1                                                                                                                            1


                    0                                                                                                                            0


                    -1                                                                                                                           -1


                    -2                                                                                                                           -2


                    -3                                                                                                                           -3
                    2000       2002    2004    2006   2008     2010      2012        2014     2016       2018       2020                         2000        2002   2004         2006   2008     2010      2012    2014                         2016    2018        2020




Note: The figure plots the observed and model-implied 20-, 28-, 40-, and 80-quarter real bond yields.

                                                                                               Figure D3: Long-term Yields and Bond Risk Premia

                                                                                       Avg. nom. yield                                                                                                                                                                                                               Avg. real yield
                    10                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5

                     9                                                                                                                                                                                                                4.5

                     8                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4

                     7                                                                                                                                                                                                                3.5
 percent per year




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   percent per year




                     6                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3

                     5                                                                                                                                                                                                                2.5

                     4                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2

                     3                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5

                     2                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1

                     1                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5

                     0                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                         0              50            100                150                  200                   250       300                       350                400                                                              0                  50            100                        150              200                    250             300            350             400
                                                                                      maturity in quarters                                                                                                                                                                                                       maturity in quarters




                                                                                 Risk Premium 5-yr nom. bond                                                                                                                                                                                              Decomposing 5-yr nom. bond yield

                               model                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ynom
                     5                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                               data                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     yreal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        exp infl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12                                                                                                                                                IRP
                     4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8
    % per year




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       % per year




                     2                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2

                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0


                    -1                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -2


                             1950             1960             1970                   1980                   1990          2000                       2010                 2020                                                                  1950                 1960         1970                          1980                    1990                2000             2010             2020




Note: The top panels plot the average bond yield on nominal (left panel) and real (right panel) bonds for maturities
ranging from 1 quarter to 400 quarters. The bottom left panel plots the nominal bond risk premium in model and data.
The bottom right panel decomposes the model's five-year nominal bond yield into the five-year real bond yield, the
five-year inflation risk premium and the five-year real risk premium.


to shocks to bond yields.
                             Figures D4 and D5 show the equity risk premium, the expected excess return, in the left panels
and the price-dividend ratio in the right panels. The various rows cover the five equity indices
and the we price. The dynamics of the risk premia in the data are dictated by the VAR. The
model chooses the market prices of risk to fit these risk premium dynamics as closely as possible.


                                                                                                                                                                                               79
The price-dividend ratios in the model are formed from the price-dividend ratios on the strips of
maturities ranging from 1 to 3600 quarters, as explained above. The figure shows an excellent fit
for price-dividend levels and a good fit for risk premium dynamics. Some of the VAR-implied risk
premia have outliers which the model does not fully capture. This is in part because the good deal
bounds restrict the SDF from becoming too volatile and extreme. We note large level differences
in valuation ratios across the various stock factors, as well as big differences in the dynamics of
both risk premia and price levels, which the model is able to capture well.

                                     Figure D4: Equity Risk Premia and Price-Dividend Ratios (part 1)

                                             Equity risk premium                                                                  Price-Dividend Ratio on Equity
                25                                                                                  100
                                                                                                            model
                20                                                                                          data
                                                                                                     80

                15
   % per year




                                                                                                     60
                10
                                                                                                     40
                5

                                                                                                     20
                0

                -5                                                                                    0
                     1950    1960   1970      1980                 1990   2000   2010   2020              1950      1960   1970         1980               1990    2000   2010   2020



                                           Small stock risk premium                                                               Price-Dividend Ratio on Small
                50                                                                                  200

                40
                                                                                                    150
                30
% per year




                20
                                                                                                    100
                10

                0
                                                                                                     50
             -10

             -20                                                                                      0
                     1950    1960   1970      1980                 1990   2000   2010   2020              1950      1960   1970         1980               1990    2000   2010   2020



                                             Growth risk premium                                                                  Price-Dividend Ratio on Growth
                40                                                                                  150

                30

                20                                                                                  100
% per year




                10

                0                                                                                    50

             -10

             -20                                                                                      0
                     1950    1960   1970      1980                 1990   2000   2010   2020              1950      1960   1970         1980               1990    2000   2010   2020




Note: The figure plots the observed and model-implied equity risk premium on the overall stock market, small stocks,
and growth stocks in the left panels, as well as the corresponding price-dividend ratio in the right panels. The model is
the blue line, the data are the red line.



D.2.3                       Pricing Claims to Aggregate Consumption and Labor Income

Shocks to the growth rate in consumption/GDP (labor/income) ratio are priced only to the extent
that they are correlated with other priced sources of risk. The innovation to the change in the
consumption/GDP (labor income/GDP) ratio that is orthogonal to all prior shocks is not priced.
                      Figure D6 plots the annual price-dividend ratios on the claims to GDP, aggregate consumption,
and aggregate labor income. It contrasts these valuation ratios to that on the aggregate stock
market.




                                                                                               80
                                            Figure D5: Equity Risk Premia and Price-Dividend Ratios (part 2)

                                                        Value risk premium                                                                                          Price-Dividend Ratio on Value
                      40
                                                                                                                                  100
                                                                                                                                          model
                      30                                                                                                                  data
                                                                                                                                   80
                      20
      % per year




                                                                                                                                   60
                      10

                                                                                                                                   40
                      0

                   -10                                                                                                             20


                   -20                                                                                                              0
                           1950    1960   1970          1980                 1990   2000     2010   2020                                1950          1960   1970        1980                1990   2000          2010   2020



                                                        Infra risk premium                                                                                          Price-Dividend Ratio on Infra
                      40                                                                                                           60

                      30                                                                                                           50

                      20                                                                                                           40
      % per year




                      10                                                                                                           30

                      0                                                                                                            20

                   -10                                                                                                             10

                   -20                                                                                                              0
                           1950    1960   1970          1980                 1990   2000     2010   2020                                1950          1960   1970        1980                1990   2000          2010   2020



                                                        HW risk premium                                                                                              Price-Dividend Ratio on HW
                      20                                                                                                           30

                                                                                                                                   25
                      15

                                                                                                                                   20
         % per year




                      10
                                                                                                                                   15
                      5
                                                                                                                                   10

                      0
                                                                                                                                    5

                      -5                                                                                                            0
                           1950    1960   1970          1980                 1990   2000     2010   2020                                1950          1960   1970        1980                1990   2000          2010   2020




Note: The figure plots the observed and model-implied equity risk premium on value stocks, infrastructure stocks, and
housing wealth in the left panels, as well as the corresponding price-dividend ratio in the right panels. The model is
the blue line, the data are the red line.

                                                                                           Figure D6: Valuation Ratios

100
                                                                                                                   Stocks
                                                                                                                   Housing
                                                                                                                   GDP
 90                                                                                                                Consumption
                                                                                                                   Labor Income


 80




 70




 60




 50




 40




 30




 20




 10




  0
                            1950                 1960                               1970                   1980                                1990                  2000                                  2010                 2020




Note: The figure plots the annual price-dividend ratios on the aggregate stock market and claims to GDP, aggregate
consumption, and aggregate labor income.




                                                                                                                  81
D.2.4       Cash-flow Duration

The (McCauley) duration is the weighted average time for an investor to receive cash flows. For
the aggregate stock market, this measure is computed as follows:

                                                                                            Ptd          exp ( Am   m
                                                                                                                 + B zt )
                                                            
                                         CF,m                                                 ,
                                        Dt    =                    w t,  ,       w t, h =   Ptm
                                                                                                  =
                                                             =1                             Dtm         exp pd + e pdm zt

where Ptd
        , is the price-dividend ratio of a  -period dividend strip. Since durations are usually
expressed in years while time runs in quarters in our model, we have to divide by 4. This duration
concept is defined similarly for any other equity index, real estate, GDP, consumption, and labor
                                                                                CF =  .
income claims. Note that for a nominal or real zero-coupon bond of maturity  , Dt
        Figure D7 The figure plots the model-implied time series of cash-flow durations on the overall
stock market, small stocks, growth stocks, value stocks, infrastructure stocks, housing wealth, the
GDP claim, the aggregate consumption claim, and the aggregate labor income claim.

                                                                   Figure D7: Cash-Flow Duration

                          Duration aggregate stock market                                                                         Duration small
40                                                                                                 80

35                                                                                                 70

30                                                                                                 60

25                                                                                                 50

20                                                                                                 40
     1950   1960   1970          1980              1990     2000       2010   2020                      1950   1960   1970       1980              1990   2000   2010   2020

                                 Duration growth                                                                                  Duration value
60                                                                                                100

                                                                                                   80
50
                                                                                                   60
40
                                                                                                   40

30                                                                                                 20
     1950   1960   1970          1980              1990     2000       2010   2020                      1950   1960   1970       1980              1990   2000   2010   2020

                              Duration infrastructure                                                                           Duration real estate
35                                                                                                 20

30

25                                                                                                 15

20

15                                                                                                 10
     1950   1960   1970          1980              1990     2000       2010   2020                      1950   1960   1970       1980              1990   2000   2010   2020

                             CF Duration Consumption                                                                         CF Duration Labor Income
40                                                                                                 40


30                                                                                                 30


20                                                                                                 20


10                                                                                                 10
     1950   1960   1970          1980              1990     2000       2010   2020                      1950   1960   1970       1980              1990   2000   2010   2020




Note: The figure plots the model-implied time series of cash-flow durations on the overall stock market, small stocks,
growth stocks, value stocks, infrastructure stocks, housing wealth, the GDP claim, the aggregate consumption claim,
and the aggregate labor income claim. The duration is expressed in years.



D.2.5       Market Price of Risk Estimates

The market prices of risk are pinned down by the moments discussed in the main text. Here we
report and discuss the point estimates. Note that the prices of risk are associated with the orthog-
onal VAR innovations   N (0, I ). Therefore, their magnitudes can be interpreted as (quarterly)


                                                                                     82
Sharpe ratios. The constant in the market price of risk estimate 0 is:

 0.11   0.00   -0.36    0.05      0.00      0.43   0.00      -0.01     0.00      0.12    0.00    0.25   0.00   0.25    0.00     2.74       0.00     0.00   0.00



   The matrix that governs the time variation in the market price of risk is estimated to be 1 =:

  0.0    0.0     0.0        0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0    0.0
  0.0    0.0     0.0        0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0    0.0
 19.3   16.7    -31.8    -250.7       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0    0.0
 37.8   15.8     0.0        3.5       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    2.0     19.6       0.9    0.9
  0.0    0.0     0.0        0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0    0.0
 23.3    3.8    -29.7    -160.2      -0.9      12.4    0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.4      3.7       0.1    1.1
  0.0    0.0     0.0        0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0    0.0
 -5.0   -1.5     1.6      -20.9       0.6      2.0    -0.5       8.8       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    3.0     -4.1       0.2    0.7
  0.0    0.0     0.0        0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0    0.0
  1.1   34.7    -23.8      13.9       0.9     -11.1   -0.1       1.8      -1.1    16.7     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.9      1.2      -0.1   -0.
  0.0    0.0     0.0        0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0    0.0
  0.0   33.8    -11.0      34.0       0.8     -15.5    0.1      -0.9      -0.3     0.4    -2.0    0.6   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0   -1.5      1.3      17.6    0.1
  0.0    0.0     0.0        0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0    0.0
 10.5   42.9    -39.3     -20.9       7.6     -10.7    1.0      -2.3      -5.9    -3.2     0.5    1.7   -4.4   0.1    0.0     0.0    3.4      3.7      -5.2   -2.
  0.0    0.0     0.0        0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0    0.0
  8.8   29.2   -109.1      66.7       5.6      1.8    -2.2      -5.8      -0.3    -3.2     0.9    0.2   -3.2   0.0    1.3     0.4    0.1     -0.2     -14.7   -5.
  0.0    0.0     0.0        0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0    0.0
  0.0    0.0     0.0        0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0    0.0
  0.0    0.0     0.0        0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0    0.0
  0.0    0.0     0.0        0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0    0.0




                                                                     83
