                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DRY BULK SHIPPING AND THE EVOLUTION OF MARITIME TRANSPORT
                             COSTS, 1850-2020

                                        David S. Jacks
                                        Martin Stuermer

                                      Working Paper 28627
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28627


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




The views in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas or the Federal Reserve System. This paper is a contribution to a
volume in honour of Jeff Williamson, and we would like to recognize not only his comments but
also his support through the years. Additionally, we thank Christiane Baumeister, Lutz Kilian, Jan
Tore Klovland, James Morley, Andrew Seltzer, and Stig Tenold for timely comments. We also
especially thank Christiane Baumeister for allowing us to use additional freight rate data for the
post-1973 period and Alexis Wegerich for allowing us to use the coal price data underlying his
thesis. Anna Eckert, Camila Holn, Sean Howard, Aida Kazemi, and Sean Lee also provided
excellent research assistance. Finally, Jacks gratefully acknowledges the Social Science and
Humanities Research Council of Canada for research support. Jacks: Simon Fraser University/
Yale-NUS College, CEPR, and NBER; Stuermer: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Research
Department. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by David S. Jacks and Martin Stuermer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Dry Bulk Shipping and the Evolution of Maritime Transport Costs, 1850-2020
David S. Jacks and Martin Stuermer
NBER Working Paper No. 28627
March 2021
JEL No. E30,N70,R40

                                         ABSTRACT

We provide evidence on the dynamic effects of fuel price shocks, shipping demand shocks, and
shipping supply shocks on real dry bulk freight rates in the long run. We first analyze a new
dataset on dry bulk freight rates for the period from 1850 to 2020, finding that they followed a
downward but undulating path with a cumulative decline of 79%. Next, we turn to understanding
the drivers of booms and busts in the dry bulk shipping industry, finding that shipping demand
shocks strongly dominate all others as drivers of real dry bulk freight rates in the long run.
Furthermore, while shipping demand shocks have increased in importance over time, shipping
supply shocks in particular have become less relevant.


David S. Jacks
Department of Economics
Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive
Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6
CANADA
and NBER
dsjacks@gmail.com

Martin Stuermer
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
2200 N. Pearl St
Dallas, TX 75201
U.S.A.
martin.stuermer@dal.frb.org
1. Introduction

       A long-standing body of research in economic history centers on documenting the

radical decline in transportation costs from the 18th and 19th centuries as well as identifying

the fundamental drivers of this transport revolution. In a key contribution to this literature,

Mohammad and Williamson (2004) offer up the most comprehensive analysis of maritime

transport costs in the critical period from 1869 to 1950. They collect tramp freight rates for a

larger and more representative sample of routes than in previous research, identify

significant but varying rates of productivity growth in the shipping sector over these 80 years,

and find that this productivity growth is most strongly associated with dramatic changes in

ship cargo capacities/sizes and turnaround times in ports. In O'Rourke and Williamson's

related and seminal work on the pre-World War I global economy (1994, 1999), the decline

in maritime transport costs along with the diffusion of railways takes pride of place in

explaining the emergence of the first wave of globalization from 1870.

       Alongside such considerations of slowly evolving trends in freight rates, professional

sentiment has long argued for the existence of alternating booms and busts in the maritime

shipping industry (Metaxas, 1971; Cufley, 1972; Stopford, 2009). What is more, a burgeoning

academic literature in behavioural finance and industrial organization has taken these claims

to heart, finding that such boom/bust activity goes a long way in understanding the dynamics

of ship building, ship earnings, and ship prices in the dry bulk sector. The key underlying

mechanism in these papers is the role of unanticipated positive shipping demand shocks and

their propagation over time. In the wake of such shocks, the attendant booms in maritime

freight rates generate over-investment in shipping supply either due to time-to-build

constraints as in Kalouptsidi (2014) or firms simultaneously overestimating future freight rates

and underestimating their competitors' responses as in Greenwood and Hansen (2015).

       Here, we seek to at least partially integrate these two perspectives on maritime

transport costs in the short- and long-run. Building on new and more encompassing data on

global shipping activity, we first present evidence on the evolution of a new real dry bulk

freight rate index for the entire period from 1850 to 2020. To our knowledge, this is the


                                                                                                   2
longest consistently-measured and continuous series on the costs of shipping goods in the

literature. In so doing, we document the following important facts. First, real dry bulk freight

rates are estimated to have followed a downward but undulating path over time: thus, they

fell from 1850 to 1910, rose from 1910 to 1950, and fell once again from 1950 with a

cumulative decline of 79% between 1850 and 2020. Second, behind these slowly evolving

trends, there were also often abrupt movements with real dry bulk freight rates in some

instances nearly tripling on a year-to-year basis.

       Abstracting away from this long-run trend and its potential productivity-related

determinants, we then narrow our focus to understanding the drivers of booms and busts in

the dry bulk shipping industry which occur at a higher frequency. That is, is it possible to

rationalize the often extreme inter-annual changes we observe in dry bulk freight rates by

considering fundamentals in the sector? We build on a canonical structural vector auto-

regressive model with sign restrictions to set-identify shocks in the market for dry bulk

shipping services. Based on assumptions related to supply-and-demand analysis, we specify

four orthogonal shocks to real maritime freight rates which we interpret as a fuel price shock,

a shipping demand shock, a shipping supply shock, and a residual shock.1

       In particular, we assume that a positive aggregate demand shock represents an

unexpected expansion in global economic activity as in periods of rapid industrialization and

urbanization. This, in turn, leads to not only higher global GDP, but also higher world

mercantile tonnage, higher real fuel prices, and higher real freight rates. One key mechanism

at work here is that an increase in dry bulk freight rates due to an increase in shipping

demand triggers not only investment in new shipping capacity as in Kalouptsidi (2014) and

Greenwood and Hanson (2015) but also technological change in the wider industry which

augments effective supply.

       In contrast, a negative shipping supply shock represents an unexpected inward shift of

the shipping supply curve. We associate such shocks with declines in world mercantile


1
 We emphasize that these shocks are specifically related to the market for dry-bulk shipping services
and should not be confused with the aggregate demand and aggregate supply shocks used in the
macroeconomic literature.
                                                                                                        3
tonnage and assume that they negatively affect global GDP and real fuel prices but positively

affect real maritime freight rates. Likewise, we assume that positive fuel price shocks

negatively affect global GDP and world mercantile tonnage but lead to an increase in real

maritime freight rates.

       Finally, the residual term captures all remaining uncorrelated shocks, including

changes in expectations. For our purpose, It can also ­ at least partially ­ be interpreted as a

utilization shock (see Kilian, Nomikos, and Zhou, 2020). Here, a negative innovation in this

term ­ perhaps due to a change in regulations associated with shipping ­ is assumed to

negatively affect real global GDP, positively affect world mercantile tonnage, and lead to

higher real freight rates. However, we leave the effect of such a residual shock on real fuel

prices unrestricted.

       Based on the sign-restricted VAR model, we compute structural impulse response

functions and historical decompositions for real dry bulk freight rates. The historical

decompositions show the cumulative contribution at each point in time of each of the four

structural shocks in driving booms and busts in the market for dry bulk shipping services.

Thus, they serve to quantify the independent contribution of the four shocks to the deviation

of our real dry bulk freight rate index from its base projection after accounting for long-run

trends in the same.

       Our results indicate that shipping demand shocks strongly dominate all others as

drivers of real dry bulk freight rates over the long run. Over the period from 1880 to 2020,

the average share of shipping demand shocks in explaining variation in the real dry bulk

freight rate index is 49% while the average share of shipping supply shocks is 22% and the

average share of fuel price shocks is 11%. Residual shocks absorb the remaining 18% of

variation. Additionally, we consider the contribution of these shocks across three sub-

periods: the pre-World War I era from 1880 to 1913, the interwar years from 1919 to 1939,

and the post-World War II era from 1949 to 2020. We find that the contribution of shipping

demand shocks to variation in the real dry bulk freight rate index increased substantially in

the interwar years and remained elevated in the post-World War II era. Likewise, the


                                                                                                   4
contribution of shipping supply shocks decreased substantially in the interwar years and

remained suppressed in the post-World War II era. Finally, the contribution of both fuel price

shocks and residual shocks remained roughly constant through the three sub-periods.

       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the new real dry bulk

freight rate index constructed for this paper while Section 3 outlines the methodology related

to structural vector auto-regressions. Section 4 quantifies the contribution of various shocks

on freight rate dynamics. Section 5 concludes.



2. A new series of dry bulk freight rates and other data

       One of the chief outputs of this paper comes in the form of a new and comprehensive

index on real global dry bulk freight rates from 1850 to 2020.2 The primary sources of the

underlying data are a mixture of an abundant academic literature (both contemporary and

historical), government reports, and official/trade publications along with standards in the

literature like Angier (1920) and Isserlis (1938). Appendix A details the sources in full.

       We narrow our attention to activity in the dry bulk sector -- that is, commodity cargo

like coal, grains, and ore which is shipped in large, unpackaged parcels -- for two principal

reasons. For one, this sector represents roughly 50% of world trade by volume in the present

day (UNCTAD, 2015). Historically, this share would have only been higher, given that the

composition of trade by value only began to favor manufactured goods from the late 1950s

(Jacks and Tang, 2018). Thus, developments in the dry bulk sector loom large in our

understanding of the global economy and its evolution.

       For another, dry bulk markets are decentralized spot markets whereby exporters,

importers, and traders must engage in a search process in order to hire a ship for a specific

itinerary. Thus, Brancaccio, Kalouptsidi, and Papageorgiou (2020) and others characterize dry

bulk ships as the "taxis of the oceans", and so, their hire rates -- that is, dry bulk freight rates --

2
  From 2017, our index of real dry bulk freight rates is extended by using the annual changes in the
real value of the Baltic Dry Index. In future work, we hope to supplement the underlying dataset with
raw observations on dry bulk freight rates for the years of 2018, 2019, and 2020. However, materially
similar results should arise as the correlation between proportionate changes in our index and the BDI
is very high for the period from 1999-2017 (r =0.95).
                                                                                                      5
reflect real-time conditions in the supply of and demand for their services. This is in contrast

to some other means of maritime transport like containerships or liners which operate in

between fixed ports on fixed schedules and which can be bound to long-term contracts

among exporters, importers, and shippers.3

        All told, there are 10,448 observations on maritime freight rates underlying the real

dry bulk index presented below. Table 1 summarizes the principal currencies, destinations,

goods, and origins in the raw freight rate data. The sample is split roughly 85/15 between

observations in Great British pounds (which predominate up to the 1960s) and US dollars

(which predominate after the 1960s) and is heavily weighted towards coal and grains.

European countries and their offshoots are also heavily represented in terms of destinations

and origins, given their outsized role in global trade flows throughout the 19th and 20th

centuries (Jacks and Tang, 2018).

        Our method of annually aggregating the individual observations comes in using the

following general estimating equation:

                  (1) #!,# % - #!,#$% % = & !& + ' !' +  + ( !( + !,#


where fi,t, is the real freight rate between a particular origin and destination (e.g., New York

City to London) for a particular good (e.g., wheat) at time t; D represents a set of indicator

variables that are equal to 1 at time t, equal to -1 at time t-j when the last observation of this

particular origin/destination/good combination was observed, and equal to 0 otherwise; and

e is an error term. This procedure has strong intuitive appeal in that it roughly amounts to
calculating an unweighted average of the proportionate change in real freight rates in any

given year. This procedure has also been used to good effect by Klovland (2009, 2017) in a

set of papers which explore the trajectory of freight rates at a higher frequency (monthly) and

which form a good basis of comparison as they draw on different samples of freight rates


3
 To be clear, we neglect any separate consideration of insurance rates or port charges. The main
barrier in this regard is the availability of data. However, these additional components of shipping
costs were already much smaller in the late 19th century and subject to much less dramatic secular
declines than maritime freight rates (Persson, 2004).
                                                                                                       6
than those used here. Finally, we employ the most conservative selection of the data and only

use real freight rate observations which are observed on a year-to-year basis, thereby

excluding any observations which include gaps which are two or more years in length.

        Figure 1 depicts the resulting index for real dry bulk freight rates from 1850 to 2020 as

the solid black series. At first glance, the series matches up well with many of our priors, but

how does it compare with existing estimates in the literature? Mohammed and Williamson

(2004) draw on the original sources underlying Isserlis (1938) in an attempt to correct his

index for issues related to aggregation, deflation, and sample selection. They report a global

real freight rate index for successive five-year periods from 1870-1874 to 1995-1999.

Evaluating these values at their midpoints generates a correlation between changes in our

index and Mohammed and Williamson's series of 0.89. We can make this association even

tighter if we only consider the period of their primary focus which is from 1870 to 1939: in this

case, the correlation between the changes climbs to a value of 0.94 over these 70 years.4

Likewise, we find: a correlation of 0.98 between changes in our index and that reported in

Klovland (2009) for the period from 1850 to 1861; a correlation of 0.89 between changes in

our index and that reported in Klovland (2017) for the period from 1912-1920; and a

correlation of 0.95 between changes in our index and the annual Baltic Dry Index for the

period from 1999-2017. By all accounts then, our index of real dry bulk freight rates appears

to be highly representative of developments in the general market for dry bulk shipping

services.

        In Figure 1, our series is also overlayed by an estimate of its very long-run trend. The

now-familiar story of a radical decline in real maritime freight rates for the period before the

first World War is reproduced in the dotted black series with dry bulk rates estimated to have




4
  The primary reason for any divergence in between Mohammed and Williamson's series and ours
stems from the fact that after 1950 they tie their series to the Norwegian Shipping News global freight
rate index for tramp charters. Likely due to the time-varying but unknown set of weights it uses, the
Norwegian Shipping News index demonstrates a somewhat larger decline from 1950 to 2000 but
substantially less variation in real freight rates than we document here.
                                                                                                      7
declined by 55% in between 1850 and 1910.5 This decline was then partially reversed with

the index estimated to have risen 62% between 1910 and 1950 and finally resumed with the

index estimated to have fallen 71% between 1950 and 2020. Cumulatively, the index is

estimated to have fallen 79% in between 1850 and 2020. Underpinning the secular declines

from 1850 to 1910 and from 1950 to 2020 was significant productivity growth. Changes in

naval architecture leading to large increases in ship cargo capacities/sizes, the transition from

sail to steam and from steam to the internal combustion engine, and equally dramatic

improvements in goods handling and storage in ports all contributed to this process (Harley,

1988; Mohammed and Williamson, 2004; Tenold, 2019).

        Of course, behind the smooth arcs and slow transitions depicted in Figure 1 are often

abrupt movements of real dry bulk freight rates on a year-to-year basis. Figure 2 depicts the

de-trended version of the real dry bulk index to get a better sense of the inherent variation in

the series. Before 1970, positive spikes in the real dry bulk index occur in and around 1854,

1917, 1943, 1951, and 1956. And all of these spikes can be associated with the outbreak of

interstate conflict (respectively, the Crimean War, World War I, World War II, the Korean War,

and the Suez Crisis). After 1970, the spikes are dominated by the oil price shocks of 1974 and

1980 and the commodity-demand shock emanating from China in the period from 2004 to

2008. And while there are some sharp reversals in the index (most significantly after World

War I and during the Great Depression), there is also a degree of asymmetry across the

relative strength of its booms versus busts.

        Apart from documenting long-run trends in maritime transport costs, the other

purpose of this paper then comes in explaining this inter-annual variation in the real dry bulk

index by considering the respective roles of global economic activity, real fuel prices for

shipping, and world shipping supply. The other data needed for our analysis relate to these

measures in the following fashion:

5
  Jacks, Meissner, and Novy (2010, 2011) find that in a panel of 27 countries in the forty years prior to
World War I, the average level of aggregate trade costs -- inclusive of all commercial policy barriers
and information/transportation costs -- fell by 33%. This suggests that while aggregate trade costs are
much more than the cost of transporting goods the two series are roughly in agreement in terms of
their general trajectory in this period.
                                                                                                            8
(a) Global economic activity

       Positive shipping demand shocks, representing an unexpected expansion in global

economic activity as in periods of rapid industrialization and urbanization, are a key variable

in our econometric model below. Our benchmark measure of global economic activity is real

global GDP data based on Maddison (2010) with extensions from Jacks and Stuermer

(2020).6 This measure is far from ideal in that GDP contains many elements which are not

likely to be especially bearing on the demand for shipping services and which may be

growing over time (in particular, the domestic component of the service sector). As sensitivity

analysis, we consider an index of US industrial production from 1850 to 2020, but clearly, this

measure is limited in its geographic scope and, therefore, its representativeness. Finally, we

also consider a proxy for world industrial production reported in Baumeister and Hamilton

(2019). This index covers the OECD plus Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Russia, and South

Africa ­ representing roughly 75% of world GDP ­ but regrettably is only available from 1958.

       Panels A through C of Figure 3 respectively document proportionate changes in real

global GDP, US industrial production, and industrial production for the OECD+6 from 1850

to 2020. The pairwise correlation for changes in real global GDP and US industrial production

from 1850 to 2020 is 0.95 while the pairwise correlation for changes in real global GDP and

industrial production for the OECD+6 from 1958 to 2020 is 0.99. Appendix A details the

sources for the individual series.



(b) Real fuel prices for shipping

       In our framework, fuel price shocks emerge from unanticipated changes in supply and

demand conditions in global energy markets. In principle, fuel prices are one of the most

important variable costs in the shipping industry and have obvious implications for the

determination of real dry bulk freight rates. In practice, we need to be conscious of important

6
  How to measure such demand shocks is somewhat of an open question as there is an active debate
in empirical macroeconomics in defining the most appropriate measure of global economic activity at
sub-annual frequencies (Kilian, 2009; Kilian and Zhou, 2018; Baumeister and Hamilton, 2019;
Hamilton, 2019; and Baumeister, Korobilis, and Lee, 2020). We remain agnostic on these issues as data
constraints -- even at the annual level ­ become far more binding the further back in time we go.
                                                                                                   9
changes in the primary fuels used in the shipping industry as Panel A of Figure 4 makes clear.

It depicts the share of world mercantile (gross) tonnage by fuel type from 1879 when

consistent records on world mercantile tonnage first become available. There, we see the

well-known decline of sail (with coal achieving dominance in 1885 but with sail lingering

around until 1957) and the less well-studied decline of coal-driven propulsion (with fuel oil

achieving dominance in 1937 but with coal lingering around until 1989).

        We then combine these tonnage shares with data on real energy prices from

Wegerich (2016) and Jacks (2019). There are two important considerations in this regard.

First, we lack long-run data on fuel oil prices and instead use petroleum prices. We rationalize

this choice by noting that, while fuel oil and other distillate prices can indeed diverge from

petroleum prices in the short run due to differential supply and demand, changes in the two

series are very highly correlated on an annual basis (r = 0.98 for the period from 1983 to

2020). Second, we need to contend with the fact that for at least part of our period, a not-

insignificant share of world tonnage was still under sail and, therefore, remained relatively

unaffected by changes in real fuel prices.

        To this end, we construct two real fuel price indices. Our benchmark series depicted

in Panel B of Figure 4 considers the respective shares of coal, fuel oil, and sail in all tonnage

(irrespective of the type of propulsion)7 and combines these with real prices for coal and

petroleum. An alternative series depicted in Panel C of Figure 4 only considers the respective

shares of coal and fuel oil in tonnage under propulsion via mechanical means and combines

these with the same real price data for coal and petroleum. Not surprisingly, the correlation

between changes in the two series is very high at >0.99 as they are virtually the same from

1900, the point at which the share of sail dips below 25% and steadily declines to zero.

Regardless of the series considered, large and positive fuel price shocks can easily be

discerned for years with known disruptions in global energy markets (e.g., 1973 and 1979).




7
 We make this distinction for the fact that ships which used fuel oil for boilers -- that is, the generation
of steam -- dominated those which used fuel oil for internal combustion until 1963.
                                                                                                          10
(c) World shipping supply

        The final component needed for our analysis is a measure of changes in the world

supply of shipping services in the dry bulk market. We rely on a newly constructed series on

changes in world mercantile (gross) tonnage from 1880 to 2020 which is depicted in Figure 5

(again, Appendix A details the sources of this new series).

        In Figure 5, changes in world mercantile tonnage are tracked on an annual basis back

to 1880 when consistent records first become available. We see ample variation over this

period with lower volatility in the annual growth rate of shipping in the post-1950 period (s =

2.8) than in the pre-1950 period (s = 4.1). Some of this volatility is naturally attributable to the

pronounced destruction of and subsequent recovery in the size of the fleet surrounding the

World Wars (including a tremendous 16.8% increase in 1943). But the pre-1950 period was

also marked with more frequent (and sizeable) downward adjustments in world mercantile

tonnage during peacetime: indeed, the largest annual decline in the fleet (-6.5%) came in the

year 1892. In contrast, the only period of any decline in the post-1950 period was from 1982

to 1987 when the fleet cumulatively shrank by a relatively modest 5.0%.8

        Given the sweeping span of time under consideration, we should acknowledge some

important caveats associated with the use of this particular measure. For one, even a

statistically accurate measure of physical tonnage of worldwide mercantile shipping will fail to

capture the increases in effective shipping capacity which marked the transitions from sail to

steam and from steam to the internal combustion engine. These transitions were marked by

increasing speeds of shipping service: one ton under steam was initially reckoned to be

roughly as effective as one ton under sail in 1850 but subsequently reckoned to be roughly

as effective as four tons under sail in 1910 (Sturmey, 1962, pp. 13-14). However, in our series

on world mercantile tonnage, we choose to take the data at face value rather than impose




8
  Underlying these substantial changes in world mercantile tonnage, there are equally dramatic
changes in the distribution of the ownership of ships across countries and various corporate/legal
structures, most notably in the form of the rise of "flags of convenience" after World War II (Ojala and
Tenold, 2017).
                                                                                                       11
arbitrary corrections for effective shipping capacity, given uncertainty over the exact timing

and magnitude of these transitions.

       There has also been a remarkable revolution in naval architecture which has

lamentably been overshadowed in the academic literature by the aforementioned changes in

propulsion. In particular, the post-1950 era gave way to a marked transition from general

cargo carriers to ships which were not only much larger in size but also much more

specialized in the types of goods they carried (Beaver, 1967; Lundgren, 1996; Tenold, 2019).

Much of the impetus for this increasing specialization in shipping came from the needs of the

petroleum industry in which the main sites of consumption and production were generally

very far removed. But the lessons in construction, design, and port handling learned there

were soon applied to chemical carriers, combination carriers, and, of course, dry bulk

carriers. The use of our series on world mercantile tonnage will necessarily have to then come

with the assumption that changes in world mercantile tonnage are highly correlated with

changes in the tonnage of specialized dry bulk carriers.

       Finally, we need to acknowledge the fact that this measure does not capture perhaps

equally important changes in shipping utilization. That is, a given stock of ships can always be

ran faster ­ but generally, at a more than proportionate cost of fuel ­ and thereby increase

effective shipping supply in response to a positive shipping demand stock. Likewise, they can

be placed under "slow steaming" in response to a negative shipping demand shock. Owners

can also voluntarily remove their ships from active service in response to a negative shipping

demand shock, during which time their ships may be completely idled or sent for repairs and

service. An example may be instructive in this last case. In the midst of the Great Depression,

the British Chamber of Shipping estimated that "due to trade depression...about 18,000,000

tons of vessels, or about 20 percent of world tonnage, were laid up at the end of 1931"

(Sollohub 1932, p. 410). We can then compare this estimate of laid-up tonnage to the

observed change in world mercantile tonnage as depicted in Figure 5: from 1930 to 1931, it

actually increased by 0.75%; and from there, it only slowly declined by 7.5% into 1935 (after

which it began to climb again). This matters in that the separate processes of laying-up and


                                                                                                 12
reactivating tonnage each come with their own fixed costs which likely lead to non-linearities

in the effective supply of shipping services.

       Our proposed means of dealing with these issues is as follows. To account for the

slowly evolving changes in naval architecture and propulsion discussed above, we use the

annual percentage change in world mercantile tonnage as a measure of the supply of

shipping services in the structural VAR below. Thus, if we can assume these transitions are

roughly linear over the long run (as Panel A of Figure 4 would indeed suggest), then changes

in the effective supply of shipping services due to changes in technology will be roughly

constant on a year-to-year basis and will be differenced out. Likewise, to account for

unobserved changes in the effective supply of shipping services due to time-varying

utilization rates either from changes in the speed of shipping services or the process of laying

up/recommissioning part of the fleet, we will interpret the residual term in the structural VAR

below as primarily capturing utilization shocks among other orthogonal components.



3. Structural Vector Autoregression

       We build on a structural vector auto-regressive model with sign restrictions to set-

identify shocks in the dry bulk freight market. Faust (1998), Canova and De Nicolo (2002), and

Uhlig (2005) pioneered this model which has become a standard of the applied

macroeconomics literature. Kilian and Murphy (2012, 2014), in particular, apply this model to

decompose changes in the real price of crude oil into components driven by different types

of shocks. The same methodology makes it possible to set-identify the various shocks that

drive real dry bulk freight rates at any one moment that might have an offsetting impact. This

allows us to deal with two notable problems, namely unobserved structural shocks and

reverse causality.



3.1 Identification

       We set-identify four orthogonal shocks to real dry bulk freight rates. We interpret

these as a fuel price shock, a shipping demand shock, a shipping supply shock, and a


                                                                                              13
residual shock. We relate them to one another and real dry bulk freight rates via supply-and-

demand analysis as summarized in Table 2. In what follows, we normalize all shocks to have a

positive effect on the real freight rate index.

       The first shock is intended to capture exogenous shifts in the demand curve for

shipping which are associated with unanticipated changes in the global business cycle. To

identify this shipping demand shock, we assume that a positive shock leads to higher real

global GDP, world mercantile tonnage, real fuel prices, and real freight rates. The second

shock corresponds to a shipping supply shock. We assume that an unexpected inward shift of

the supply curve negatively affects real global GDP, world mercantile tonnage, and real fuel

prices, but increases real freight rates. Likewise, we interpret the third shock as a fuel price

shock. We assume that a positive fuel price shock negatively affects real global GDP and

world mercantile tonnage while it positively affects real fuel prices and real freight rates.

       Finally, we include a residual shock designed to capture idiosyncratic shocks not

otherwise accounted for. This could relate to shifts in the demand for shipping due to

forward-looking behavior or to other demand shocks specific to the market for shipping

driven by changes in preferences, regulation, or technology. This type of shock may also

capture exogenous shocks to capacity utilization in the global shipping fleet (see Kilian,

Nomikos, and Zhou, 2020). For example, the International Maritime Organization introduced

regulation in 2020 imposing a reduction in the sulfur content of fuels used by ships. One

means of compliance is through the use of scrubbers for filtration purposes, but this comes

with additional monetary and time costs of installation, additional weight for non-shipping

purposes, and additional fuel costs as a scrubber consumes roughly 5% more fuel per tonne

of cargo (Kerriou, 2020). Here, we assume that such a negative utilization shock negatively

affects real global GDP as bottlenecks in global value chains emerge stemming from the

reduction in effective shipping supply, positively affects world mercantile tonnage as

shipbuilders respond to the exogenous reduction in utilization by increasing fleet size, and

naturally leads to higher real freight rates. However, we leave the effect of such a residual

shock on real fuel prices unrestricted.


                                                                                                   14
3.2 Econometric Model

       We include K endogenous variables yt = (DYt, DQt, log(Ft), log(Pt))', namely the

percentage change in real global GDP (DYt), the percentage change in world mercantile

tonnage (DQt), the log of the real fuel price index Ft, and the log of the real freight rate index

Pt as well as the lags of all endogenous variables in our structural VAR model:

                        (2) ) # =  & #$& +  +  * #$* +   # +  ) # .

       The matrix of deterministic terms (D) consists of a constant and a linear trend. These

deterministic terms account for long-run trends in productivity growth in the shipping

industry, the costs of energy and shipping production, trade costs, and other factors. We also

add indicator variables for World War I and the three subsequent years after its conclusion

(that is, from 1914 to 1921) as well as World War II and the three subsequent years after its

conclusion (that is, from 1939 to 1948). These indicator variables control for war-related

market distortions introduced by government policy and restrictions on international trade.

       The matrix ) governs the instantaneous relationship among the endogenous
                                      $&
variables. The inverse of this matrix )  is called the structural multiplier matrix which relates
                                                                  $&
to the reduced form coefficients of the endogenous variables ! =  )  ! with the dimension

of ! = 1, ... ,  being  × . The structural form matrix for the deterministic terms is   =
$&
)  . The  ×  matrix  is assumed to consist of serially and mutually uncorrelated

structural innovations. It relates to the reduced form residuals # through the structural
                  $&
multiplier matrix )  namely # =  # -  & #$& -... -* #$* . These equations allow us to

express the mutually correlated reduced-form innovations, # , as weighted averages of the

mutually uncorrelated structural innovations, # . The elements of the structural multiplier
       $&
matrix )  are the weights.



3.3 Historical Decompositions

       Based on the structural model, historical decompositions allow us to decompose

fluctuations in the real dry bulk index into the respective contributions of the accumulated

effects of each structural shock and the deterministic terms. Basically, we compute what the
                                                                                                15
counter-factual freight rate series would have looked like based on the emergence of only

one type of shock, removing the effects of the other shocks.

       We decompose the four endogenous variables according to:

                       #$&   $&      #$&   $                   (#)        (#)
             (3) <# =  !,) ! ) #$& + !,) !  #$& +  & ) + ... +* $*1& ,


where ! are the estimated reduced form impulse responses which capture the responses of

the endogenous variables to one-unit shocks  periods ago. They are computed from ! =
           (#)     (#)
!  and C& , ... , * D = # with ( × ) matrix  = G2 , 0(2×2) , ... , 0(2×2) J. The companion

matrix  is defined as a ( × ) matrix:

                                        &      *$&       *
                                               0         0
                                    =  L 2                 O
                                                         
                                         0     2         0

                  $&
       The matrix )  is the estimated structural multiplier matrix of the endogenous
              
variables and  is the structural form matrix for the deterministic terms. We denote variables

that are derived from the historical decomposition by upper tildes. The first term on the right-

hand side of equation (3) contains the sum of the cumulative contributions of the five

structural shocks on each of the endogenous variables. The second term is the contributions

of the deterministic terms to the endogenous variables. The last term on the right-hand side

includes the cumulative effect of the initial states on the five endogenous variables which

become negligible for stationary processes as   .



3.4 Estimation and Inference

       We estimate a set-identified VAR model using a Bayesian framework based on Rubio-

Ramirez, Waggoner, and Zha (2010) and Arias, Rubio-Ramirez, and Waggoner (2018). As set-

identified VAR models rely on inequality restrictions, they do not generate unique point

estimates of the impulse responses (in contrast to VARs with short- or long-run restrictions

which do). Instead, they generate a -- possibly large -- set of admissible models. Each of



                                                                                               16
these admissible models is consistent with the data and satisfies the sign restrictions. We

construct the set of admissible models as discussed in Kilian and Lütkepohl (2017).

       We assume a conventional diffuse Gaussian-inverse Wishart prior on the reduced-

form parameters  = [& , ..., Ap] and the residual variance-covariance matrix u and a uniform

prior for the orthogonal rotation matrix Q. Given the vector of reduced-form parameters and

the lower triangular Cholesky decomposition of the residual variance-covariance matrix (P =

chol(Su)) with positive diagonal elements, we generate a large number of candidate solutions
                                 $&
for the structural impact matrix )  . In particular, we draw 20,000 realizations of the rotation
                                                                               $&
matrix Q such that PQ is a candidate solution for the structural impact matrix )  . This is

based on a QR decomposition using the Householder transformation following Rubio-

Ramirez, Waggoner, and Zha (2010). For each candidate solution of the structural impact
       $&
matrix )  , we construct the structural model and compute the set of implied structural

impulse responses.

       We repeat this procedure for each of 5,000 draws from the posterior distribution of

(A, Su), retain structural models with impulse response functions that satisfy all identifying sign

restrictions, and discard all others. For inference, we evaluate the joint posterior density value

of the set of admissible structural models under Dirac delta loss (see Inoue and Kilian, 2013,

2019, 2020). Finally, we compute both the most likely structural model (modal model) and

the 68% joint credible sets of the admissible structural models.



4. Results

4.1 Impulse Response Functions

       Figure 6 presents the credible set of impulse response functions for the four

endogenous variables. The functions show how (from left to right) the percentage change in

real global GDP, the percentage change in world mercantile tonnage, the log of the real fuel

price index, and the log of the real dry bulk index react to a one-standard deviation change in

(from top to bottom) the shipping demand shock, the shipping supply shock, the fuel price




                                                                                                17
shock, and the residual shock through time. The mode and the joint credible sets of the

admissible structural models are depicted in black and red, respectively.

       In the main, the impulse response functions demonstrate that the reaction of real dry

bulk freight rates to the different types of shocks are either in line with what one would

reasonably expect or effectively indistinguishable from zero. A positive shipping demand

shock and a positive fuel price shock both increase real dry bulk freight rates, but with the

former leading to stronger and more long-lasting effects than the latter. Likewise, a negative

shipping supply shock increases real dry bulk freight rates while a residual shock does not

have a clear effect on freight rates. On average, shipping demand shocks are, by far, the most

persistent with their effects lingering up to 10 to 15 years. This is followed by fuel price

shocks and shipping supply shocks which are significantly less persistent with effects that only

last for a few years. Finally, the effect of residual shocks is, for the most part, fairly minimal.



4.2 Historical Decompositions

       Historical decompositions show the contribution of each shock in driving variation in

the real dry bulk freight rate series. They quantify the independent contribution of the four

shocks to deviations in real dry bulk freight rates from their base projection. Figure 7 allows

us to visually discern the historical drivers of booms and busts in the dry bulk shipping

industry. The vertical scales are identical across the four sub-panels so that the figures clearly

illustrate the relative importance of a given shock. Another way of intuitively thinking about

these historical decompositions is that each of the sub-panels represents a counterfactual

simulation of what real dry bulk freights rates would have been if it had only been driven by

this particular shock.

       For instance, we can consider the case of shipping demand shocks by integrating the

lessons of economic and financial history on variation in global output. The historical

decomposition starts in 1880 when dry bulk freight rates were likely somewhat depressed

due to the negative accumulated effects of shipping demand shocks during the Long

Depression of the 1870s. Afterwards, the effects of shipping demand shocks are in line with


                                                                                                      18
our historical knowledge about the business cycles in major economies at the time. For

example, the effects of the large negative shipping demand shock in the late 1900s can be

associated with the Panic of 1907. Likewise, real dry bulk freight rates plummeted in the early

1930s as the Great Depression dramatically reduced global trade and the demand for

shipping services.

       After World War II, positive shipping demand shocks led to increases in real dry bulk

freight rates in the wake of the immediate post-war efforts at re-industrialization and re-

urbanization in much of Europe and Japan as well as the later economic transformation of the

East Asian Tigers and Japan. From 1950 to 1980, this amounted to a nearly uninterrupted --

but far from constant -- string of positive shipping demand shocks. This long swing was

reversed in the period from 1980 to 2000. However, from the early 2000s, a series of positive

commodity demand shocks emerged which were clearly related to unexpectedly strong

global growth driven by the industrialization and urbanization of China. Indeed, this period

represents the most dramatic upswing in the cumulative effects of shipping demand shocks

seen in these 140 years of global macroeconomic history. The lingering effects of the Global

Financial Crisis are also clearly visible in the series for the accumulated effects of shipping

demand shocks. Finally, the historical decompositions show that shipping supply shocks, fuel

price shocks, and residual shocks alike had much less of an important role in driving

deviations in long-run real dry bulk freight rates from their underlying trend.

       Table 3 more precisely quantifies these impressions by numerically summarizing the

contribution of each shock by period. For the full period from 1880 to 2020, shipping

demand shocks explain 49% of the variation in real dry bulk freight rates while shipping

supply shocks explain 22%. These two types of fundamental shocks which are related to basic

supply and demand conditions, thus, explain a significant majority (71%) of the medium- and

long-run variation in real dry bulk freight rates. Fuel price shocks and residual shocks

respectively explain 11% and 18% of the same.

       It is also possible to replicate this decomposition for shorter spans of time by using

the parameter estimates derived from the full sample in combination with the respective size


                                                                                                  19
of shocks for various sub-periods. In the lower half of Table 3, we consider the independent

contribution of the four shocks in the pre-World War I era from 1880 to 1913, the interwar

years from 1919 to 1939, and the post-World War II era from 1949 to 2020. In the pre-World

War I era, we find a slightly more balanced contribution across shipping demand shocks and

shipping supply shocks with shares of 44% and 29%, respectively. We also find that the

contribution of shipping demand shocks to variation in real dry bulk freight rates increased

substantially to 56% in the interwar years while the contribution of shipping supply shocks

decreased substantially to 17% in the same. What is more, the share of shipping demand

shocks remains elevated at 50% and the share of shipping supply shocks remains suppressed

at 20% in the post-World War II era. While there may be several potential explanations for this

phenomenon (see below), we must leave their exploration for future research. In contrast, the

contribution of both fuel price shocks and residual shocks remained roughly constant

through the three sub-periods, not straying very far from the respective headline numbers of

11% and 18% reported above.



4.3 Sensitivity analysis

       Our results are relatively robust to a number of different approaches to the data. First,

we have previously noted that the use of real global GDP may not be ideal, given changes in

the composition of GDP over time away from goods production and towards services. To this

end, we substitute the series of real global GDP with the series of US industrial production

depicted in Panel B of Figure 3. And while the pairwise correlation for changes in real global

GDP and US industrial production is very high, we may also reasonably expect some changes

in the values of parameter estimates from the structural VAR. Likewise, we also substitute the

series of real global GDP with the proxy for world industrial production which covers the

OECD plus Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Russia, and South Africa and which is depicted in

Panel C of Figure 3. Finally, we substitute the series of real fuel prices inclusive of sail tonnage

with an index of real fuel prices which excludes sail tonnage and which is depicted in Panel C

of Figure 4.


                                                                                                 20
       Rather than display and try to visually compare the associated impulse response

functions and historical decompositions, we instead reproduce the decomposition exercise

in Table 3 and numerically summarizing the contribution of each shock by period across the

three alternate specifications. The first panel of Table 4 reports the shares for our benchmark

specification. This is then followed by the shares from the specification using the index of US

industrial production, the specification using the index of OECD +6 industrial production,

and finally the specification using the real fuel price index which excludes sail tonnage.

       There, we find that relative to the benchmark specification, the substitution of the

index of US industrial production for real global GDP leads to an 18 percentage point

reduction in the share of shipping demand shocks from 1880 to 2020. Almost all of this

reduction is then split in between increases in the share of shipping supply shocks (+13 pp)

and fuel price shocks (+4 pp). Shipping demand shocks retain pride of place only during the

interwar period while supply shocks become less important over time and fuel price and

residual shocks become more important over time. On balance, we question how much

interpretative weight to place on these figures, given the geographic specificity of this proxy

for global economic activity and the waning US share of world industrial production.

       More reassuringly, the substitution of the index of OECD+6 industrial production for

real global GDP delivers results which are qualitatively more consistent with those for the

benchmark specification in the post-World War II period. Thus, the share of shipping demand

shocks decreases by 9 percentage points while the share of shipping supply shocks remains

roughly constant. However, the largest changes occur: (1) for fuel price shocks which are now

reckoned to explain 25% of the variation in real dry bulk freight rates (a result which is

perhaps not surprising given the size of these shocks in the past 60 years); and (2) for residual

shocks which are now reckoned to explain a mere 13% of the same (a figure which also

represents the lowest share of the residual across all specifications and sub-periods).

       Finally, the substitution of the real fuel price index derived without sail tonnage for the

real fuel price index derived with sail tonnage yet again sees shipping demand shocks prevail

in the full sample and for each of the three sub-periods. In sum, these results suggest that


                                                                                               21
while numerical values change across specifications, the relative ordering of the importance

of these shocks remain relatively invariant: shipping demand shocks are generally the most

important driver of booms/busts in the dry bulk shipping industry followed, in order, by

shipping supply shocks, residual shocks, and fuel price shocks.



5. Conclusion

       This paper is the first to provide evidence on the drivers of maritime transport costs in

the very long-run. To this end, we develop and analyze a new and large dataset on dry bulk

freight rates for the period from 1850 to 2020, finding that, in real terms, these followed a

downward, but undulating path with a cumulative decline of 79% between 1850 and 2020.

We relate this secular decline to a historical literature which documents significant

productivity growth as radical changes in goods handling and storage in ports, naval

architecture, and propulsion took place (Harley, 1988; Mohammed and Williamson, 2004;

Tenold, 2019).

       Our next step came in understanding the drivers of booms and busts in the dry bulk

shipping industry. Here, we speak to both a recent academic literature and a long-standing

professional consensus which emphasize the role of shipping demand in governing cyclic

patterns of investment and profitability in the dry bulk industry. Somewhat reassuringly, we

find that shipping demand shocks do indeed strongly dominate all other shocks as a driver of

real dry bulk freight rates over the long run. Furthermore, while shipping demand shocks

have increased in importance over time, shipping supply shocks in particular have become

less relevant.

       What remains as tasks for the future comes in developing disaggregated measures of

maritime transport costs across commodity classifications and destination/origin pairings.

That is, it would be useful to have a characterization of the respective shares of shocks for

particular commodity-destination-origin combinations which could then be matched with

known features of commodity and industrial production and their geographical

determinants. An additional way forward would also come in developing a much more


                                                                                                22
refined measure of shipping supply, specifically as it relates to the dry bulk sector. Here, we

have had to abstract away from the implications of increasing specialization by ship type,

technological change in propulsion, and time-varying utilization rates which may vitally affect

any measure of the effective ­ as opposed to the observed ­ supply of dry bulk shipping

services. Thus, in any final reckoning of the respective role of fundamentals in the dry bulk

shipping market, shipping supply may yet reemerge as a more dominant force if our current

measure of mercantile gross tonnage diverges too far from actual conditions in the industry.




                                                                                                23
References
Angier, E.A.V. (1920), Fifty Years' Freights 1869-1919. London: Fairplay.
Arias, J.E., J.F. Rubio-Ramirez and D.F. Waggoner (2018), "Inference Based on Structural
         Vector Autoregressions Identified With Sign and Zero Restrictions: Theory and
         Applications." Econometrica 82(2): 685-720.
Baumeister, C. and J.D. Hamilton (2019), "Structural Interpretation of Vector Autoregressions
         with Incomplete Identification: Revisiting the Role of Oil Supply and Demand Shocks."
         American Economic Review 109(5): 1873-1910.
Baumeister, C., D. Korobilis, and T.K. Lee (2020), "Energy Markets and Global Economic
         Conditions." Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Beaver, S.H. (1967), "Ships and Shipping: The Geographical Consequences of Technological
         Progress." Geography 52(2): 133-156.
Brancaccio, G. Kalouptsidi, M. and T. Papageorgiou (2020), "Geography, Transportation, and
         Endogenous Trade Costs." Econometrica 88(2): 657-691.
Canova, F. and G. De Nicolo (2002), "Monetary Disturbances Matter for Business Fluctuations
         in the G7." Journal of Monetary Economics 49(6): 1131-1159.
Cufley, C. (1972), Ocean Freights and Chartering. London: Staples Press.
Faust, J. (1998), "The Robustness of Identified VAR Conclusions about Money." Carnegie-
         Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 49: 207-244
Greenwood, R. and S.G. Hanson (2015), "Waves in Ship Prices and Investment." Quarterly
         Journal of Economics 130(1): 55­109.
Hamilton, J.D. (2019), "Measuring Global Economic Activity." NBER Working Paper 25778.
Harley, C.K. (1988), "Ocean Freight Rates and Productivity, 1740-1913: The Primacy of
         Mechanical Invention Reaffirmed." Journal of Economic History 48(4): 851-876.
Inoue, A. and L. Kilian (2013), "Inference on Impulse Response Functions in Structural VAR
         Models." Journal of Econometrics 177(1): 1-13.
Inoue, A. and L. Kilian (2019), "Corrigendum to "Inference on Impulse Response Functions in
         Structural VAR Models." Journal of Econometrics 209(1): 139-143.
Inoue, A. and L. Kilian (2020), "The Role of the Prior in Estimating VAR Models with Sign
         Restrictions." Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Working Paper 2030.
Isserlis, L. (1938), "Tramp Shipping Cargoes and Freights." Journal of the Royal Statistical
         Society 101(1): 53-146.
Jacks, D.S. (2019), "From Boom to Bust: A Typology of Real Commodity Prices in the Long
         Run." Cliometrica 13(2): 201-220.
Jacks, D.S., C.M. Meissner, and D. Novy (2010), "Trade Costs in the First Wave of
         Globalization." Explorations in Economic History 47(2): 127-141.
Jacks, D.S., C.M. Meissner, and D. Novy (2011), "Trade Booms, Trade Busts, and Trade
         Costs." Journal of International Economics 83(2): 185-201.
Jacks, D.S. and M. Stuermer (2020), "What Drives Commodity Price Booms and Busts?"
         Energy Economics 85: Article 104035.
Jacks, D.S. and J.P. Tang (2018), "Trade and Immigration, 1870-2010." NBER Working Paper
         25010.

                                                                                            24
Kalouptsidi, M. (2014), "Time to Build and Fluctuations in Bulk Shipping." American Economic
         Review 104(2): 564-608.
Kerriou, A. (2020), "Low Sulfur Regulations: The Impact on Maritime Shipping Prices."
         https://market-insights.upply.com/en/low-sulfur-regulations-the-impact-on-maritime-
         shipping-prices
Kilian, L. (2009), "Not All Oil Price Shocks are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply
         Shocks in the Crude Oil Market." American Economic Review 99(3): 1053­69.
Kilian, L. and H. Lütkepohl (2017), Structural Vector Autoregressive Analysis. Cambridge:
         Cambridge University Press.
Kilian, L. and D.P. Murphy (2012), "Why Agnostic Sign Restrictions are Not Enough:
         Understanding the Dynamics of Oil Market VAR Models." Journal of the European
         Economic Association 10(5): 1166-1188.
Kilian, L. and D.P. Murphy (2014), "The Role of Inventories and Speculative Trading in the
         Global Market for Crude Oil." Journal of Applied Econometrics 29(3): 454-78.
Kilian, L., N. Nomikos, and X. Zhou (2020), "A Quantitative Model of the Oil Tanker Market in
         the Arabian Gulf." CEPR Discussion Paper 14798.
Kilian, L. and X. Zhou (2018), "Modeling Fluctuations in the Global Demand for
         Commodities." Journal of International Money and Finance 88: 54-78.
Klovland, J.T. (2009), "New Evidence on the Fluctuations in Ocean Freight Rates in the
         1850s." Explorations in Economic History 46(3): 266-284.
Klovland, J.T. (2017), "Navigating through Torpedo Attacks and Enemy Raiders: Merchant
         Shipping and Freight Rates during World War I." NHH Department of Economics
         Discussion Paper 07/2017.
Lundgren, N.-G. (1996), "Bulk Trade and Maritime Transport Costs: The Evolution of Global
         Markets." Resources Policy 22(1/2): 5-32
Lütkepohl, H. and M. Krätzig (2004), Applied Time Series Econometrics. Cambridge:
         Cambridge University Press.
Maddison, A. (2010), Historical Statistics of the World Economy: 1­2008 AD.
         http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/
Metaxas, B. (1971), The Economics of Tramp Shipping. London: Athlone Press.
Mohammed, S.I.S. and J.G. Williamson (2004), "Freight Rates and Productivity Gains in
         British Tramp Shipping 1869-1950." Explorations in Economic History 41(2): 172-203.
Ojala, J. and S. Tenold (2017), "Maritime Trade and Merchant Shipping." International Journal
         of Maritime History 29(4): 838-854.
O'Rourke, K.H. and J.G. Williamson (1994), "Late Nineteenth-Century Anglo-American Factor-
         Price Convergence" Journal of Economic History 54(4): 892-916.
O'Rourke, K.H. and J.G. Williamson (1999), Globalization and History. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Persson, K.G. (2004), "Mind the Gap! Transport Costs and Price Convergence in the
         Nineteenth Century Atlantic Economy." European Review of Economic History 8(2):
         125-147.




                                                                                          25
Rubio-Ramirez, J.F., D.F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2010), "Structural Vector Autoregressions:
       Theory of Identification and Algorithms for Inference." Review of Economic Studies
       77(2): 665-696.
Sollohub, W.A. (1932), "The Plight of Foreign Trade." American Economic Review 22(3): 403­
       413.
Stopford, M. (2009), Maritime Economics. New York: Routledge Press.
Sturmey, S.G. (1962), British Shipping and World Competition. London: Athlone Press.
Tenold, S. (2019), Norwegian Shipping in the 20th Century. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Uhlig, H. (2005), "What are the Effects of Monetary Policy on Output? Results from an
       Agnostic Identification Procedure." Journal of Monetary Economics 52(2): 381-419.
Wegerich, A. (2016), Digging Deeper: Global Coal Prices and Industrial Growth, 1840-1960.
       Ph.D. thesis, Brasenose College, University of Oxford.
UNCTAD (2015), Review of Maritime Transport. Geneva: United Nations Conference on Trade
       and Development.




                                                                                       26
Appendix A

This appendix details the sources of global economic activity, real fuel prices, real maritime
freight rates, and world mercantile tonnage used throughout this paper.

Global economic activity

In the paper, we consider three measures of global economic activity depicted in Panels A
through C of Figure 3. Our benchmark measure is world GDP derived from Maddison (2010)
with updates from Jacks and Stuermer (2020).

Our second measure is an index of US industrial production for the period from 1850 to 2020
formed by chaining Davis' (2004) annual USIP index, Miron and Romer's (1990) monthly USIP
index, and the Federal Reserve Economic Data's (2020) non-seasonally adjusted monthly
USIP index. The sources are as follows:

Davis, J.H. (2004), "An Annual Index of US Industrial Production, 1790-1915." Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 119(4): 1177-1215.
Federal Reserve Economic Data (2020), IPB50001N, Industrial Production: Total Index, Not
        Seasonally Adjusted; https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/IPB50001N
Miron, J.A. and C.D. Romer (1990), "A New Monthly Index of Industrial Production, 1884-
        1940." Journal of Economic History 50(2): 321-337.

Finally, for the period, from 1958 to 2020, we also consider a proxy for world industrial
production which covers the OECD plus Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Russia, and South
Africa. This series was originally published by the OECD in its Main Economic Indicators
database. However, the organization discontinued the series in 2011. Baumeister and
Hamilton (2019) have updated the OECD series based on the same methodology.

Real fuel prices

The share of world mercantile (gross) tonnage by fuel type from 1879 depicted in Panel A of
Figure 4 were derived from the world fleet statistics website administered by the Lloyd's
Register Foundation: https://hec.lrfoundation.org.uk/archive-library/world-fleet-statistics

The real fuel price indices depicted in Panels B and C of Figure 4 were then constructed off
the shares above and the real price of petroleum taken from Jacks (2019) and of Welsh best
steam coal taken from Wegerich (2016) with extensions from 1962 using the real price of coal
taken from Jacks (2019).




                                                                                                 27
Real maritime freight rates

Freight rates quoted in Great British pounds were converted into real 1990 GBP using the CPI
deflator in O'Donoghue, Goulding, and Allen (2004) with updates from the Bank of England.
Freight rates quoted in US dollars were converted into real 1990 USD using the CPI deflator
in Officer and Williamson (2020) with updates from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

O'Donoghue, J., L. Goulding, and G. Allen (2004), "Consumer Price Inflation since 1750."
        Economic Trends 604: 38-46.
Officer, L.H. and S.H. Williamson (2020), "The Annual Consumer Price Index for the United
        States, 1774-Present." http://www.measuringworth.com/uscpi/

The underlying sources for the nominal freight rate data are as follows:

Andrews, F. (1907), "Ocean Freight Rates and the Conditions Affecting Them." USDA Bureau
         of Statistics Bulletin no. 67. Washington: GPO.
Angier, E.A.V. (1920), Fifty Years' Freights 1869-1919. London: Fairplay.
Baumeister, C., D. Korobilis, and T.K. Lee (2020), "Energy Markets and Global Economic
         Conditions." Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Brentano, L. (1911), Die Deutschen Getreidezoelle. Stuttgart.
Daily Freight Register London, various issues.
Daily Freight Register (1960), Tramp Shipping Freight Rates 1950-1959. London.
Daily Freight Register (1964), Tramp Shipping Freight Rates 1954-1963. London.
Daily Freight Register (1968), Tramp Shipping Freight Rates 1958-1967. London.
Daish, J.B. (1918), The Atlantic Port Differentials. Washington: W.H. Lowdermilk & Co.
Fearnleys Weekly Freight Rates, various issues.
Fearnleys Weekly Reports, various issues.
Great Britain (1905), Parliamentary Papers, (LXXXIV).
Harley, C.K. (1989), "Coal Exports and British Shipping, 1850-1913." Explorations in
         Economic History 26(3): 311-338.
Harley, C.K. (1990), "North Atlantic Shipping in the Late 19th Century: Freight Rates and the
         Interrelationship of Cargoes." In Fischer and Norwik (Ed.s), Shipping and Trade, 1750-
         1950, Pontefract: Lofthouse Publications: 147-172.
Isserlis, L. (1938), "Tramp Shipping Cargoes and Freights." Journal of the Royal Statistical
         Society 101(1): 53-146.
Jevons, H.S. (1969), The British Coal Trade. New York: Augustus M. Kelley.
Kuczynski, R.R. (1902), "Freight-Rates on Argentine and North American Wheat." Journal of
         Political Economy 10(3): 333-360.
Mohammed, S.I.S. and J.G. Williamson (2004), "Freight Rates and Productivity Gains in British
         Tramp Shipping 1869­1950." Explorations in Economic History 41(2): 172­203.
Rubinow, I.M. (1908), "Russia's Wheat Trade." USDA Bureau of Statistics Bulletin no. 65.
         Washington: GPO.

                                                                                            28
van Peski, V. and D.L. Uyttenboogaart (1918), Le Marche des Cereales de Rotterdam. Rome:
        Imprimerie de l'Institut International d'Agriculture.
Sundbaerg, G. (1908), Apercus Statistiques Internationaux. Stockholm: Imprimerie Royale.
Thomas, D.A. (1903), "The Growth and Direction of our Foreign Trade in Coal during the Last
        Half Century." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 66(3): 439-533.
United Nations, Review of Maritime Transport, various issues.
Vierteljahreshefte zur Statistik, various issues.

World shipping supply

The changes in world mercantile (gross) tonnage from 1880 depicted in Figure 5 were
primarily derived from the world fleet statistics website administered by the Lloyd's Register
Foundation: https://hec.lrfoundation.org.uk/archive-library/world-fleet-statistics

In particular, this series is based on figures for vessels of 100 gross tons and larger.
Unfortunately, no equivalent figures for the period prior to 1879 are available (although
Lloyd's does provide information on registered ships in the British Empire back to 1761 and
fragmentary evidence on worldwide tonnage back to 1864).

There are also a few significant gaps in the numbers reported on the website related to the
World Wars. In particular, the series is missing observations from 1917 to 1918 and from
1940 to 1946. For 1917 and 1918, changes in gross tonnage were taken from Table A2 of
Klovland (2017). For 1940 to 1946, changes in gross tonnage were made proportionate to
estimates of wartime construction of Liberty ships and destruction of worldwide mercantile
tonnage reported on the world fleet statistics website.

After 1999, the Lloyd's numbers are extended by using data reported by UNCTAD (2020):
https://unctadstat.unctad.org/wds/TableViewer/tableView.aspx?ReportId=93




                                                                                              29
       Table 1: Composition of dry bulk freight rate data
Currencies                         British Pound        84.7%
                                     US Dollar          15.3%
Destinations (top 5 only)        United Kingdom         30.2%
                                    NW Europe           12.8%
                                        Egypt            6.3%
                                         Italy           5.2%
                                   Netherlands           4.4%
Goods (top 5 only)                      Coal            41.6%
                                       Grains           40.1%
                                         Ore             9.3%
                                     Fertilizer          3.9%
                                       Seeds             3.1%
Origins (top 5 only)             United Kingdom         36.5%
                                   United States        18.1%
                                       Russia            4.2%
                                        Brazil           3.7%
                                     Australia           3.7%
Total observation count                                10,448
Notes: For presentation purposes only, individual observations have been
aggregated up into destination/origin groups by country (e.g. London
into UK) and into goods group by commodity (e.g. wheat into Grains).




                                                                           30
                    Figure 1: Real Dry Bulk Index, 1850-2020 (1850=100)
200



180



160



140



120



100



80



60



40



20



 0
      1850   1860    1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020



       Notes: The solid black line represents the real dry bulk freight rate index,
       constructed as described in the text. The dotted black line is an estimate of the
       long-run trend derived from the Christiano-Fitzgerald band pass filter which
       assumes a cyclical component of 70 years duration in the real dry bulk freight
       rate index.




                                                                                                                                     31
                    Figure 2: Real Dry Bulk Index, de-trended, 1850-2020
125




100




75




50




25




 0




-25




-50
      1850   1860    1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020



       Notes: The solid black line represents the observed deviation of the real dry
       bulk freight rate index from the estimated long-run trend depicted in Figure 1.




                                                                                                                                     32
               Figure 3: Changes in Global Economic Activity (in percent)
                            Panel A: Real Global GDP, 1850-2020
 8

 6

 4

 2

 0

-2

-4

-6

-8
     1850    1860   1870   1880    1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020




                                  Panel B: US Industrial Production, 1850-2020
30


20


10


 0


-10


-20


-30
      1850   1860   1870   1880    1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020




                           Panel C: OECD+6 Industrial Production, 1958-2020
10

 8

 6

 4

 2

 0

 -2

 -4

 -6

 -8

-10
      1850   1860   1870   1880    1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020




                                                                                                                                     33
                 Figure 4: Real Fuel Prices for Shipping
 Panel A: Share of World Mercantile Tonnage by Fuel Type, 1879-2020
1.0
                Coal
0.9             Fuel oil
                Sail
0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
      1850     1860        1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020




               Panel B: Real Fuel Price Index with sail (in logs), 1879-2020
7.00

6.50

6.00

5.50

5.00

4.50

4.00

3.50

3.00

2.50
       1850    1860        1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020




              Panel C: Real Fuel Price Index without sail (in logs), 1879-2020
7.00

6.50

6.00

5.50

5.00

4.50

4.00

3.50

3.00

2.50
       1850    1860        1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020




                                                                                                                                           34
Figure 5: Changes in World Mercantile Tonnage (in percent), 1880-2020
18
16
14
12
10
 8
 6
 4
 2
 0
 -2
 -4
 -6
 -8
      1850   1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020




                                                                                                                                    35
                     Table 2: Sign Restrictions in the Structural VAR Model
                                   Global           Mercantile       Real Fuel                   Real Dry
                                  Real GDP           Tonnage        Price Index                 Bulk Index
Shipping demand shock                +                  +                +                          +
Shipping supply shock                 -                 -                -                          +
Fuel price shock                      -                 -                +                          +
Residual shock                             -                  +                                      +
Notes: Table 2 summarizes the sign restrictions imposed on the responses of the endogenous variables to the
four shocks in the structural VAR model. All structural shocks have been normalized to imply an increase in the
real dry bulk index. A missing entry (as in the fourth row) means that no sign restriction is imposed.




                                                                                                         36
Figure 6: Impulse Response Functions for Four Shocks on the Real Dry Bulk Index




   Notes: Figure 6 shows impulse responses from the 68% joint highest posterior
   density sets obtained from the posterior distribution of the structural models.
   The impulse responses implied by the most likely structural model (modal
   model) are depicted in black models as in Inoue and Kilian (2013, 2019).
   Impulse responses are normalized such that each shock has a positive effect on
   freight rates. The results shown are based on 5,000 draws from the reduced-
   form posterior distribution with 20,000 draws of the rotation matrix each.




                                                                                     37
  Figure 7: Historical Decompositions of Real Freight Rates




Notes: Figure 7 shows historical decompositions from the 68%
joint highest posterior density sets obtained from the posterior
distribution of the structural models as in Inoue and Kilian (2013,
2019). The cumulative effects implied by the most likely structural
model (modal model) are depicted in black. The results shown
are based on 5,000 draws from the reduced-form posterior
distribution with 20,000 draws of the rotation matrix each.




                                                                      38
       Table 3: Shares of Shocks in Explaining Booms and Busts in Freight Rates by Period
                                   Shipping        Shipping        Fuel price       Residual
                                demand shock     supply shock        shock           shock
Full sample: 1880-2020               49%             22%              11%             18%
Pre-World War I: 1880-1913                 44%                 29%                 11%                 16%
Interwar: 1919-1939                        56%                 17%                 8%                  19%
Post-World War II: 1949-2020               50%                 20%                 11%                 19%
Notes: Table 3 reports the share of variation in the real dry bulk index explained by the four structural shocks for
the entire period from 1880 to 2020 and three sub-periods.




                                                                                                           39
                 Table 4: Shares of Shocks by Period, Alternative Specifications
                                  Shipping         Shipping        Fuel price                         Residual
        BENCHMARK
                               demand shock      supply shock        shock                             shock
Full sample: 1880-2020               49%             22%              11%                               18%
Pre-World War I: 1880-1913                 44%                  29%                 11%                 16%
Interwar: 1919-1939                        56%                  17%                 8%                  19%
Post-World War II: 1949-2020               50%                  20%                 11%                 19%
                                       Shipping              Shipping            Fuel price           Residual
           With US IP
                                     demand shock          supply shock            shock               shock
Full sample: 1880-2020                   31%                   35%                  15%                 19%
Pre-World War I: 1880-1913                 28%                  41%                 12%                 19%
Interwar: 1919-1939                        43%                  26%                 12%                 19%
Post-World War II: 1949-2020               28%                  33%                 17%                 22%
                                       Shipping              Shipping            Fuel price           Residual
       With OECD+6 IP
                                     demand shock          supply shock            shock               shock
Full sample: 1880-2020                     -                     -                    -                   -
Pre-World War I: 1880-1913                   -                    -                   -                    -
Interwar: 1919-1939                          -                    -                   -                    -
Post-World War II: 1958-2020               41%                  21%                 25%                 13%
                                       Shipping              Shipping            Fuel price           Residual
   Without sail in fuel prices
                                     demand shock          supply shock            shock               shock
Full sample: 1880-2020                   43%                   24%                  12%                 21%
Pre-World War I: 1880-1913                 34%                  31%                 12%                 23%
Interwar: 1919-1939                        51%                  20%                 8%                  21%
Post-World War II: 1949-2020               45%                  22%                 13%                 20%
Notes: Table 4 reports the share of variation in the real dry bulk index explained by the four structural shocks for
the entire period from 1880 to 2020 and three sub-periods across four potential specifications.




                                                                                                               40
