                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     USING MACHINE LEARNING AND QUALITATIVE INTERVIEWS TO DESIGN
                A FIVE-QUESTION WOMEN'S AGENCY INDEX

                                     Seema Jayachandran
                                      Monica Biradavolu
                                         Jan Cooper

                                     Working Paper 28626
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28626


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




We thank Ambika Chopra, Anubha Agarwal, Sahiba Lal, Azfar Karim, Bijoyetri Samaddar,
Vrinda Kapoor, Ashley Wong, Jacob Gosselin, and Akhila Kovvuri for excellent research
assistance, and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for funding the study. We also thank
Markus Goldstein, Jessica Heckert, Varun Kshirsagar, Hazel Malapit, Ruth Meinzen-Dick,
Amber Peterman, Agnes Quisumbing, Anita Raj, Biju Rao, Greg Seymour, and several seminar
and conference participants for helpful feedback. The study received institutional review board
approval from Northwestern University and the Institute for Financial Management and
Research, Chennai. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Seema Jayachandran, Monica Biradavolu, and Jan Cooper. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Machine Learning and Qualitative Interviews to Design a Five-Question Women's Agency
Index
Seema Jayachandran, Monica Biradavolu, and Jan Cooper
NBER Working Paper No. 28626
March 2021
JEL No. C83,D13,J16,O12

                                           ABSTRACT

We propose a new method to design a short survey measure of a complex concept such as
women's agency. The approach combines mixed-methods data collection and machine learning.
We select the best survey questions based on how strongly correlated they are with a "gold
standard'' measure of the concept derived from qualitative interviews. In our application, we
measure agency for 209 women in Haryana, India, first, through a semi-structured interview and,
second, through a large set of close-ended questions. We use qualitative coding methods to score
each woman's agency based on the interview, which we treat as her true agency. To identify the
close-ended questions most predictive of the "truth," we apply statistical algorithms that build on
LASSO and random forest but constrain how many variables are selected for the model (five in
our case). The resulting five-question index is as strongly correlated with the coded qualitative
interview as is an index that uses all of the candidate questions. This approach of selecting survey
questions based on their statistical correspondence to coded qualitative interviews could be used
to design short survey modules for many other latent constructs.

Seema Jayachandran                               Jan Cooper
Department of Economics                          Department of Global Health and Population
Northwestern University                          Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
2211 Campus Dr                                   90 Smith Street, Office 318
Evanston, IL 60208                               Boston, MA 02120
and NBER                                         jancooper@hsph.harvard.edu
seema@northwestern.edu

Monica Biradavolu
QualAnalytics
3541 16th Street NW
Washington, DC 20010
monica.qualanalytics@gmail.com
1     Introduction
     Women's agency -- or their ability to make and act on their choices for their lives -- is
an important concept in research and policy related to gender equality. Many policies aim
to increase women's agency, as a means for them to improve their health, economic security,
and so forth, or as an end in itself.
     Agency is a psychological construct, or a postulated attribute, which unlike, say, height,
is not directly observable (Cronbach and Meehl, 1955). It is also multi-faceted: It encom-
passes the many domains of one's life including reproductive health, employment, and civic
engagement, and has both an instrumental component and an intrinsic one. The complexity
of agency makes it a challenge to measure quantitatively.
     Nonetheless, researchers often want a measure of women's agency for use in statistical
analyses. When evaluating the effects of an intervention, a researcher might want to test for
an increase in agency (i.e., use the measure as an outcome variable) or investigate whether
women with more agency enjoy larger benefits from the intervention (i.e., use it for subgroup
analysis). An accurate and precise measure of agency is important for these purposes.
Otherwise, one does not know whether a lack of statistical evidence that a program improved
women's agency is due to the absence of an effect or to the inadequacy of the measure.
     While the complexity of agency suggests the need for a long survey module, researchers
often seek a short module, particularly if agency is a secondary focus of their study. A longer
module could elicit more information but would be costlier to implement in terms of money
and respondents' time.
     In this study, we develop a new short survey module on women's agency.1 Our contri-
bution lies in the innovative way we select the survey questions. We choose them based on
criterion validity. That is, we evaluate our measure vis-`
                                                         a-vis a "gold standard" measure of
the construct (DeVon et al., 2007). We start with a "true" measure -- one derived from
a qualitative interview -- and then select the best set of questions to combine into an in-
dex based on their statistical correspondence with the "truth." We carry out this exercise
through mixed-methods data collection in rural Haryana, India, and then data analysis.
     How well a psychometric (e.g., an agency index) captures the concept it is trying to
measure is called its validity (Jose et al., 2017). One type of validity is content validity,
which assesses whether a measure covers all facets of the construct. Qualitative methods
 1
   It is not one of our study's aims to contribute to how agency is conceptualized. We follow the litera-
ture here, focusing on a woman's instrumental agency ("power to") and intrinsic agency ("power within"),
specifically within her household and marriage (Rowlands, 1997; Kabeer, 1999). The next section reviews
the literature that conceptualizes agency.


                                                   1
are often used to assess the content validity of survey questions and ensure that they are
meaningful in the local context (Camfield et al., 2009; Small et al., 2008; Kanbur and Shaffer,
2007; Rao, 2002; Shaffer, 2013).2
     With construct validity, the researcher uses theory to predict that a construct is related
to another variable. One might posit that women's agency is related to another factor Z
because Z increases agency or agency increases Z . Then one judges a measure of agency
based on its correlation with Z .3 An example of an agency index developed using construct
validity is the Survey-based Women's Empowerment Index (SWPER), which is a combina-
tion of Demographic and Health Survey questions chosen because of their strong correlation
with gender gaps in health and education (Ewerling et al., 2017). The premise behind the
measure is that women's agency narrows these gender gaps, or when these gaps narrow,
women acquire more agency. An advantage of construct validity is we almost always have
data on factors that might affect or be affected by a construct. The disadvantage is we are
rarely certain that women's agency causes or is caused by Z ; it is theoretically possible that
women's agency and education gender gaps have a weak association, for example.
     Our approach, criterion validity, also uses the correlation between the measure in ques-
tion and another variable, but here the other variable is a second, "gold standard" measure
of the same construct. There is, of course, no perfect or "true" measure of women's agency.
In practice, we design a women's agency index by benchmarking it against a better way of
measuring women's agency, one that provides richer data. If a richer measure exists, then
why not always use it? Because doing so is often impractical. The better measures we
use are more time-intensive, skill-intensive, logistically complex, or expensive, and thus are
infeasible to include in most large-N studies.
     The primary "gold standard" we use are semi-structured interviews conducted by trained
qualitative researchers. We use qualitative coding methods to score each woman's agency
as conveyed through the interview. These interviews provide in-depth and nuanced data
 2
    Researchers might collect qualitative data from the study population as a first step and use it to design
new survey questions. Studies that take a qualitative-first approach have used various methods, including
open-ended interviews (Camfield and Ruta, 2007; Woodcock et al., 2009), life histories (Quisumbing, 2011),
participatory techniques (Hargreaves et al., 2007), and longer-term ethnographic engagement (Crede and
Borrego, 2013; Jha et al., 2007; Ware et al., 2003). Qualitative methods are also used to improve the validity
of proposed questions through open-ended debriefing techniques during piloting of the questions. Techniques
include interviews and group discussions with respondents about how they understood the questions, asking
them to think aloud as they answer them, or having a panel of experts review the questions (Bowden et al.,
2002; Durham et al., 2011; Latcheva, 2011; Cohen and Saisana, 2014; Greco et al., 2018).
  3
    In addition to validity, another characteristic of a measure is its reliability, or how consistent the value
would be if the measure were used again in the exact same context with the same person. Test-retest
correlation is an example of a way to assess reliability.



                                                       2
but require highly skilled staff to conduct and code them. We also collected a second "gold
standard" measure of agency based on an experimental economics lab game. In the game,
which we adopt from Alm°
                       as et al. (2018), each woman makes a real-stakes choice between
money for herself or her husband. This lab game adds logistical complexity and costs to the
fieldwork, but observed behavior ("revealed preferences") might be less subject to social de-
sirability bias than survey responses. We use these two quite different "gold standards" out
of recognition that researchers likely differ in which they prefer, according to their method-
ological taste. We conduct the lab game among 443 women and choose a subsample of 209
of them for the semi-structured interviews.
     The third way we measure women's agency is through close-ended survey questions.
We ask a long list of questions, drawing on existing survey instruments. Our objective at
the data collection stage was to be comprehensive and agnostic about which were the best
questions, and then to later use a data-driven approach to select the best ones. There is
nothing special about five questions, but this length seems appropriate for survey designers
seeking a short module on agency. Another benefit of a short validated module is that it
could serve as a common set of questions to use in surveys. Each research team could opt
to include many other questions on agency too, but the common questions would allow for
better comparisons across data sets, without being too onerous to include.
     The goal of our statistical analysis is to identify the best close-ended questions to field
from among many candidates. The algorithms we use build on standard supervised machine
learning techniques, adding a constraint on the the number of survey questions that are
selected. This type of problem is referred to as feature selection. We apply three feature
selection algorithms. Our preferred algorithm is LASSO stability selection, in which the top
questions are those selected most frequently when LASSO is repeatedly run on subsamples
of the data (Meinshausen and B¨
                              uhlmann, 2010). This method has previously been used
by Kshirsagar et al. (2017) to choose a small set of survey questions for a proxy-means
test of household poverty, for example.4 We view this as the algorithm that best balances
multiple objectives such as transparency of the predictive model, ease of implementation, and
avoidance of over-fitting the data. The second algorithm is a more complex procedure using
random forest that has more flexibility to fit non-linear relationships in the data (Genuer
et al., 2010). The third algorithm, backward sequential selection, is more prone to over-fitting
but is the simplest one (Liu and Motoda, 1998). It uses only standard linear regressions:
We start with the full set of survey questions and iteratively remove the question that leads
 4
  McBride and Nichols (2018) also use machine learning to design a survey-based proxy for poverty, and
Knippenberg et al. (2019) do so for food insecurity.

                                                  3
to the smallest decrease in the set's explanatory power, stopping when the desired number
of questions remain.
       Turning to our results, when we use the qualitative interviews as the "gold standard," all
three of the statistical algorithms produce an index of women's agency that is quite strongly
correlated with the interview score. There is considerable overlap in the top questions
selected by each algorithm. In addition, the five-question indices are considerably more
correlated with the "truth" than if we had chosen the subset of questions randomly. More
strikingly, they have more explanatory power than indices constructed from all 63 candidate
questions, either their first principal component or a standardized index that averages them.
Interestingly, the algorithm-selected questions are quite specific ones about decision-making
in particular situations, rather than questions that ask women about their power in general.
       The lab game was ineffective in measuring agency in our study. The premise of the
game is that a woman with less agency will more often choose money for herself because she
would not have a say in how money given to her husband is spent. We do see this behavior,
but we also see an opposing force: some women with very low agency never want money for
themselves because they view money as men's domain or are fearful of their husband finding
out and becoming angry. The survey index obtained when we apply the statistical techniques
is only weakly correlated with the lab game behavior, consistent with this putatively "true"
measure actually being very noisy. We conclude that only the semi-structured interviews
can be considered a "gold standard" in our setting. Another advantage of the qualitative
interviews is that they cover many domains of agency, not just financial agency.
       The primary contribution of our study is methodological: We introduce a novel mixed-
methods way to develop a survey measure. Using mixed methods in the design of measure-
ment scales is not new (Onwuegbuzie et al., 2010; Zhou, 2019). For example, Creswell and
Clark (2017) describe a process of using qualitative methods to define a construct and then
quantitative methods to assess the scale once it is developed. In addition, machine learning
techniques have been used in the development of survey instruments, primarily to pare down
full-length scales to short-form versions (Gonzalez, 2020). What is new is our use of machine
learning to select quantitative questions by treating a qualitative measure of the construct
as the "gold standard." We refer to this new approach to survey module design as MASI,
for MAchine learning and Semi-structured Interviews.5
       We believe that selecting survey questions based on their statistical correspondence
to coded qualitative interviews is innovative and has applications beyond women's agency.
 5
     Masi means maternal aunt in Hindi.



                                                4
Many complex concepts are best measured with open-ended questions, yet there is practical
need for close-ended measures of them. One could apply MASI to create survey modules for
other such constructs, such as financial insecurity or cultural assimilation.
      The second contribution of our study is the new short survey module and index for
women's agency that we develop. Our study thus adds to the literature proposing measures
of women's agency or empowerment, which we review in the next section. We believe that the
five-question module validated against semi-structured interviews is a valuable new resource
for measuring women's agency in north India, and perhaps elsewhere. A natural direction
for future research is to replicate the study elsewhere to create short modules appropriate for
other contexts and to assess the extent to which the same questions are or are not selected
elsewhere. One could also apply our method to design a "universal" module based on how
robustly it predicts qualitative interview scores across multiple contexts.


2     Related literature on women's agency
2.1     The concept of agency
      Agency is one aspect of women's empowerment. Empowerment as defined by Kabeer
(1999) encompasses resources, agency, and achievement and refers to the process of acquiring
the ability to make choices. Contemporary notions of empowerment often build on Amartya
Sen's capabilities approach, as elaborated by Nussbaum (1999), who highlights that dignity
and the freedom to actively determine one's life are central to human beings.
      Agency specifically refers to the ability to make decisions and act on one's goals. It
is often defined in a way that captures both an intrinsic characteristic and something with
external, instrumental value. To do this, many definitions of agency reflect both an internal
feeling of agency (sometimes defined as the ability to set goals, where the setting of goals
is a reflection of the intrinsic sense of agency) and the external actions of pursuing goals,
which is the instrumental aspect of agency (Donald et al., 2020).
      Scholars have also highlighted that the conceptualization of women's agency depends
on the context, for example differing in more coercive settings. Individual actions must be
viewed within social, economic, and cultural contexts, and there are multiplicities and hidden
forms of women's agency (Campbell and Mannell, 2016).

2.2     Measurement of women's agency
      There is an array of research on how to measure women's empowerment and agency.
Donald et al. (2020) and Laszlo et al. (2020) provide excellent overviews of this literature.

                                              5
      Recent proposed measurement tools include the Women's Empowerment in Agriculture
Index (WEAI) (Alkire et al., 2013) and PRO-WEAI (Malapit et al., 2019). WEAI is a set
of survey questions that measures empowerment, agency, and inclusion in the agricultural
sector (Alkire et al., 2013). It aggregates an individual's empowerment across five domains
and also measures women's status relative to men in the household. The index was designed
based on analysis of household survey data collected in Guatemala, Uganda, and Bangladesh,
and it has been applied in several other contexts subsequently. PRO-WEAI adapts the
WEAI to measure empowerment brought about by agriculture projects (Malapit et al.,
2019). It includes further indicators that are most likely to change over the course of a
project's duration. This adaptation of the WEAI was informed by qualitative data from key
informants and project participants.
      Another proposed measure is SWPER, which was developed by analyzing responses to
Demographic and Health Survey questions among partnered women in 34 African countries
(Ewerling et al., 2017). SWPER includes 15 questions that represent three dimensions of
empowerment: attitudes to violence, social independence, and decision making. SWPER was
adapted into a 14-question version designed to be applicable in all low- and middle-income
countries (Ewerling et al., 2020). Another recent contribution is by Maiorano et al. (2021),
who introduce a choices-values-norms framework for measuring agency. Specifically on India,
Kishor and Gupta (2004) adapt WEAI for nutrition, while Richardson et al. (2019) develop
an index of National Family Health Survey questions using confirmatory factor analysis.
      A different strand of the literature assesses current practices for measuring women's
agency. Donald et al. (2020) and Laszlo et al. (2020) highlight conceptual challenges and
provide frameworks to guide measurement. Peterman et al. (2021) investigate how robust
results are to different ways of constructing agency indicators from commonly-used survey
questions. They conclude that current practices are often insufficient to capture women's
decision-making and call for further measurement innovation.


3      Description of study site and sample
3.1     Selection of study site and sample villages
      We selected Kurukshetra district in the Indian state of Haryana as the study site based
on several considerations. We chose north India because of our knowledge of the context and
because women's agency is an important topic of study there. To match our team's language
skills, we restricted attention to Hindi-speaking areas. Within this narrowed set of possible



                                              6
                                         Figure 1: Study location
 Study district location                  Location of study villages within Kurukshetra district




sites, we chose Kurukshetra for practical reasons. First, we could draw on a pool of female
surveyors who had worked on earlier studies conducted by J-PAL South Asia, the research
organization through which our fieldwork was conducted. Second, the main town was large
enough that we could recruit two lead research assistants from New Delhi who would be
willing to be based there for several months. Third, Kurukshetra was within a few hours of
New Delhi by car or train, which facilitated site visits by the principal investigators.
       We focused on the rural population and worked backwards from our target sample size
of 210 semi-structured interviews to determine how many villages within Kurukshetra to
include in our sample. We were able to recruit two qualitative interviewers, and about 100
interviews each was the most they could conduct within the three months we had planned
for the data collection. We wanted to complete data collection in each village within two or
three days so that there would not be discussion among women about our study that might
prime their answers. We expected each interviewer to conduct two to three interviews per
day, which implied that our team should conduct about 10 qualitative interviews per village.
We, thus, included 21 villages in our sample in order to complete roughly 210 interviews.
       We had a separate, larger team of surveyors that conducted the quantitative surveys
and lab game. The quantitative team spent about the same number of days in each village,
collecting data from twice as many women. The final sample size for that team was 443
women, of whom the 209 semi-structured interviewees are a subset.
       We chose a random sample of villages for the study that were representative of Kuruk-
shetra, with the selection stratified by village population, distance from the district head-
quarters, and the ratio of male to female literacy.6 We created a randomly ordered list of
 6
     Using the 2011 Census, of the 407 villages in Kurukshetra district, we excluded the top and bottom 5% of


                                                      7
potential sample villages. We then visited the first 21 villages to obtain a roster of house-
holds with young children from the village ASHA, or Accredited Social Health Worker. We
used these rosters to choose households for the sample. In the few cases where we could
not obtain a roster from the ASHA, we replaced the village with the next village from its
stratum on our list. Figure 1 shows the location of Kurukshetra district within India and
the location of the 21 study villages.

3.2      Selection of study participants and descriptive statistics
      We used the ASHA lists to choose a preliminary random sample of eligible women in
each village. Our eligibility criterion was that a participant was a married woman with a
child under the age of 10; we wanted the sample to be homogeneous in this way so that
we could ask everyone similar questions, for example about their relationships with their
husbands and about decisions over children's health. The ASHA data included a household
roster but not relationships among household members, so we chose households with a child
under age 10 and a woman at least 15 years older than that child, who was feasibly the
child's mother. We aimed to enroll 20 women (with no more than one per household) in the
study, and we randomly chose 50% of them for the semi-structured interview.
      We collected the data between February and May 2019. We varied whether the qual-
itative or quantitative data collection came first. The quantitative team started fieldwork
in a random half of villages, and the qualitative team started in the other half; halfway
through the data collection, they switched villages. (We do not find significant differences in
measured agency, either qualitative or quantitative, based on the order of data collection.)7
      The first step when the first team visited a household was to verify the woman's eligi-
bility for the study, which also required that she speak Hindi.8 We then explained the study
and obtained informed consent.
      Table 1 reports summary statistics for the sample, based on data collected in the quan-
titative survey. The women are on average 30 years old with a youngest child who is five
years old. Women are, on average, 3 years younger than their husbands. The average years
of schooling is 10. Most of the sample is Hindu; Sikhism is the second most common religion.
villages based on population, distance to the district headquarters, child sex ratio, and female literacy rate.
We also excluded a few villages with similar names as each other to avoid confusion in the field. Among the
remaining 303 villages, we picked 2 or 3 villages in each of 8 strata, defined by being above or below median
population, distance to district headquarters, and ratio of male to female literacy.
  7
    A few women declined to participate in the second part of the data collection or the second team could
not locate them. The sample of 209 qualitative interviews are those for whom we also have quantitative data.
We conducted qualitative interviews with 9 additional women for whom the quantitative data are missing.
  8
    If more than one woman in a household was eligible, we randomly selected one to participate in the study.


                                                      8
                          Table 1: Descriptive statistics for the sample


  Variable                                                 Full sample      Sample with
                                                                           qual. interview
  Number of respondents                                         443             209
  Age                                                          29.720          29.512
                                                               [4.953]         [4.778]
  Age at marriage                                              20.377          20.316
                                                               [2.584]         [2.708]
  Husband-wife age gap                                          2.946           2.914
                                                               [2.821]         [2.702]
  Age of youngest child                                         4.989           5.019
                                                               [2.765]         [2.792]
  Can read and write                                            0.986           0.986
                                                               [0.116]         [0.119]
  Years of education                                            9.916          10.024
                                                               [3.258]         [3.175]
  Husband-wife education gap                                    0.853           0.660
                                                               [3.070]         [3.313]
  Employed                                                      0.165           0.182
                                                               [0.371]         [0.387]
  Hindu                                                         0.840           0.837
                                                               [0.367]         [0.370]
  Sikh                                                          0.151           0.144
                                                               [0.359]         [0.351]
  Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe                               0.341           0.335
                                                               [0.475]         [0.473]
  Other backward castes                                         0.501           0.502
                                                               [0.501]         [0.501]
  Pukka house                                                   0.386           0.373
                                                               [0.487]         [0.485]

Notes: Table reports variable means and standard deviations.




                                                   9
About a third of the sample belongs to a scheduled caste or scheduled tribe, and about half
belong to an `other backward caste.' Less than a fifth of women are employed, consistent
with the low India-wide female employment rate.


4      Measuring agency with three types of data
4.1     Quantitative surveys
      We administered a 45-minute survey that asked close-ended questions to the full sample
of 443 study participants. It was conducted by female enumerators who had the typical
qualifications for J-PAL South Asia quantitative surveyors.
      After asking a few questions on demographic characteristics such as age and religion,
the questionnaire focused on measures of women's agency within her household. We asked
a long list of such questions, aiming to be exhaustive. We drew on existing questions to
measure instrumental and intrinsic agency from other surveys. These included questions
from the Demographic and Health Surveys, Relative Autonomy Index (Ryan and Deci,
2000; Vaz et al., 2016), a J-PAL toolkit on measuring women's agency that aggregated
survey questions that were used in several research studies (Glennerster et al., 2018), and
the Sexual Relationship Power Scale (Pulerwitz et al., 2000). We also included a handful of
questions that we developed ourselves.
      Concatenating all of the existing modules would introduce a lot of redundancy, resulting
in a long and repetitive survey from the respondent's point of view, so we made judgment calls
in removing questions that overlapped. In total, we asked 63 questions measuring agency.
The question order was not randomized. (The list of questions is provided in Appendix B.)
      Some of the agency questions were about the woman's say in specific decisions, such
as, "If money is available, who in your household decides whether to pay school fees for a
relative from your side of the family?" and "Can you go unescorted to the next village?"
Other questions were more general, asking the woman about her overall impression of her
agency. An example is, "This is a ten step ladder, where on the bottom, the first step,
people who are completely coerced or powerless stand, and on the highest step, the tenth
step, stand those with the most ability to advance goals that they value in their own homes
and in the world. On which step are you today?"
      We convert each of the survey responses to a single numerical variable. Some of the
responses have a natural numerical unit (e.g., days) or are binary. For questions asked on
a Likert scale, we treat the categorical response as a cardinal variable. In a handful of



                                              10
cases where the numerical mapping is less clear, we make judgment calls. For example, in
questions asked about whether women make decisions alone, jointly with their husband, or
not at all, we code those responses as 2, 1, and 0. Note that we code all of the variables so
that a higher value corresponds to more agency.9
      It is also possible to include multiple variables, or recodings, per survey question; the
important constraint is the number of survey questions at the data collection stage, not the
number of variables. For the ladder question mentioned above, we could construct variables
for the response being  2, being  3, and so forth up to the response equaling 10, or we could
be agnostic about whether a woman having sole decision-making power represents strictly
greater agency than joint decision-making with her husband. This approach would use more
information and allow the data to determine the best recodings. We use one variable per
survey question in our main index for simplicity but note that one of the statistical algorithms
we use (random forest) considers all possible recodings.

4.2     Semi-structured interviews
      The semi-structured interviews were on average 45 minutes long. They were conducted
primarily by two female interviewers who had prior experience with in-depth interviewing.
A third interviewer conducted a few of the interviews. As part of their training, one of the
authors (MB) observed each interviewer conducting pilot interviews and provided feedback
to improve interview skills. The interviewers and MB met weekly to discuss substantive and
methodological issues that arose, with learnings fed back into subsequent interviews.
      The interviews, which were recorded, followed an interview guide (see Appendix C) that
was refined through piloting. The initial guide covered five domains of agency within the
household: the respondent's decision-making around her children's education and health,
household expenditures, and her own fertility and mobility. In pilot interviews, employment
emerged as another theme and was added as a sixth domain to probe in the interview.
      The interviewers were trained to follow the interview guide and cover all six domains but
to use their judgment to phrase questions differently, ask follow-up questions, or otherwise
diverge from the guide if they felt that doing so would elicit better information from the
respondent. The open-endedness of the interviews and the multiple domains allowed women
to discuss direct and hidden strategies and the meanings behind their actions, including
"bargaining and negotiation, deception and manipulation, subversion and resistance, and
more intangible, cognitive processes of reflection and analysis" (Kabeer, 1999, p. 438).
 9
   A few of the questions have missing responses, primarily due to skip patterns in the survey. To include
these questions in our analysis, we impute the value with the sample mean.


                                                   11
     To ensure privacy during the interviews, we paired each interviewer with someone ini-
tially recruited for our quantitative surveyor team who acted as a "distractor." The distractor
would have a discussion with other family members in a separate room so that the qualitative
interviewer and study participant could have an uninterrupted private conversation.
     The interviews were transcribed, and two people, the same two who conducted the
interviews, coded them using Dedoose software. We randomly assigned which interviews
each person coded, so in about half the cases, it was an interview she had conducted.
     We used a two-step approach to coding, following Deterding and Waters (2018). The
first step in their "flexible coding" process is the development of "index codes" to represent
the broad topics pursued during the research. In this study, the index codes were the six
domains of agency that the interview focused on. The second step is the application of
"analytic codes," which emerge in the second reading of the transcripts. We paid attention
to "speech practices" in our transcripts following Madhok (2014), since agency is often more
than observable action, and women's own words open up the range of possibilities of what
they consider agentic in their particular context.
     The analytic codes were used to arrive at ranks (i.e., scores) and ranking definitions
for each index code. MB and the coders triply coded and then discussed ten transcripts to
harmonize how the coders interpreted and applied the codes.
     The ranks ranged from 1 for a woman with the lowest level of agency to a 4 for a
woman with the highest level of agency.10 As an example of the ranking definition and
how the analytic codes map to the definitions, in the mobility domain, a woman coded
as a 1 needs explicit permission to leave the house and always goes accompanied by her
husband or someone else to locations either inside or outside the village, which includes
the neighborhood store, her children's school, the hospital, the market, the bank and her
natal village. If a woman has those restrictions but objects to them or sometimes tries to
resist them, she is coded as a 2. That is, if the analytic codes "never goes alone" but also
"resistance" were coded in the transcript under the index code "mobility," the woman's rank
moved from 1 to 2. A woman who has some but not all of the restrictions was coded as a 3;
for example, she might is allowed to go to locations inside the village by foot, but is unable
to go unaccompanied to locations that require transportation. Women with the most agency
over their mobility were coded as a 4. They are able to go unaccompanied to all locations.
     The one domain not initially coded on a 1 to 4 scale is fertility. Many women had
10
   While we developed the coding approach by triply coding ten transcripts, we tried using a scale of 1 to 3,
1 to 4, and 1 to 5. We chose 1 to 4 because it seemed to best capture the nuances in the interviews and to
allow us to define each rank distinctly.


                                                     12
         Figure 2: Distribution of scores from semi-structured interviews, by domain




Notes: The histograms show the scores for the six domains covered in the qualitative interviews.




           Figure 3: Distribution of overall scores from semi-structured interviews




Notes: The histogram shows the overall qualitative agency score for women in the sample, which is the
simple average of her scores in the six domains.




                                                   13
discordant levels of agency across the four sub-domains of number of children, birth spacing,
reversible birth control, and sterilization, so we coded a woman separately in each of the
sub-domains and then averaged these scores. This fertility score was then re-scaled to also
range from 1 to 4. Figure 2 shows histograms of the domain-specific scores.
       We then calculate an overall agency score for the woman as the average across the six
domains.11 Figure 3 shows the distribution of the overall agency score, as coded from the
semi-structured interviews. Hereafter, we refer to the overall score as the qualitative score.

4.3        Lab game
       We also used a "lab-in-the-field" game to measure women's agency over household
income. The game was conducted during the same visit and by the same surveyor as the
quantitative survey. It took place in private at the end of the survey and took on average
15 minutes.
       The measure uses real-stakes choices the woman makes, specifically her willingness to
pay (WTP) to be the recipient of money given to the household. This measure was developed
by Alm°
      as et al. (2018) in a study in urban Macedonia and has since been used in other
settings (Barr et al., 2020). A potential advantage of a real-stakes choice is that it provides
an objective, quantitative measure of the woman's behavior. Because money is at stake, a
respondent might be less subject to experimenter demand effects through which she gives
insincere answers.
       The woman is offered a choice between |300 (4 USD) for herself or an amount of money
X to be given to her husband. We begin with X = |700. If the woman chooses the money
for herself, we stop. If she chooses money for her husband, we decrement X by |100 and
ask again: Does she prefer |300 for herself or |600 for her husband? The last amount we
ask about is X = |100. We inform her that any transfer of money to her will take place
privately and that we will not communicate with her husband about the game if she chooses
money for herself. If she chooses for her husband to get the money, we will give it to him and
explain that it is tied to his wife's participation in our study. We also let her know that we
will implement one of her choices, selected at random. This procedure gives her an incentive
to report her true preferences (Becker et al., 1964).
       As Alm°
             as et al. (2018) write, in a unitary household, that is, if the husband and wife
have identical preferences or are perfectly altruistic toward each other, "women should not
be willing to pay anything in order to receive the transfer themselves, and should instead try
11
     We test robustness to creating a standardized index across the six domains in section 6.



                                                      14
       Figure 4: Distribution of women's WTP to be recipient of money in lab game




Notes: The figure is a histogram of women's crossover point in the lab game, or the maximum amount they
would forgo for their household to be the recipient of the money. A woman whose WTP is |400 prefers
|300 for herself to |700 for her husband. A negative WTP means the woman prefers money to go to her
husband, all else equal, e.g., -|200 means that a woman prefers |200 for her husband to |300 for herself.


to maximize the transfer amount." But, the authors continue, "in a non-unitary model, the
weaker the position of the woman in the household (the lower her control of resources), the
more she should be willing to pay to obtain control of that transfer." Some women might
prefer |300 for themselves over |400 or even |700 for their husband because they would have
so little say in how their husband's money is spent. We calculate a woman's WTP to be
the recipient of the money, which is the highest amount X at which she prefers money for
her husband. If the highest amount is |700, her WTP is |400 (700 minus 300), for example.
The higher the WTP, the more she is willing to forgo in total household money to be the
recipient of the transfer, so the lower her agency. Thus, her WTP is an inverse measure of
her agency. We use -WTP as the variable measuring agency.
     However, the measure did not work as theoretically intended. Many women always
preferred that their husband get the money even when it was a smaller amount than |300.
For example, they prefer |100 for their husbands to |300 for themselves. These women have
a negative WTP to control financial resources. Figure 4 shows the distribution of WTP.
     We debriefed with women who had a negative WTP to understand their behavior in the
game (Jackson, 2011). This revealed that their choice was linked to having low agency; they
believed that women should not get involved with household finances, or they feared that
their husband would find out they received money. The theoretical premise of the measure
is that low-agency women will have a higher demand for agency, but many women with low
agency in fact did not want more agency.
     As a partial fix for this problem, we bottom code WTP at 0: we quantify agency as

                                                   15
min{-W T P, 0}. More importantly, after noticing this pattern in the field and then seeing
the distribution of WTP, we became pessimistic that using WTP as the "truth" would yield
a reliable survey measure of agency.


5     Statistical algorithms to select survey questions
     The goal of our data analysis is to choose the best five survey questions to measure
women's agency. We do so by selecting those that are the best predictors of "true" agency.
     An intuitive approach to finding the best subset of survey questions would be to try
every possible combination of five questions and use the set that yields the highest R2 in
a linear regression in which the true measure is the outcome and the survey variables are
the explanatory variables. A first problem with this approach is that it is subject to over-
fitting. To address over-fitting, machine learning algorithms typically leave out a portion of
the data during estimation, and then adjust the algorithm parameters or estimates based
on how accurate the predictions are in the left-out sample. A second challenge is that an
exhaustive search can be computationally infeasible (there are over 7 million ways to choose
five variables from among 63). We thus apply two statistical algorithms (LASSO stability
and random forest selection) that have the same objective of selecting a best subset of
questions but that address over-fitting and are computationally feasible. We also use a third
technique (backward sequential selection) that addresses computational feasibility and adds
robustness through an iterative process, but does not cross-validate the prediction.
     Standard supervised machine learning techniques like LASSO and random forest share
our goal of out-of-sample prediction.12 The distinction here is we want to put a rigid con-
straint on the number of predictors to select. If standard LASSO chooses 15 variables, that
would yield a survey module that is impractical for many purposes. The three statistical
algorithms we implement, described below, aim to identify the five most valuable questions.
This type of analysis is referred to as feature selection in the machine learning literature.
     Below we first describe LASSO stability selection, which is our preferred approach; it
strikes a balance between simplicity and robustness. The second algorithm builds on random
forest and is more complex, while the third algorithm, backward sequential selection, is the
simplest one. At the end of this section, we compare the algorithms in more detail.
12
   Supervised machine learning uses labeled data to train the model. The qualitative scores serve as the
labels in our analysis. Another approach would be to use only the quantitative survey questions as data and
apply unsupervised machine learning techniques for feature selection (Solorio-Fern´
                                                                                  andez et al., 2020).




                                                    16
5.1      LASSO stability selection
      The primary algorithm we use is LASSO stability selection, in which the best questions
are those most commonly selected when LASSO is repeatedly run on subsamples of the data.
Meinshausen and B¨
                 uhlmann (2010) show that variable selection through this combination
of regularized regressions (e.g., LASSO) and resampling (e.g., drawing subsamples) is quite
robust to the choice of the tuning or regularization parameter.13
      Kshirsagar et al. (2017) recently applied the stability selection technique with a similar
goal as ours of developing a short set of survey questions to measure something often mea-
sured with many questions. They select ten questions to measure a household's likelihood of
being poor; their "true" measure of poverty is based on a longer survey module that collected
data on household consumption.
      We use 50% subsamples and run LASSO 1000 times:14

     1. Draw a 50% subsample of observations without replacement.

     2. Run a LASSO regression of the true value of the outcome on all of the survey variables,
       keeping track of which predictors are selected, i.e., have coefficients not shrunk to 0.15

     3. Complete 1000 iterations of steps 1 and 2.

      The proposed survey module consists of the five survey questions chosen most frequently
by LASSO across the iterations. We then combine them into an index by normalizing each of
the variables to have a standard deviation of 1 and mean of 0 and averaging the standardized
variables. We refer to this type of aggregation as a standardized index. Using (regular or
LASSO) regression coefficients as weights to create a weighted index is another natural
way to combine the variables. We opt for just an average of the standardized variables for
simplicity and to make the aggregation less dependent on the estimates.
      Unlike in some prediction exercises, there is a "correct" sign of each regression coefficient
in our case. The premise of our criterion validation exercise is that we are regressing one
measure of agency on another, so the sign of the coefficients should be positive. Nothing in
13
     As a brief primer on LASSO, it is a type of regularized regression. A regularized regression differs from
a standard regression in that the estimator "shrinks" some coefficients toward zero to avoid the model over-
fitting the data. LASSO shrinks some coefficients all the way to zero; starting from a large set of regressors,
only a subset will have non-zero coefficient estimates, or are selected for inclusion in the model. The tuning
parameter specifies how aggressive the procedure should be in shrinking coefficients.
  14
     Implemented in Stata on a standard desktop computer, the procedure takes 19 minutes to run. Backward
sequential selection takes a few seconds. Random forest selection, implemented in R, takes 15 minutes.
  15
     The LASSO tuning parameter is chosen within each iteration by 5-fold cross-validation.




                                                      17
the statistical procedure constrains the coefficients to be positive. Thus, one diagnostic for
how well the procedure works is whether any of the coefficients are wrong-signed.

5.2      Random forest selection
      The second algorithm we use is Genuer et al.'s (2010) variable selection using random
forest, or VSURF, algorithm. The basis of this algorithm is random forest, which classifies
data using decision trees.16 VSURF entails building a series of random forests, first to narrow
the variable set based on a variable importance metric and then to compare random forests
that use different variable subsets to identify the variables with the most predictive power.17
      This algorithm is considerably more complicated than the other two we implement. A
reader who is not interested in the technical details can skip the rest of this subsection.
      The algorithm proceeds as follows:

     1. Build 100 random forests using all of the available predictors. Calculate the average
       across the forests of each variable's variable importance (VI), which is a measure of the
       improvement in model prediction when one includes the variable.18 Retain a variable
       if the standard deviation of its VI across the 100 forests exceeds a threshold.19

     2. Build 100 random forests using the most important variable from step 1, then 100
       random forests using the two most important variables, and continue up to 100 random
       forests using all variables retained in step 1. From among these models (where each
       model is an average of 100 forests), retain the smallest one (i.e., fewest variables) among
       those with an out-of-bag (OOB) error less than a threshold.20

     3. Build another set of random forest models, sequentially introducing the variables re-
16
    With random forest, one builds decision trees to classify or fit the data. At each node of a tree, one of
the variables is used to partition the data. Only a random subset of potential variables is considered at each
split, and the one that best partitions the data is used. A random forest is an ensemble of many trees. For
each tree, some observations are left out, and the predictions are validated against this "out of bag" sample.
 17
    In addition to this performance-based approach to using random forest for feature selection, there are
approaches that use only variable importance, such as the one proposed by Strobl et al. (2008).
 18
    We use the default variable importance in the VSURF package written in R by Genuer et al. (2015). It
is the difference in out-of-bag error between trees built with the variable and those trees with the variable
randomly permuted across observations, averaged across all trees in the forest that used the variable.
 19
    Variables with low average VI generally have a low standard deviation; the standard deviation rule is
a more robust way to eliminate variables with low importance than doing so based on average VI. The
threshold is calculated by estimating a decision tree (specifically CART) with 63 observations mapping to
the available predictors. The dependent variable is the standard deviation of its VI, and the independent
variable is its rank. The threshold is the minimum standard deviation predicted by the CART. Variables
with a standard deviation below this threshold are eliminated.
 20
    The threshold is the sum of the minimum OOB error among the step 2 models (that vary in the number
of included predictors) and the standard deviation of that model's OOB error across the 100 forests.


                                                     18
       tained after step 2, in the order of VI from step 1. Build and average 100 random forests
       that include the introduced variable. Keep the variable in the model if it decreases
       OOB error, relative to the model thus far, by more than a threshold amount.21

      We tune the threshold in the final step of the algorithm so that our desired number of
variables (five) are selected.22

5.3      Backward sequential selection
      The third algorithm we use is a simplified version of a backward sequential selection
technique using linear regression (Liu and Motoda, 1998). The general algorithm -- iter-
atively removing the least important variable -- is often referred to as recursive feature
elimination (Guyon et al., 2002).
      We start with the full set of survey questions and iteratively remove the one that leads
to the smallest decrease in the R2 of an ordinary least squares regression, stopping when the
target number (in our case, five) questions are left.23 We do not include any cross-validation
in the algorithm, although in principle one could.
      At each step, we could assess the predictive power of multivariate regressions with the
(remaining) candidate variables as regressors. Because ultimately most researchers will want
to use the selected variables to construct an index, we combine them into an index at the
selection stage. At the iteration with k variables left, for all combinations of k - 1 of them,
we combine the variables into a standardized index and estimate a univariate regression of
the true value of the outcome on the index.
      The first step is to combine all the candidate survey variables on agency in an index.
Then we iteratively remove variables as follows:
     1. Discard one of the available variables and combine the remaining k variables into an
       index (after normalizing them).

     2. Calculate the R2 when the true measure of agency is regressed on the index.

     3. Repeat steps 1 and 2 for all remaining variables.
21
    The threshold is proportional to the change in OOB error between the model at the end of step 1 and the
model at the end of step 2. The threshold also depends on a multiplicative tuning parameter.
 22
    In our application, 42 of the full set of 63 variables are retained at the end of step 1, and 13 of those
variables are retained at the end of step 2.
 23
    One can also run sequential selection in the forward direction, starting with an empty set and then sequen-
tially adding the most predictive variable among the candidates. Backward selection typically outperforms
forward selection (Leslie et al., 2018).




                                                      19
  4. Drop from the set the variable that led to the smallest loss of R2 , relative to including
       all k in the set.

  5. Repeat steps 1 to 4 until the desired number of variables for the index is reached.
      The last five questions that remain comprise the proposed survey module, and the
standardized index based on them is the proposed measure of women's agency.

5.4      Comparison of the three algorithms
      Our rationale for using three different algorithms was to better understand how sensi-
tive the general approach we are proposing -- combining machine learning and qualitative
interviews for survey design -- is to the specific statistical algorithm used.
      LASSO stability selection and random forest selection both address over-fitting in each
iteration or decision tree. An advantage of the LASSO approach is the final model's trans-
parency. For example, if a researcher wanted to use the model prediction instead of a
standardized index to combine the variables, with LASSO stability selection the formula is
a parsimonious linear equation. For random forest, the formula is an average across many
trees of many interaction and non-linear terms. Moreover, the "wrapper algorithm" around
LASSO used in LASSO stability selection is simple iteration. The VSURF (random forest)
wrapper algorithm is more complex. Thus, the main reason we view LASSO stability selec-
tion as preferable to random forest selection for those applying our approach or using our
selected questions is the transparency of both the algorithm and the resulting model.
      Backward sequential selection's disadvantage is that, in our implementation of it without
cross-validation, it does not address over-fitting. Its advantage is its simplicity: It uses a
standard linear regression in each iteration.
      For each of the algorithms, we propose to combine the five variables into a standardized
index. The algorithms differ in how restrictive this method of aggregation is. Backward
sequential selection optimizes the predictive power of the top five questions when they are
combined in this way; there is no mismatch between the predictive model and how the
selected questions are then aggregated. LASSO stability selection collapses each question
to a linear variable, which matches how the questions are then aggregated. However, two
highly ranked variables could be collinear and thus redundant, with each chosen in different
LASSO iterations. (This does not occur in practice in our application). Aggregating via
a standardized index is the least appropriate for random forest. The advantage of random
forest is that it allows for non-linearities and interaction terms, but the aggregation then
discards this information. Thus, when we present the results, we also consider the predicted


                                                20
value from the model as an alternative index. For random forest, the model prediction is
opaque, but as an alternative index, it has a much stronger correlation with the true measure.
      Putting this all together, we view LASSO stability selection as the preferred algorithm
because it addresses over-fitting yet is transparent and intuitive. Backward sequential se-
lection is a potentially useful alternative because it involves nothing more than a loop over
ordinary linear regressions. Random forest can extract more information from five variables,
so it may be of interest to researchers undeterred by a more complex algorithm and index.


6      Results: Validated survey module for women's agency
6.1      Based on semi-structured interviews as gold standard
      We report the best set of survey questions to measure agency, as determined by the
MASI method, in Table 2. These are the questions chosen based on their correspondence
with the qualitative score. Overall, the three statistical algorithms select similar sets of five
questions that capture a considerable amount of the variation in the qualitative score.
      Table 2, column (1) reports the questions selected with our preferred statistical tech-
nique of LASSO stability selection. The numbers in the cells are the rank for the question,
in terms of how often it was selected in LASSO iterations estimated on subsamples of the
data.24 The top question is about decision-making about large household purchases like a
cow or bicycle. The variable was selected in 85% of the LASSO iterations, as reported in
Table 3. The fifth question was selected 58% of the time. Table 3 provides the frequency of
selection for the top ten variables; if a researcher seeks a ten-question module, these are the
best choices based on the algorithm. The fourth- to sixth-ranked questions perform fairly
similarly to each other, and the biggest gains from the algorithmic approach seem to be from
identifying the best three questions. The lowest-ranked of the 63 candidate questions was
selected in 2% of the LASSO iterations.
      Interestingly, none of the general questions that ask a woman to assess her overall agency
or perception of her power are among the top questions. The top three questions ask about
her role in specific purchase decisions: large household purchases, clothing for herself, and
items in the market. The other two questions pertain to her physical mobility (whether
she can visit women in her neighborhood without permission) and to decisions about her
24
   We calculated the qualitative score by averaging the six domain-specific scores. We repeated the analysis
using an alternative qualitative score that is a standardized index across the domains. This change did not
alter the top five questions selected by any of the three algorithms. While this amount of insensitivity need
not always hold, this result provides some additional reassurance about the robustness of our method.



                                                     21
              Table 2: Selected survey questions using semi-structured interviews


 Question                                                         LASSO          Random         Backward
                                                                 stability         forest       sequential
                                                                 selection       selection       selection
                                                                                (VSURF)
 Opinion heard when expensive item like a bicycle                    1               3                2
   or cow is purchased?
 Need permission from other household members                        2                                1
   to buy clothing for self?
 Allowed to buy things in the market without                         3               2
   asking partner?
 Are you permitted to visit women in other                           4               4                4
   neighborhoods to talk with them?
 Who do you consult with for decisions regarding                     5
   your children's health care?
 Are you permitted to visit any place riding on                                      1
   public transport?
 Who in household decides to pay school fees for a                                   5                5
   relative from your side of family?
 Allowed to go alone to meet your friends for any                                                     3
   reason?
 5-Question Standardized Index R2                                  0.289           0.251           0.287
 5-Question Model Prediction Index R2                              0.290           0.615           0.287

Notes: The table lists the top 5 survey questions selected. (See Appendix B for the full question wording.)
The numbers in the cells in columns (1) to (3) indicate the selection order, with 1 referring to the best, or
most predictive question. The R2 is for a regression of the qualitative score on the index.




                                                     22
           Table 3: Frequency of variable selection using LASSO stability selection


   Question                                                                          Percent of times
                                                                                         selected
   Opinion heard when expensive item like a bicycle or cow is                               84.9
     purchased?
   Need permission from other household members to buy clothing                             76.4
     for self?
   Allowed to buy things in the market without asking partner?                              73.8
   Are you permitted to visit women in other neighborhoods to talk                          59.3
     with them?
   Who do you consult with for decisions regarding your children's                          58.1
     health care?
   Are you permitted to visit any place riding on public transport?                         57.6
   Allowed to go alone to meet your friends for any reason?                                 54.8
   Can decide by self to purchase emergency medicine for child                              52.3
   Are you allowed to go alone to a relative's house inside the village?                    47.4
   When husband has different opinion, voice opinion and argue                              47.3
     more often than voice opinion but do as he says*

Notes: The numbers reported are how often, out of 1000 iterations of LASSO on 50% subsamples, a
variable was selected as a regressor in the LASSO stability selection procedure. The dependent variable is
the semi-structured interview score. * This variable is constructed from a series of separate questions. See
Appendix B for more details and for the full wording of the questions.




                                                     23
children's health care. The mobility question highlights that the best five-question module
is likely to differ by context; restrictions on women's travel within their village are more
common in north India than many other places (Rahman and Rao, 2004; Jayachandran,
2015; Naybor et al., 2016).
     All five of the selected variables are predictive in the correct direction; with the variables
coded such that a higher value theoretically represents more agency, the raw correlation with
the qualitative score is always positive. Appendix Table A.1 shows the correlation between
the qualitative score and each of the selected variables.
     The proposed way to combine the survey questions into one measure is to average the
five variables: We code each survey question as a continuous variable, make them comparable
by normalizing each to have a standard deviation of 1, and then average them. The R2 of a
univariate regression of the qualitative score on the resulting index is shown at the bottom
of Table 2. The R2 of 0.29 in column (1) is equivalent to a correlation coefficient of 0.54.
The next row shows the R2 if we instead use the model prediction as an index, specifically
the predicted value of a LASSO regression of the qualitative score on the five variables.25
The similar R2 indicates that one does not lose much information by using the standardized
average. This simple way of aggregating, therefore, seems preferable for many purposes.
     Appendix Table A.2 shows the correlation between the survey index and qualitative
scores in each of the six domains. The index is most strongly correlated with the household
expenditures and mobility domains, which is unsurprising as four of the five selected questions
are within those two domains.
     We now turn to the results using the two alternative statistical algorithms. Table 2,
column (2) reports the top five questions selected using random forest selection. Three of the
questions are in the set chosen by LASSO stability selection, though not in the same order.26
The new variables that are selected pertain to household spending and mobility. The R2
when regressing the qualitative score on a standardized index of the random-forest-selected
variables is 0.25. It is unsurprising that random forest performs worse than LASSO stability
because, in averaging the five variables, we are ignoring the non-linearities and interactions
that random forest selection allowed for when choosing variables.
     It is also informative to assess random forest selection when using the model's predicted
value as the women's agency index. We take the five selected variables, build a random
25
    The formula is 1.02 + 0.071q 1 + 0.200q 2 + 0.049q 3 + 0.117q 4 + 0.167q 5 where qn is the nth -ranked question.
 26
    The two new questions in the top five set for random forest are ranked sixth and twelfth by LASSO
stability selection. The two new questions in the top five for backward sequential selection are ranked
seventh and twelfth by LASSO stability selection.



                                                        24
forest using them, and extract the predicted value for each observation. Here, random
forest performs much better than LASSO stability selection; its model prediction is more
strongly correlated with the qualitative score than is LASSO stability selection's. This is
again unsurprising: Random forest allows for more degrees of freedom when using the five
variables as predictors. A researcher could choose to use the random forest set of questions
and then estimate a random forest model with her data to extract the predicted value as
the women's agency index or use the predicted value from the random forest trained on our
data.27 The resulting index would be a richer but more black-box measure.
     In Table 2, column (3), we report the top questions based on backward sequential
selection. Three of them overlap with the set chosen by LASSO stability selection (and
three overlap with the random forest set). The new variables are related to household
spending and mobility. The R2 using this index is 0.29, almost identical to the LASSO
stability selection R2 . It is somewhat surprising -- and reassuring -- that LASSO stability
selection, which chooses variables taking into account out-of-sample fit and chooses them
one-by-one without assessing their performance in a standardized index, achieves as much
within-sample predictive power as backward sequential selection.

Comparison to randomly choosing variables
     One way to gauge how valuable it is to use an algorithmic approach to survey question
selection is to compare it to ad hoc selection. Figure 5 plots a histogram of index performance,
specifically the R2 when the qualitative score is regressed on the index, if we randomly select
five questions from among the 63 candidates. The median R2 across 1000 randomly selected
sets of variables is 0.06. The three algorithm-selected indices have explanatory power that
is well above not just the median, but also the 99th percentile of the distribution using
randomly selected variables.

Comparison to LASSO
     When we estimate standard LASSO using the qualitative score as the dependent variable
and the 63 candidate survey variables as potential regressors, LASSO selects 15 regressors
(which are listed in Appendix Table A.3). Reassuringly, among them are all 8 survey ques-
tions that are in the top 5 set for one or more of the statistical algorithms, which need not
have been the case.
     If all of the LASSO-selected variables are combined into a standardized index, the R2
27
  R code that allows one to generate the predicted value from a random forest or LASSO model trained on
our data is available from the corresponding author.



                                                  25
             Figure 5: Selected indices compared to five randomly chosen variables




Notes: We take 1000 random draws of 5 out of 63 questions. The figure plots the distribution of R2 when
the qualitative score is regressed on a standardized index combining the 5 variables.


is 0.38. One can also, of course, use the predicted value of the LASSO regression as the
agency index. This also yields an R2 of 0.38, which is higher than one achieves with the
five-question index, but at the cost of a longer survey module. We return to this trade-off
between explanatory power and brevity later in this section.

Comparison to using all 63 close-ended survey questions
     Another benchmark is if we used all 63 quantitative variables. The R2 of a multivariate
regression of the qualitative score on all of them is 0.51. All of the variables collectively
explain 51% of the variation, while with the five questions chosen by LASSO stability selec-
tion combined into an index, one explains 29% of the variation. Thus, we sacrifice less than
half of the explanatory power when we use just 5 out of 63, or 8%, of the potential survey
questions, and combine them into one measure.
     Using all 63 variables in a standardized index actually leads to a lower R2 of 0.21
compared to the five-variable index. The cost of using more variables is not just that it
requires a longer survey, but also that some variables are weak (or wrong-signed) predictors
of agency as measured by the interview, so including them lowers the predictive power of
the index.
     An alternative way to extract information from the 63 variables is to use principal
component analysis. If we use the first principal component of the 63 variables as the
measure of agency, then in a regression of the qualitative score on the principal component,


                                                  26
the R2 is 0.24, which is again lower than what our algorithms achieve.

Trade-off between length of module and explanatory power of index
    The fact that an index using all 63 survey variables performs worse than using the five
selected variables raises the question of how index performance is related to the number of
variables selected. We repeated the three algorithms incrementing the number of selected
variables from 1 to 63. Figure 6 plots the predictive power of the selected indices. For LASSO
stability selection, the R2 peaks at 0.35, with the best 19 questions included. Recall that the
best 5 questions yield an R2 of 0.29. The maximum R2 is achieved with 13 questions and 16
questions using random forest selection and backward sequential selection, respectively.
    Thus, there is a trade-off between a shorter survey module and an agency index that
captures more information, up to a point. A researcher willing to use a longer module could
take the best 10 or 15 questions instead of the best 5 that we have focused on. But what is
also apparent is that after a point, even if fielding a longer survey were not costly, using a
larger number of agency variables in the index seems to hurt performance.

Correlation with characteristics often associated with women's agency
    As another assessment of the indices, we report their correlation with factors often
associated with agency. For example, one might expect younger women to have less agency.
Also, agency is often believed to be negatively correlated with the age gap between the
husband and wife (that is, women who are considerably younger than their husbands have
less agency), and likewise with the husband-wife education gap. A first step is to check the
correlation between these factors and the qualitative score itself. As reported in Appendix
Table A.2, the qualitative agency score is indeed positively correlated with the woman's age
and negatively correlated with the husband-wife education gap. In turn, the indices chosen
by the three algorithms have the same-signed correlations with age and the education gap.
Surprisingly, both the qualitative score and the three indices have a small positive correlation
with the husband-wife age gap.

How well would MASI have performed with a smaller sample size?
    A sample size of 209 qualitative interviews might be impractically large in some applica-
tions, due to time or budget constraints. To understand how well MASI would work with a
smaller sample size, we drew random subsamples of 100 observations (48% subsamples) and
repeated the variable selection process, focusing on the LASSO stability selection algorithm.
We repeated this 100 times and assessed how well the 100 resulting indices performed and


                                              27
    Figure 6: Explanatory power of selected indices when number of questions is varied

                               Panel (a): LASSO stability selection




    Panel (b): Random forest selection                   Panel (c): Backward sequential selection




Notes: The figures plot the R2 of a regression of the qualitative score on an index constructed from the
best k variables selected by the algorithm; the value k is plotted on the horizontal axis. LASSO stability
selection produces a ranked list of all variables (as all variables are selected in some LASSO iterations in
our application); thus an index is produced for each value of k from 1 to 63. Backward sequential selection
also ranks all variables. For random forest, we vary the tuning parameter in the last step of the algorithm,
which produces models with different values of k but not for all k . The maximum k shown in panel (b) is
14 because that is the maximum number of variables retained before the last step of the random forest
algorithm across all possible values of the tuning parameters that influence earlier steps of the algorithm.




                                                    28
the degree to which the selected questions overlapped with those chosen with the full sample.
      The top full-sample question, about the woman's say in large household purchases, is
among the top 5 selected questions 73% of the time when we use 100-observation subsets
of the data. On average, 2.4 questions from the full-sample set of five questions were se-
lected using the smaller samples. Another metric for assessing performance is the correlation
between the resulting indices and the qualitative score. The average correlation using the
smaller subsamples is 0.48; the correlation is 0.54 for the index created using the full sample.
      To summarize, there is some instability in the specific questions chosen if one uses a
smaller sample size. However, much of the value of MASI seems to derive from identifying
the best one or two questions plus the next six to ten very good questions, and a smaller
sample size seems to suffice for these purposes.

6.2     Based on lab game as gold standard
      Given the problems with the lab game discussed in section 4.3, it is unsurprising that
the statistical algorithms do not perform well when the lab game is treated as the "truth."
For completeness, we report the selected questions in Appendix Table A.4. One indication
that the questions validated against the lab game measure are less reliable is that the index
combining them is not strongly correlated with the "true "measure (R2 of 0.05 using LASSO
stability selection, for example). Moreover, the top question from LASSO stability selection
is selected in only 18% of the LASSO runs. Also, two of the top questions based on random
forest selection have a negative (i.e., wrong signed) correlation with the lab game measure
of agency. These results reinforce our conclusion that the lab game was an inadequate tool
for measuring women's agency -- and thus for applying MASI -- in our study.


7      Conclusion
      A first contribution of this study is to develop a new survey module for women's agency.
We select a five-question survey module, from a starting set of 63 questions, in a data-driven
way. We propose as a women's agency measure the standardized average of the five variables
that map to the selected questions. This short module could be useful for two purposes, first,
for those seeking an off-the-shelf way to measure agency in north India and perhaps elsewhere,
and, second, as a set of standard questions that could be asked as part of longer modules,
to enable comparisons across studies.
      The module was created using data from married women with children in one part of
India, so a valuable direction for future research is to replicate the study in other populations.


                                               29
Indeed, the fact that some of the selected questions pertain to women's physical mobility, a
dimension of agency particularly salient in India, highlights the context-specificity of women's
agency and its measurement.
    Another finding that highlights the importance of context is that behavior in a lab game,
which was originally developed to measure women's agency in Macedonia and replicated
successfully in Zambia, mapped to agency in our study in too nuanced a way to serve as a
"gold standard" measure. Specifically, the game uses a high demand for agency as a proxy
for having low agency, but many women in our sample with low agency did not want more
agency. We conclude that using semi-structured interviews to obtain a "true" measure of
agency is advantageous in large part because such interviews are intrinsically context-specific,
with the flow of the conversation adapting to the woman's responses. Another nice feature
of qualitative interviews is their flexibility to cover any number of domains, even beyond
those we covered, e.g., political agency.
    The second, larger contribution of our study is to introduce a new method for devel-
oping validated measures of constructs. The method combines machine learning and semi-
structured interviews, or MASI for short. Based on the principle of criterion validation, we
vet quantitative measures of a construct -- women's agency, in our case -- by benchmark-
ing them against semi-structured interviews. Specifically, we use statistical algorithms that
build on standard supervised machine learning techniques to select the best survey ques-
tions based on how well they predict the measure of agency obtained through the time- and
skill-intensive in-depth interviews.
    MASI has many other potential applications. For example, the best questions to mea-
sure changes in a woman's agency, such as those caused by policy interventions, might differ
from the best ones to measure a woman's current agency (our focus). One could carry out
a similar study to create a survey module optimized for measuring changes in agency, with
the data collection carried out at two points in time, and the statistical analysis centered
around changes in responses.
    More broadly, one could apply our approach to create quantitative measures of concepts
very different from women's agency. We believe that combining machine learning and semi-
structured interviews to develop short survey measures of complex constructs has many
promising applications.




                                              30
References
Alkire, S., R. Meinzen-Dick, A. Peterman,           develop the Multidimensional Poverty Assess-
  A. Quisumbing, G. Seymour, and A. Vaz             ment Tool. Journal of Development Stud-
  (2013). The women's empowerment in agri-          ies 50 (1), 35­50.
  culture index. World Development 52, 71­91.
                                                  Crede, E. and M. Borrego (2013). From ethnog-
Alm°as, I., A. Armand, O. Attanasio, and            raphy to items: A mixed methods approach to
  P. Carneiro (2018). Measuring and changing        developing a survey to examine graduate en-
  control: Women's empowerment and targeted         gineering student retention. Journal of Mixed
  transfers. Economic Journal 128 (612), F609­      Methods Research 7 (1), 62­80.
  F639.
                                                 Creswell, J. W. and V. L. P. Clark (2017).
Barr, A., M. Dekker, F. Mwansa, and T. L. Zuze     Designing and conducting mixed methods re-
  (2020). Financial decision-making, gender and    search (3 ed.). Los Angeles: Sage Publica-
  social norms in Zambia: Preliminary report on    tions.
  the quantitative data generation, analysis and
                                                 Cronbach, L. J. and P. E. Meehl (1955). Con-
  results. CeDEx Discussion Paper Series .
                                                   struct validity in psychological tests. Psycho-
Becker, G. M., M. H. DeGroot, and J. Marschak      logical Bulletin 52 (4), 281.
  (1964). Measuring utility by a single-response Deterding, N. M. and M. C. Waters (2018). Flex-
  sequential method. Behavioral Science 9 (3),     ible coding of in-depth interviews: A twenty-
  226­232.                                         first-century approach. Sociological Methods
                                                   and Research , 1­32.
Bowden, A., J. Fox-Rushby, L. Nyandieka, and
  J. Wanjau (2002). Methods for pre-testing and DeVon, H. A., M. E. Block, P. Moyle-Wright,
  piloting survey questions: Illustrations from    D. M. Ernst, S. J. Hayden, D. J. Lazzara,
  the KENQOL survey of health-related qual-        S. M. Savoy, and E. Kostas-Polston (2007).
  ity of life. Health Policy and Planning 17 (3),  A psychometric toolbox for testing validity
  322­330.                                         and reliability. Journal of Nursing Scholar-
                                                   ship 39 (2), 155­164.
Camfield, L., G. Crivello, and M. Woodhead
  (2009). Wellbeing research in developing coun- Donald, A., G. Koolwal, J. Annan, K. Falb,
  tries: Reviewing the role of qualitative meth-   and M. Goldstein (2020). Measuring women's
  ods. Social Indicators Research 90 (1), 5.       agency. Feminist Economics 26 (3), 200­226.

Camfield, L. and D. Ruta (2007). Translation is Durham, J., B.-K. Tan, and R. White (2011).
  not enough: using the Global Person Gener-      Utilizing mixed research methods to develop
  ated Index (GPGI) to assess individual quality  a quantitative assessment tool: An exam-
  of life in Bangladesh, Thailand, and Ethiopia.  ple from explosive remnants of a war clear-
  Quality of Life Research 16 (6), 1039­1051.     ance program. Journal of Mixed Methods Re-
                                                  search 5 (3), 212­226.
Campbell, C. and J. Mannell (2016). Concep-
  tualising the agency of highly marginalised Ewerling, F., J. W. Lynch, C. G. Victora, A. van
  women: Intimate partner violence in extreme     Eerdewijk, M. Tyszler, and A. J. Barros
  settings. Global Public Health 11 (1-2), 1­16.  (2017). The SWPER index for women's em-
                                                  powerment in Africa: Development and vali-
Cohen, A. and M. Saisana (2014). Quantify-        dation of an index based on survey data. The
  ing the qualitative: Eliciting expert input to  Lancet Global Health 5 (9), e916­e923.

                                               31
Ewerling, F., A. Raj, C. G. Victora, H. F, Jackson, C. (2011). Research with experimental
  C. C. V, and A. J. Barros (2020). SW-           games: Questioning practice and interpreta-
  PER Global: A survey-based women's em-          tion. Progress in Development Studies 11 (3),
  powerment index expanded from Africa to all     229­241.
  low- and middle-income countries. Journal of
  Global Health 10 (2), 020434.                 Jayachandran, S. (2015). The roots of gender in-
                                                  equality in developing countries. Annual Re-
Genuer, R., J.-M. Poggi, and C. Tuleau-Malot      view of Economics 7 (1), 63­88.
  (2010).   Variable selection using random
  forests. Pattern Recognition Letters 31 (14), Jha, S., V. Rao, and M. Woolcock (2007). Gov-
  2225­2236.                                      ernance in the gullies: Democratic responsive-
                                                  ness and leadership in Delhi's slums. World
Genuer, R., J.-M. Poggi, and C. Tuleau-Malot      Development 35 (2), 230­246.
  (2015). VSURF: An R package for variable
  selection using random forests. The R Jour- Jose, R., N. Bhan, and A. Raj (2017). EMERGE
  nal 7 (2), 19.                                measurement guidelines report 2: How to cre-
                                                ate scientifically valid social and behavioral
Glennerster, R., C. Walsh, and L. Diaz-Martin   measures on gender equality and empower-
  (2018).     A practical guide to measuring    ment. Center on Gender Equity and Health
  women's and girls' empowerment in impact      (GEH), University of California, San Diego
  evaluations. Technical report. Abdul Latif    School of Medicine. San Diego, CA.
  Jameel Poverty Action Lab.
                                                  Kabeer, N. (1999). Resources, agency, achieve-
                                                    ments: Reflections on the measurement of
Gonzalez, O. (2020). Psychometric and machine
                                                    women's empowerment. Development and
  learning approaches for diagnostic assessment
                                                    Change 30 (3), 435­464.
  and tests of individual classification. Psycho-
  logical Methods .                               Kanbur, R. and P. Shaffer (2007). Experience
                                                  of combining qualitative and quantitative ap-
Greco, G., J. Skordis-Worrall, and A. Mills       proaches in poverty analysis. World Develop-
  (2018). Development, validity, and reliability  ment 35 (2), 183­354.
  of the women's capabilities index. Journal of
  Human Development and Capabilities 19 (3), Kishor, S. and K. Gupta (2004). Women's
  271­288.                                        empowerment in India and its states: Evi-
                                                  dence from the NFHS. Economic and Political
Guyon, I., J. Weston, S. Barnhill, and V. Vapnik  Weekly 39, 694­712.
  (2002). Gene selection for cancer classifica-
  tion using support vector machines. Machine Knippenberg, E., N. Jensen, and M. Constas
  Learning 46 (1), 389­422.                       (2019). Quantifying household resilience with
                                                  high frequency data: Temporal dynamics
Hargreaves, J. R., L. A. Morison, J. S. Gear,     and methodological options. World Develop-
  M. B. Makhubele, J. D. Porter, J. Busza,        ment 121, 1­15.
  C. Watts, J. C. Kim, and P. M. Pronyk (2007).
  Hearing the voices of the poor: Assigning Kshirsagar, V., J. Wieczorek, S. Ramanathan,
  poverty lines on the basis of local perceptions and R. Wells (2017). Household poverty clas-
  of poverty. A quantitative analysis of qualita- sification in data-scarce environments: A ma-
  tive data from participatory wealth ranking in  chine learning approach. 31st Conference on
  rural South Africa. World Development 35 (2),   Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS
  212­229.                                        2017) .

                                              32
Laszlo, S., K. Grantham, E. Oskay, and T. Zhang Naybor, D., J. P. Poon, and I. Casas (2016). Mo-
  (2020). Grappling with the challenges of        bility disadvantage and livelihood opportuni-
  measuring women's economic empowerment          ties of marginalized widowed women in rural
  in intrahousehold settings. World Develop-      Uganda. Annals of the American Association
  ment 132, 104959.                               of Geographers 106 (2), 404­412.

Latcheva, R. (2011). Cognitive interviewing and Nussbaum, M. (1999). Women and equality: The
  factor-analytic techniques: A mixed method       capabilities approach. International Labor Re-
  approach to validity of survey items measuring   view 138 (3), 227­246.
  national identity. Quality & Quantity 45 (6), Onwuegbuzie, A. J., R. M. Bustamante, and
  1175­1199.                                       J. A. Nelson (2010). Mixed research as a tool
                                                   for developing quantitative instruments. Jour-
Leslie, H. H., X. Zhou, D. Spiegelman, and
                                                   nal of Mixed Methods Research 4 (1), 56­78.
  M. E. Kruk (2018). Health system mea-
  surement: Harnessing machine learning to Peterman, A., B. Schwab, S. Roy, M. Hidrobo,
  advance global health. PLoS ONE 13 (10),         and D. O. Gilligan (2021). Measuring women's
  e0204958.                                        decisionmaking: Indicator choice and sur-
                                                   vey design experiments from cash and food
Liu, H. and H. Motoda (1998). Feature selec-       transfer evaluations in Ecuador, Uganda and
  tion for knowledge discovery and data mining,    Yemen. World Development 141, 105387.
  Volume 454. New York: Springer Science and
  Business Media.                                Pulerwitz, J., S. L. Gortmaker, and W. DeJong
                                                   (2000). Measuring sexual relationship power
Madhok, S. (2014). Rethinking agency: Devel-       in HIV/STD research. Sex Roles 42 (7-8), 637­
  opmentalism, gender and rights. New Delhi:       660.
  Routledge.
                                                 Quisumbing, A. R. (2011). Poverty transitions,
Maiorano, D., D. Shrimankar, S. Thapar-            shocks and consumption in rural Bangladesh,
  Bj¨orkert, and H. Blomkvist (2021). Measur-      1996­97 to 2006­07. In B. Baulch (Ed.), Why
  ing empowerment: Choices, values and norms.      poverty persists: Poverty dynamics in Asia
  World Development 138, 105220.                   and Africa, pp. 29­64. Edward Elgar, Chel-
                                                   tenham, UK.
Malapit, H., A. Quisumbing, R. Meinzen-Dick,
                                                 Rahman, L. and V. Rao (2004). The determi-
  G. Seymour, E. M. Martinez, J. Heckert,
                                                   nants of gender equity in India: examining
  D. Rubin, A. Vaz, K. M. Yount, G. A. A. P.
                                                   Dyson and Moore's thesis with new data. Pop-
  Phase, et al. (2019). Development of the
                                                   ulation and Development Review 30 (2), 239­
  project-level Women's Empowerment in Agri-
                                                   268.
  culture Index (pro-WEAI). World Develop-
  ment 122, 675­692.                             Rao, V. (2002). Experiments in `participatory
                                                   econometrics': Improving the connection be-
McBride, L. and A. Nichols (2018). Retooling       tween economic analysis and the real world.
  poverty targeting using out-of-sample valida-    Economic and Political Weekly 37 (20), 1887­
  tion and machine learning. The World Bank        1891.
  Economic Review 32 (3), 531­550.
                                                 Richardson, R., N. Schmitz, S. Harper, and
Meinshausen, N. and P. B¨  uhlmann (2010). Sta-    A. Nandi (2019). Development of a tool to
  bility selection. Journal of the Royal Statis-   measure women's agency in India. Journal of
  tical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodol-   Human Development and Capabilities 20 (1),
  ogy) 72 (4), 417­473.                            26­53.

                                               33
Rowlands, J. (1997). Questioning empowerment:        variable importance for random forests. BMC
  Working with women in Honduras. Oxford:            Bioinformatics 9 (1), 307.
  Oxfam.
                                                   Vaz, A., P. Pratley, and S. Alkire (2016).
Ryan, R. M. and E. L. Deci (2000). Self-             Measuring women's autonomy in Chad using
  determination theory and the facilitation of       the relative autonomy index. Feminist Eco-
  intrinsic motivation, social development, and      nomics 22 (1), 264­294.
  well-being. American Psychologist 55 (1), 68­
  78.                                              Ware, N. C., T. Tugenberg, and B. Dickey
Shaffer, P. (2013). Ten years of "Q-Squared":        (2003). Ethnography and measurement in
  Implications for understanding and explaining      mental health: Qualitative validation of a
  poverty. World Development 45, 269­285.            measure of continuity of care (CONNECT).
                                                     Qualitative Health Research 13 (10), 1393­
Small, M. L., E. M. Jacobs, and R. P. Mas-           1406.
  sengill (2008). Why organizational ties mat-
  ter for neighborhood effects: Resource access Woodcock, A., L. Camfield, J. A. McGregor, and
  through childcare centers. Social Forces 87 (1),   F. Martin (2009). Validation of the WeDQoL-
  387­414.                                           goals-Thailand measure: Culture-specific in-
Solorio-Fern´
            andez, S., J. A. Carrasco-Ochoa,         dividualised quality of life. Social Indicators
  and J. F. Mart´inez-Trinidad (2020). A review      Research 94 (1), 135­171.
  of unsupervised feature selection methods. Ar-
  tificial Intelligence Review 53 (2), 907­948.  Zhou, Y. (2019). A mixed methods model
                                                   of scale development and validation analysis.
Strobl, C., A.-L. Boulesteix, T. Kneib, T. Au-     Measurement: Interdisciplinary Research and
  gustin, and A. Zeileis (2008). Conditional       Perspectives 17 (1), 38­47.




                                                34
                                        App. Table A.1: Correlation of qualitative score and selected survey variables

                          Qualitative   Opinion heard          Need      Allowed to buy       Are you       Who do you          Are you           Who in         Allowed to go
                         agency score         when         permission     things in the    permitted to     consult with     permitted to        household       alone to meet
                                        expensive item     from other        market       visit women in    for decisions   visit any place   decides to pay    your friends for
                                         like a bicycle    household     without asking         other      regarding your      riding on      school fees for     any reason?
                                            or cow is     members to        partner?      neighborhoods       children's         public       a relative from
                                          purchased?      buy clothing                     to talk with     health care?      transport?       your side of
                                                             for self?                         them?                                              family?
Qualitative agency          1.000
 score
Opinion heard when          0.318           1.000
 expensive item like
 a bicycle or cow is
 purchased?
Need permission from        0.338           0.192            1.000
  other household
  members to buy
  clothing for self?
Allowed to buy things       0.346           0.287            0.324           1.000
  in the market
  without asking
  partner?
Are you permitted to        0.295           0.120            0.155           0.211            1.000
  visit women in other
  neighborhoods to
  talk with them?
Who do you consult          0.218           -0.054           0.123           -0.006           0.119            1.000
 with for decisions
 regarding your
 children's health
 care?
Are you permitted to        0.332           0.194            0.278           0.369            0.369            0.124            1.000
  visit any place
  riding on public
  transport?
Who in household            0.176           0.019            0.143           0.206            -0.139           -0.013           0.145             1.000
 decides to pay
 school fees for a
 relative from your
 side of family?
Allowed to go alone to      0.280           0.091            0.071           0.218            0.319            0.190            0.268             -0.018             1.000
  meet your friends
  for any reason?
                    App. Table A.2: Correlation of qualitative score, 5-question indices, and factors often associated with agency

                                Qualitative LASSO       Random      Backward    Fertility   Education   Health      HH      Mobility   Work      Age     Husband-   Husband-
                                 agency     stability     forest       seq.      score       score      score    expenses    score     score             wife age     wife
                                  score     selection   selection   selection                                      score                                   gap       educa-
                                               5-Q         5-Q         5-Q                                                                                            tion
                                              index       index       index                                                                                           gap
Qualitative agency score         1.000
LASSO stability selection 5-Q    0.532        1.000
  index
Random forest selection 5-Q      0.503        0.830      1.000
  index
Backward seq. selection 5-Q      0.539        0.820      0.791       1.000
  index
Fertility score                  0.346        0.197      0.143       0.233       1.000
Education score                  0.658        0.284      0.302       0.262       0.093       1.000
Health score                     0.634        0.281      0.221       0.321       0.153       0.409      1.000
HH expenses score                0.707        0.436      0.429       0.438       0.093       0.355      0.367     1.000
Mobility score                   0.697        0.339      0.415       0.364       0.017       0.299      0.345     0.533      1.000
Work score                       0.479        0.322      0.232       0.283       0.131       0.170      0.046     0.083      0.157     1.000
Age                              0.218        0.187      0.187       0.177       -0.054      0.121      0.096     0.227      0.293     0.036    1.000
Husband-wife age gap             0.071        0.032      0.016       0.034       -0.009      0.026      0.088     0.180      0.091     -0.122   -0.162    1.000
Husband-wife education gap       -0.245      -0.075      -0.059      -0.141      -0.010      -0.170     -0.085    -0.235     -0.191    -0.137   0.055     0.054      1.000
App. Table A.3: All variables selected by regular LASSO (using semi-structured interview)

   Question
   Can decide by self to purchase emergency medicine for child
   Who accompanied you to healthcare provider?
   Who do you consult with for decisions regarding your children's health care?
   Opinion heard when expensive item like a bicycle or cow is purchased?
   Allowed to buy things in the market without asking partner?
   Who in household decides to pay school fees for a relative from your side of family?
   Who in household decides purchasing item like radio or paraffin lamp?
   Need permission from other household members to buy clothing for self?
   Do you have a bank or savings account that you yourself use?
   Are you permitted to visit any place riding on public transport?
   Are you permitted to visit women in other neighborhoods to talk with them?
   Are you allowed to go alone to a relative's house inside the village?
   Allowed to go alone to meet your friends for any reason?
   When husband has different opinion, voice opinion and argue more often than voice
     opinion but do as he says
   In last 12 months, how often you and husband discussed children's expenses

Notes: The variables listed are the 15 ones chosen by standard LASSO when the dependent variable is the
semi-structured interview score and the possible regressors are the 63 close-ended survey questions.




                                                  37
                   App. Table A.4: Selected survey questions using lab game


 Question                                                        LASSO          Random         Backward
                                                                stability         forest       sequential
                                                                selection       selection       selection
                                                                               (VSURF)
 He (husband) expects me not to contradict him                      1               3               1
   in public
 Since New Year's Day, how often has this                           2                               2
   (husband threatening to hurt you) happened?
 On which step are you? (0=powerless to                             3               2               3
   10=most ability)
 Are you allowed to go alone to a relative's house                  4                               4
   inside the village?
 Opinion heard when expensive item like a bicycle                   5
   or cow is purchased?
 He is upset if I express an opinion that disagrees                                 1
   with him
 Often when disagree what to do, do what partner                                   4*
   wants
 Chose not to perform household roles in last 2                                    5*
   weeks
 Has partner/other male ever threatened to hurt                                                     5
   or harm you?
 5-Question Standardized Index R2                                 0.045           0.011           0.047
 5-Question Model Prediction Index R2                             0.047           0.463           0.047

Notes: The table lists the top 5 survey questions selected. The numbers in the cells indicate the selection
order, with 1 referring to the best, or most predictive question. * indicates that the variable, when coded
so that a higher value maps to more agency, has a negative correlation with the WTP measure. The R2 is
for a regression of the agency measure from the lab game on the index.




                                                    38
Appendix B: Full list of close-ended questions measuring agency

      Question                                                        Responses
      Who do you consult with for decisions regarding your            a 1.   No one, I decide on my own 2. My husband.          3.
      children's health care?                                         Mother-in-law 4. Father-in-law 5. Relatives from my hus-
                                                                      band's side -96. Other (specify):         -98. Don't know
                                                                      -99. Refused to answer
      Imagine that you were home alone, without your (prefill          1.    Yes 2. No -98. Don't know -99. Refused to answer
      response from previous question ) and one of your chil-
      dren was very sick. Could you make the choice on your
      own to purchase medication to treat your child?
      When was the last time you were unwell and visited a                      [DD] -98. Don't know/ Can't remember
      health care provider for treatment?                             [MM] -98. Don't know/ Can't remember                [YY] -
                                                                      98. Don't know/ Can't remember -99. Refused to answer
      Who accompanied you to the provider? Surveyor: Do               b   1. Went alone 2. Husband 3. Mother-in-law 4. Sister-in-
      not read out the response options aloud                         law 5. Father-in-law 6. Brother-in-law 7. Son 8. Father
                                                                      9. Brother 10. Mother 11. Sister 12. Male relative 13.
                                                                      Female relative 14. Male non-relative 15. Female non-
                                                                      relative -98. Don't know/ Can't remember -99. Refused
                                                                      to answer
      Getting permission to go?                                       1. Big problem 2. Small problem 3. No problem -98.
                                                                      Don't know -99. Refused to answer
      Finding someone to go with you?                                 1. Big problem 2. Small problem 3. No problem -98.
                                                                      Don't know -99. Refused to answer
      "When I am in a difficult situation, I can usually find         1. Strongly agree 2. Somewhat agree 3. Neither agree nor
      my way out of it."                                              disagree 4. Somewhat disagree 5. Strongly disagree -98.
                                                                      Don't know -99. Refused to answer
      "I feel helpless."                                               1.    Strongly agree 2. Somewhat agree 3. Neither agree
                                                                      nor disagree 4. Somewhat disagree 5. Strongly disagree
                                                                      -98. Don't know -99. Refused to answer
      "I feel I can provide for my family and meet my family's        1. Strongly agree 2. Somewhat agree 3. Neither agree nor
      needs."                                                         disagree 4. Somewhat disagree 5. Strongly disagree -98.
                                                                      Don't know -99. Refused to answer
      "I have no confidence in myself."                                1.    Strongly agree 2. Somewhat agree 3. Neither agree
                                                                      nor disagree 4. Somewhat disagree 5. Strongly disagree
                                                                      -98. Don't know -99. Refused to answer
      When you have small amounts of money, such as 20 or              1.    Yes, always 2. Yes, usually 3. Yes, sometimes 4.
      50 INR, can you decide how to spend it on your own?             Rarely 5. Very rarely 6. Never -98. Don't know -99. Re-
                                                                      fused to answer
      When an expensive item like a bicycle or a cow is pur-           1.    Yes, always 2. Yes, usually 3. Yes, sometimes 4.
      chased by the household, is your opinion listened to in         Rarely 5. Very rarely 6. Never -98. Don't know -99. Re-
      the decision of what to buy?                                    fused to answer


                                                                                                        (Continue on next page)



      For this question as asked, lower-valued responses represent more agency. The response is then reverse-coded in the data
analysis so that for all variables, a higher value represents more agency.
 a Recoded   as: 1. Relatives from my husband's side, father-in-law, or mother-in-law, 2. My husband, 3. No one, I decide on my
own
 b Recoded   as: 1. With male relative, 2. With female relative, 3. Went alone


                                                                 39
   (Continuation of table listing quantitative survey questions)
   Question                                                          Responses
   If you have some money you have earned, can you use                1.   Yes, always 2. Yes, usually 3. Yes, sometimes 4.
   it to purchase clothing for yourself or children without          Rarely 5. Very rarely 6. Never -98. Don't know -99. Re-
   asking the permission of anyone else?                             fused to answer
   Are you allowed to buy things in the market without                1.   Yes, always 2. Yes, usually 3. Yes, sometimes 4.
   asking the permission of your partner?                            Rarely 5. Very rarely 6. Never -98. Don't know -99. Re-
                                                                     fused to answer
   If money is available, who in your household decides               1.   You 2. You and your husband 3. You and someone
   whether to pay school fees for a relative from your side          other than husband 4. Husband 5. Husband with others
   of the family?                                                    -96. Other (specify):       -99. Refused to answer
   If money is available, who in your household decides               1.   You 2. You and your husband 3. You and someone
   whether to purchase items like a radio or a paraffin lamp?        other than husband 4. Husband 5. Husband with others
                                                                     -96. Other (specify):       -99. Refused to answer
   Do you have to ask the permission of other household              c   1. Yes 2. No 3. Have never bought -99. Refused to
   members to buy: Vegetables or fruits                              answer
   Do you have to ask the permission of other household              1. Yes 2. No 3. Have never bought -99. Refused to answer
   members to buy: Clothing for yourself
   Do you have to ask the permission of other household              1. Yes 2. No 3. Have never bought -99. Refused to answer
   members to buy: Medicines for yourself
   Do you have to ask the permission of other household              1. Yes 2. No 3. Have never bought -99. Refused to answer
   members to buy: Personal supplies (soap, shampoo, den-
   tal paste, sanitary napkins, etc.)?
   Do you have access to any cash available now for buying            1.   Yes 2. No -98. Don't know -99. Refused to answer
   HH food or medicine if you suddenly needed something?
   How much money do you usually have on hand to meet                           -99. Refused to answer
   these types of expenses?
   Do you have a bank or savings account that you yourself            1.   Yes 2. No -99. Refused to answer
   use?
   Who makes deposits of money into this account?                     1.   You 2. You and your husband 3. Your husband -96.
                                                                     Other (specify):        -98. Don't know -99. Refused to
                                                                     answer
   Can your husband withdraw money from this account                 1. Yes, always 2. Yes, usually 3. Yes, sometimes 4. Rarely
   without consulting you?                                           5. Very rarely 6. Never -98. Don't know -99. Refused to
                                                                     answer
   Can you withdraw money from this account without con-              1.   Yes, always 2. Yes, usually 3. Yes, sometimes 4.
   sulting your husband?                                             Rarely 5. Very rarely 6. Never
                                                                     -98. Don't know -99. Refused to answer
   Are you permitted to visit any place riding on public             1. Never 2. Yes, but never alone 3. Yes, alone, with per-
   transport?                                                        mission 4. Yes, alone, do not need permission -97. Not
                                                                     applicable -99. Refused to answer
   Are you permitted to visit women in other neighbor-               1. Never 2. Yes, but never alone 3. Yes, alone, with per-
   hoods to talk with them?                                          mission 4. Yes, alone, do not need permission -97. Not
                                                                     applicable -99. Refused to answer
   Can you go unescorted to your parents' house/village?              1.   Yes 2. No
                                                                     -97. Not applicable -99. Refused to answer
   Can you go unescorted to the next village?                         1.   Yes 2. No -99. Refused to answer


                                                                                                      (Continue on next page)



c Recoded   as: 1. With male relative, 2. With female relative, 3. Went alone


                                                                40
(Continuation of table listing quantitative survey questions)
Question                                                         Responses
Are you allowed to go alone to a relative's house inside          1.   Yes 2. No -97. Not applicable -99. Refused to answer
the village?
Are you allowed to go to the school/college alone or with         1.   Yes 2. No -97. Not applicable -99. Refused to answer
friends?
Are you allowed to go alone to meet your friends for any          1.   Yes 2. No
reason (to get school notes, chat, play etc.)?                   -97. Not applicable -99. Refused to answer
In the last one year, have you ever gone to the market           1. Yes 2. No
within your village to buy personal items with friends?          -97. Not applicable -99. Refused to answer
(no guardians)
In the last one year, have you ever gone to the market            1.   Yes 2. No
within your village to buy personal items alone?                 -97. Not applicable -99. Refused to answer
In the last one year, have you ever attended any sort of          1.   Yes 2. No
community events/activities? (Ex: fair, theatre, cultural        -97. Not applicable -99. Refused to answer
program, religious event)
In the last one year, have you ever attended one of these         1.   Yes 2. No
events without guardians present (either alone or with           -97. Not applicable -99. Refused to answer
friends)?
A wife should obey her husband, even if she disagrees.           1. Strongly agree 2. Agree 3. Neither agree nor disagree
                                                                 4. Disagree 5. Strongly disagree -98. Don't know -99.
                                                                 Refused to answer
It is the job of men to be leaders, not women                    1. Strongly agree 2. Agree 3. Neither agree nor disagree
                                                                 4. Disagree 5. Strongly disagree
                                                                 -98. Don't know -99. Refused to answer
A woman should be able to choose her own friends, even            1.   Strongly agree 2. Agree 3. Neither agree nor disagree
if her husband disapproves                                       4. Disagree 5. Strongly disagree
                                                                 -98. Don't know -99. Refused to answer
In the last 12 months, approximately how often have              1. Everyday 2. Once a week 3. Once a month 4. Every
you and your husband discussed [. . . ]? G.5. Children's         couple of months 5. Almost never 6. Never, we never talk
expenses G.6. Children's education G.7. Your husband's           about this subject 7. Never, we always agree about this
alcohol consumption G.8. Your husband's relatives G.9.           subject
Your relatives G.11. Health expenses                             -97. Not applicable -98. Don't know -99. Refused to an-
                                                                 swer


                                                                                                   (Continue on next page)




                                                            41
     (Continuation of table listing quantitative survey questions)
     Question                                                          Responses
     Now I am going to read a list of things that might de-            1. Strongly agree 2. Agree 3. Neither agree nor dis-
     scribe your current partner. Please tell me how closely           agree/Neutral 4. Disagree 5. Strongly disagree
     this describes your current partner. G.12. Most of the            -98. Don't know -99. Refused to answer
     time when we disagree about what to do, we do what my
     partner wants to do. G.13. My partner treats me well.
     G.14. My partner won't let me wear certain things. G.15.
     When my partner and I are together, I'm pretty quiet.
     G.16. He expects me not to contradict him in public.
     G.17. He is upset if I express an opinion that disagrees
     with him. G.18. [Follow up to previous] I often express
     my opinion when I disagree with my husband. G.19. My
     partner has more say than I do about important deci-
     sions that affect us. G.20. My partner tells me who I
     can spend time with. G.21. I feel trapped or stuck in
     our relationship. G.22. My partner does what he wants,
     even if I do not want him to. G.23. When my partner
     and I disagree, he gets his way most of the time. G.24.
     My partner always wants to know where I am.
     When your husband has a different opinion from you on             d 1.   Never 2. Rarely 3. Sometimes 4. Often 5. Most of the
     a particular decision what do you do. Please tell us how          times 6. All the time
     many times you adopt each of these approaches (Sur-               -97. Not Applicable -98. Don't know -99. Refused to an-
     veyor: guide her through all the six options ) G.26. Don't        swer
     voice your opinion but do what you think is right G.27.
     Don't voice your opinion and wait for another occasion
     to see if he changes his mind G.28. Don't voice your opin-
     ion but do what your husband thinks is right G.29. Voice
     your opinion but also make it clear that you will go along
     with his view G.30. Voice your opinion and argue why
     your choice is better G.31. Other: Please explain


     When you disagree with your husband, does he get angry            1. Yes 2. No
     with you?                                                         -99. Refused to answer
     How often does he get angry with you when you disagree?           1. All the time 2. Almost all of the time 3. Some of the
                                                                       time 4. Once in a while 5. Rarely 6. Never
                                                                       -99. Refused to answer
     Has he (your husband, or other adult male in your house-          1. Yes 2. No
     hold) ever threatened to hurt or harm you or someone              -99. Refused to answer
     close to you?
     Since New Year's Day, has this happened often, some-              1. Often 2. Sometimes 3. Rarely 4. Never
     times, rarely, or never?                                          -99. Refused to answer


                                                                                                         (Continue on next page)




 d Recoded   as four binary variables for yes/no questions: When husband has different opinion, voice opinion and argue more
often than voice opinion but do as he says; When husband has different opinion, voice opinion but do as he says more often
than not voicing opinion and waiting for him to change mind; When husband has different opinion, wait for him to change
mind more often than do as he says (but don't voice opinion); When husband has different opinion do what you think more
often than what he says (but don't voice opinion)


                                                                  42
(Continuation of table listing quantitative survey questions)
Question                                                          Responses
It's wrong for me to question people who are in charge            1. Strongly agree 2. Agree 3. Neither agree nor disagree
or in authority, like teachers or parents, leaders in the         4. Disagree 5. Strongly disagree
village etc.                                                      -98. Don't know 99. Refused to answer
Do you feel that people like yourself can generally change         1.   Yes, very easily 2. Yes, fairly easily 3. Yes, but with a
things in your community if they want to?                         little difficulty 4. Yes, but with a great deal of difficulty
                                                                  5. No, not at all
                                                                  -98. Don't know -99. Refused to answer
Do you participate in making major household pur-                  1.   Yes 2. No -99. Refused to answer
chases? Major household purchases include things like
refrigerator, television, vehicle, livestock etc.?
I do not participate in making major household pur-                1.   Because I don't like doing/ can't/ don't want to do it
chases. . .                                                       2. Because it is not my responsibility 3. Because I don't
                                                                  think it is important for me to make major household
                                                                  purchases 4. Because others don't expect/ want me to
                                                                  make major household purchases 5. Because I will get in
                                                                  trouble if I do/ am not allowed to -96. Other (specify):
                                                                         -98. Don't know -99. Refused to answer
Thinking about your role in the household and the ex-             1. Never 2. One or two times 3. Several times 4. Often 5.
pectations of you, in the past 2 weeks have you ever              Nearly every day -98. Not sure/don't know -99. Refused
chosen for yourself not to perform any of your roles or           to answer
responsibilities?
This is a ten step ladder, where on the bottom, the first         Response Options: 1-10 -98. Don't know -99. Refused to
step, stand people who are completely coerced or power-           answer
less, and on the highest step, the tenth step, stand those
with the most ability to advance goals that they value
in their own homes and in the world. On which step are
you today?



 Notes: Table lists the 63 closed-ended questions used as the set from which the best 5 were selected.




                                                             43
Appendix C: Semi-structured interview guide

      Thank you very much for speaking with me. My name is [NAME] and I work for an organi-
zation that works around the world to reduce poverty. The name of the organization is J-PAL. In
India the organization's office is in Delhi. We are not from the government.
      Purpose of the study: The organization I work for conducts research all over India, and
the results from the research are used to make better government programs. [Give example of
immunization study in Haryana].
      In this study, we are talking to many women in and around Kurukshetra. The reason we are
doing this is to understand your experiences, your circumstances, your needs, and your struggles.
We want to know how families make decisions on day-to-day events, such as child-rearing, household
finances, health care issues in the family etc.
      What will you have to do? We will talk to you for 30-45 minutes. We request that you
answer as honestly as you can. Some of the questions might be of a personal or sensitive nature.
If you ever feel uncomfortable, I want to remind you that it is okay to not answer. You should
not feel obligated or pressured. We can stop the interview at any time. There will be no negative
consequences if you stop the interview.
      Why are we recording? We will also record the interview. It is difficult to talk and write
notes at the same time. If I don't record, I have to keep asking you what you said, and the interview
will take longer. Because of the recorder, I can give you my full attention.
      What is being done to maintain confidentiality? What you tell us, and the recording
will only remain with our small research team. Maximum 3 or 4 people will be able to listen to
the recording. Your name, your family members' name, your address, the name of the village or
anybody's phone number, nothing will be in the recording. If I do something like that, I will be
thrown out of my job. Our company takes the matter of confidentiality very seriously.
      Why do we need privacy? I am requesting that we speak to you alone. There are two
reasons for this. First, we have been told that we should only get the experiences of those mothers
who have young children. That's why we are talking only to you in your family. Second, if too
many voices come into the recording, then it is difficult to listen to it later.
      Why are you only talking to me and not other village women? We have selected
you through a lottery. First, we selected about 20 villages in and around Kurukshetra through a
lottery. Then we selected families within villages through a lottery.
      Any questions? If you have any questions you may ask now or later. If you wish to contact
later, please keep these numbers [give her the Contact Sheet].

SECTION I: INTRODUCTION
     These questions are both as a way to start the conversation, but also important for the in-
terviewer to remember for upcoming questions about the respondent's work, children, and potential
decision-makers within the household. Do not spend too much time on these questions as they are
meant to be introductory and brief.
     Note: The respondent may have already answered these questions in the quant survey. Say
that she may already have answered these questions, and these are being asked again to refresh the
researcher's memory.

· How old are you?
· How many years has it been since you got married?
· How many children do you have? How many boys and how many girls? How old are they?

                                                 44
· Besides yourself, your husband, and children, how many people live in your household? Can
  you tell me who they are?
· Does your husband work? If yes, what work?
· Do you work outside the home? If yes, what work? [Throughout interview, probe about working
  where appropriate.]

SECTION II: CHILDREN'S SCHOOLING
     The questions in this section are to understand the extent of involvement of the mother in
decisions related to her children's schooling.
     The goal is to engage in a conversation to ascertain how engaged the mother is in these
decisions, how she negotiates, the extent to which she cedes control, to whom she cedes control,
whether she thinks of it as ceding control, etc. The `facts' that are embedded in the question ­
whether it is a private or government school or how much it costs (which can be answered in
a survey as well) ­ are conversation starters to get deeper into questions about decision-making
power. The sub-questions are meant to ask for more details that should lead to a fuller account, a
narrative, or a story. If they do not work, you can modify. Do not ask them like they are questions
in a survey.
     The questions will be asked separately for sons and daughters to understand gender differences.
Note that we are only asking about her children under the age of 10. If there is no school age child,
skip this section.
The next few questions are about your children ­ their schooling and healthcare. First, I'll ask
about your daughter's education.

· Which school does she go to? Is it a government or private school? Does it cost money to go
  to this school? How much?
· Who decided on this school?
· Why did you choose this school?
· Did you think about any other schools? Which ones? [If there were other schools in considera-
  tion, probe about how choices were made, and why.]
· Was there agreement among family members about the school? If not, ask for details about the
  actors and events around the disagreement.
· Did you agree with the decision? Why/why not?
· Do you ever have to keep your daughter from going to school? I am not asking about when she
  is sick...for any other reason?
· Till what class do you want your daughter to study? Why?
· What are your hopes and aspirations for your daughter? Do you think you can help her fulfill
  these aspirations? Why/why not?

    If you do not get much traction with the schooling questions, ask about aspirations for the
daughter post-puberty.
Let's now talk about your son's education.

· Which school does he go to? Is it a government or private school? Does it cost money to go to
  this school? How much?
· Who decided on this school?
· Why did you choose this school?
· Did you think about any other schools? Which ones? [If there were other schools in considera-
  tion, probe about how choices were made, and why.]

                                                 45
· Was there agreement among family members about the school? If not, ask for details about the
  actors and events around the disagreement.
· Did you agree with the decision? Why/why not?
· Do you ever have to keep your son from going to school? I am not asking about when he is
  sick...for any other reason?
· Till what class do you want your son to study? Why?
· What are your hopes and aspirations for your son? Do you think you can help him fulfill these
  aspirations? Why/why not?

SECTION III: CHILDREN'S HEALTH CARE
     Similar to Section II, this section is also about the extent of involvement of the mother in
decisions related to her children, in this case, the child's health care.
     Again, the goal is to engage in a conversation and get a narrative account of an actual incident
that involved her child. Any specific details that are "factual" ­ type of illness, which doctor, who
took the child to the doctor etc. ­ are the bridge to allow the woman to talk in depth about her
own engagement with all the small decisions that are involved in getting to the big picture of the
decision-making process, her own control over these decisions, whether she cedes control, how much,
and her opinions on the same.
     Questions on the respondent's mobility are embedded within the questions and should be probed.
     The questions will be asked separately for sons and daughters to understand gender differences.
I will now ask about your children's health care.

· Can you remember the last time your child was sick, and you had to take your child to the
  doctor? Can you tell me about what happened?
     ­ Was it your son or daughter? When did this happen? How old was your child? What was
       the sickness? Which doctor or clinic or hospital did you take your child to?
     ­ Who decided on which doctor/hospital? Why?
     ­ Were you in agreement with the decision? Why?
     ­ Who took the child to the doctor? Why?
     ­ If she did not go, ask whether she wanted to go. If she wanted to go, ask why she did not
       go. If she did not want to go, ask why she did not want to go.
     ­ What was the treatment? Who took care of the treating the child?
     ­ Were you satisfied with the treatment? Why/why not?
· If the woman has a child of another gender, ask the same questions about that child.

     If she has an infant, you can ask about vaccination.

SECTION IV: FERTILITY
     The questions should probe about respondent's choice and agency around the number of chil-
dren, birth spacing, and decisions around breastfeeding.

· You said you have X children. Would you like to have more? Why/why not? Would your
  husband (in-laws; whoever she says is in charge) agree with your decision? If not, why not?
· According to you, what is the ideal spacing between children? [If there is a discrepancy between
  what she says is the ideal and we know to be the fact, probe about the discrepancy.] Whose
  decision as it to have a different spacing?
· Ask about contraception.

                                                 46
· Ask separately for son and daughter. Did you breastfeed daughter/son? For how long? Probe
  about decisions related to breastfeeding ­ who decided how long to breastfeed? Did she agree
  with the decision? Were there any disagreements in the household about this decision? Why?
  If she did not breastfeed, ask why.
· Ask about delivery ­ at home or institutional?

SECTION V: HOUSEHOLD EXPENSES
     These questions are around a woman's control (or lack thereof ) over household budgets, and
her involvement in decisions around making purchases of various sorts.
     There's a separation between purchasing smaller and larger items for the household. Determine
what the appropriate small or large item is likely to be for the household and probe accordingly.
     Questions on the respondent's mobility are embedded within the questions and should be probed.
Finally, I'd like to ask about household expenses.

· Overall budgeting questions
     ­ How do you run the household?
     ­ If she works, asks if she hands over her pay or keeps it? Who is in charge of the household
       money?
· Buying items of daily need
     ­ Who is in charge of the money for buying items needed on a daily or regular basis?
     ­ Wheat, vegetables, milk, soap etc. Who goes out to buy these items?
     ­ If she goes, would she prefer that somebody else was in charge of doing the shopping?
     ­ If she doesn't go, would she like to go? If she would like to go, why is she not able to?
     ­ Does she have a say in what items get purchased?
     ­ After marriage, did she have a say if she needed anything that she was used to buying
       before?
     ­ Any particular vegetable she liked, or any brand of soap?
· Buying items in an emergency
     ­ Questions about the different ways that the woman saves (buffalo milk money is hers,
       separate bank account for girl child through a government scheme, gullak etc.) are yielding
       responses, so continue asking about this.
· Buying a large item for the household
· What if the household won a lottery?

    Be attuned to any issue she raises about running debt with the local shop or money lenders
and probe about how this plays into decision-making in household budgeting decisions.

SECTION VI: MOBILITY
     The goal of adding this section on mobility is to understand the constraints placed on women's
physical mobility, and whether, and to what extent, she has agency in her own movement.

   · When you go to visit your family/natal village, how do you go (means of transport)? Do you
     go by yourself or does someone need to accompany you? Probe about why.
   · [DRAW A MOBILITY MAP.]

     These are all the questions. Do you have any questions for me? Thanks very much for
participating in this interview.

                                                47
