                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         COVID-19 TIME-VARYING REPRODUCTION NUMBERS WORLDWIDE:
                 AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF MANDATORY AND
                       VOLUNTARY SOCIAL DISTANCING

                                       Alexander Chudik
                                       M. Hashem Pesaran
                                       Alessandro Rebucci

                                      Working Paper 28629
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28629


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




This paper is a substantially revised and extended version of the paper entitled "Voluntary and
mandatory social distancing: Evidence on COVID-19 exposure rates from Chinese provinces and
selected countries," NBER Working Paper No. 27039, April 2020. We are grateful to Anton
Korinek, Ippei Fujiara, Piero La Mura, Ron Smith, Zheng (Michael) Song, Cynthia Yang, and
seminar participants in the VEAMS seminar series for comments and discussions on a previous
draft of this paper. We also thank Johns Hopkins University for assistance with the data and
Daniel Jiménez for excellent research assistance. The views in this paper are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Any errors or omissions are the
responsibility of the authors.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Alexander Chudik, M. Hashem Pesaran, and Alessandro Rebucci. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
COVID-19 Time-varying Reproduction Numbers Worldwide: An Empirical Analysis of Mandatory
and Voluntary Social Distancing
Alexander Chudik, M. Hashem Pesaran, and Alessandro Rebucci
NBER Working Paper No. 28629
April 2021
JEL No. C40,D0,E7,F60,I20

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper estimates time-varying COVID-19 reproduction numbers worldwide solely based on
the number of reported infected cases, allowing for under-reporting. Estimation is based on a
moment condition that can be derived from an agent-based stochastic network model of
COVID-19 transmission. The outcomes in terms of the reproduction number and the trajectory of
per-capita cases through the end of 2020 are very diverse. The reproduction number depends on
the transmission rate and the proportion of susceptible population, or the herd immunity effect.
Changes in the transmission rate depend on changes in the behavior of the virus, reflecting
mutations and vaccinations, and changes in people's behavior, reflecting voluntary or government
mandated isolation. Over our sample period, neither mutation nor vaccination are major factors,
so one can attribute variation in the transmission rate to variations in behavior. Evidence based on
panel data models explaining transmission rates for nine European countries indicates that the
diversity of outcomes results from the non-linear interaction of mandatory containment measures,
voluntary precautionary isolation, and the economic incentives that governments provided to
support isolation. These effects are precisely estimated and robust to various assumptions. As a
result, countries with seemingly different social distancing policies achieved quite similar
outcomes in terms of the reproduction number. These results imply that ignoring the voluntary
component of social distancing could introduce an upward bias in the estimates of the effects of
lock-downs and support policies on the transmission rates. The full set of estimation results and
the replication package are available on the authors' websites.

Alexander Chudik                                 Alessandro Rebucci
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas                   Johns Hopkins Carey Business School
2200 N. Pearl St.                                100 International Drive
Dallas, TX 75201                                 Baltimore, MD 21202
alexander.chudik@gmail.com                       and NBER
                                                 arebucci@jhu.edu
M. Hashem Pesaran
University of Southern California
Department of Economics
3620 South Vermont Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and Trinity College
Cambridge, UK
pesaran@usc.edu


A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28629.
Updated estimates and code are available at sites.google.com/site/alexanderchudik/
1    Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic has claimed millions of lives and brought about very costly government

interventions to contain it, with unprecedented and widespread economic disruption worldwide.

China responded to the initial outbreak with strict and binding mandatory social distancing policies

to contain the epidemic and it is widely credited to have been successful in eradicating the virus

each time it resurfaced. At the other end of the spectrum, for example, Sweden initially attempted

to let its epidemic run its course with only minimal interventions from the government. Other

countries responded by adopting a mixture of policies, either by deliberate choice or due to popular

opposition to the implementation of lock-downs or even milder forms of social distancing. Yet

outcomes in terms of per capita cases and deaths do not always diverge or align with these priors.

    The purpose of this paper is two-fold: (a) to compare time-varying estimates of COVID-19

effective reproduction numbers across a large number of diverse countries, and to highlight the

wide disparities that exist across countries. (b) to model empirically the effects of mandatory and

voluntary social distancing as well as incentives to comply on the evolution of the virus transmission

rate in a sample of European countries.

    Reproduction numbers are epidemiologic metrics to measure the intensity of an infectious dis-

ease. The basic reproduction number, denoted by R0 , is the number of new infections expected

to result from one infected individual at the start of the epidemic. Within a classical susceptible-

infective-removed (SIR) model the basic reproduction number is given by R0 =  0 / , where  0

is the initial (biological) transmission rate, and  is the recovery rate. Since the transmissibility

of a disease will vary over time due to changes in immunity, mitigation policies, or precautionary

behavior, the effective reproduction number, which we denote by Ret , measures the R number t

periods after the initial outbreak. As we show in the paper, in the classical SIR model, we have

Ret = (1 - ct )  t / , where ct is the per capita number of infected cases at time t. Moreover, in

our framework, for a given value of R0 , social distancing, either voluntary due to precautionary

behavior or mandatory due to non-pharmaceutical interventions (which we also call mitigation or

containment policies for brevity), lead to time-variation in the transmission rate,  t , driven by



                                                  1
changes in contacts or susceptibility to infection. As a result, in our model, one can separate

changes in Ret due the extent to which the susceptible population is shrinking, 1 - ct (which we

call herding), or due to social distancing whether mandated or voluntary.

       To estimate the COVID-19 time-varying transmission rates,  t , we apply a new method pro-

posed by Pesaran and Yang (2020), henceforth PY, based on a moment condition that can be derived

from an agent-based stochastic network model of epidemic diffusion. As PY show, a linearized ver-

sion of this moment condition can aggregate up to the classical deterministic SIR model. From

this moment condition, we then derive reduced form regressions in confirmed cases that control

for under-reporting due to unreported asymptotic cases and/or in absence of universal COVID-19

testing.

       The estimation approach that we propose is applicable to any level of jurisdiction and could

provide guidance on how to measure the health impact in causal studies of specific mitigating

policies. For the sake of brevity we report the results for selected countries and regions, but compute

rolling estimates of effective reproduction numbers for all jurisdictions for which Johns Hopkins

University (JHU) reports case statistics.1 This is important since measuring health outcomes is

challenging in studies that seek to establish causal effects of policies to address COVID-19.

       Our method of moment estimation requires only data on infected cases, thus complementing

estimation methods based on death statistics. The reported number of infected cases and deaths is

problematic and different countries might have better quality data on either one or the other. For

example, Spain has very good death statistics. In other countries, death statistics have undergone

major revisions on several occasions. For example, the United Kingdom death toll was revised

downward by 5,377 on August 12, 2020 after a review concluded that daily death figures should

only include deaths which had occurred within 28 days of a positive COVID-19 test.

       Our estimation method is not only simple to apply, but also fairly robust to the under-reporting

of infected cases. Many existing estimation methods of reproduction numbers do not allow for

measurement errors and might not be robust to the under-reporting problem. For instance, the

seemingly unrelated regression estimates developed by Korolev (2020) may be biased downward if
   1
    The full set of estimation results are available on the authors' websites (sites.google.com/site/alexanderchudik/,
pesaran.com, sites.google.com/site/alessandrorebucciphd/).


                                                          2
one neglects under-reporting of confirmed cases. Stock (2020) focuses on measurement errors and

explores the benefits of randomly testing the general population to determine the asymptomatic

infection rate.

      Following the medical evidence in Gibbons et al. (2014), we use a multiplication factor to

allow for under-reporting in a way that will be elaborated in later sections of the paper. This

is particularly important given that it has been widely acknowledged that number of reported

infected cases may suffer from considerable under-reporting, especially during the early stages

of the epidemic. For example, Li et al. (2020) estimate that only 14 percent of all infections

were documented in China prior to the January 23, 2020 travel restrictions. This translates to a

multiplication factor of 1/0.14  7.14. Jagodnik et al. (2020) estimate that the recorded cases

were under-reported by a multiplication factor in the range of 3 to 16 times in the seven countries

that they considered as of March 28, 2020.2 According to the Centers for Disease Control and

Prevention study of Havers et al. (2020), in the United States, the number of infected cases is

likely to be 10 times more than reported based on antibody tests from March through May, 2020.

More recently, Rahmandad, Lim, and Sterman (2020) estimate that the cumulative cases across

86 countries through July 10, 2020 are 10.5 times the number of officially reported cases, with a

10th - 90th percentile range of 3.35 - 23.81.

      We find that for China the effective reproduction number drops below 1 within 30 days of the

lock-downs. The reproduction number estimates obtained for other countries initially also fall, as

found for instance by Atkeson, Kopecky, and Zha (2020a). Contrary to evidence based on COVID

death statistics, however, the pace and the magnitude of the decline varies significantly across

countries. For example, we estimate it took about three times longer for the southern hemisphere

to bring the reproduction number down to one compared with the northern hemisphere, excluding

China.

      The critical difference between China and all other countries is not only the initial slower decline

of the reproduction number, but also the fact that, with very few exceptions, the epidemic was

never eradicated completely and hence it resurfaced every time restrictions were loosened. This
  2
   See Table 2 of Jagodnik et al. (2020). The seven countries considered are China, France, Italy, Spain, US,
Germany and UK.


                                                     3
is important because without herd immunity, community transmission resumes as soon as social

interaction resumes. Indeed, our estimates show that, in most cases, the estimated reproduction

number does not remain permanently below one and most countries experience more than one

wave, with the second wave typically larger than the first one.

      The paper also finds that, whilst in China and Asia the reproduction number is driven entirely

by a reduction in contacts and vulnerability to COVID-19, in the United States, the United King-

dom, Brazil, and several other countries, community transmission drops also due to the rise in the

proportion of population becoming infected, and the rise in the relative importance of herd immu-

nity. Critically, our results show that countries with seemingly different social distancing policies

achieved quite similar outcomes in terms of the reproduction numbers.

      For a better understanding of the factors behind the evolution of effective reproduction numbers,

we separate the herding component from the transmission rate and empirically model the latter for a

sample of European countries with a similar start to the outbreaks in March 2020, but with differing

outcomes subsequently. In line with the agent-based stochastic epidemic network model of PY, we

argue that it is the transmission rate, and not the R number, that depends on behavioral changes.

The agent-based model shows the transmission rate to depend on the average number contacts

multiplied by individual-specific susceptibility to become infected which in turn depends on average

duration of contacts, wearing of face masks, and other recommended precautions. Accordingly, in

our empirical analysis we assume that a country's time-varying country-specific transmission rate

depends on three factors. Consistent with a simple decision theoretic model presented in the

paper and a large body of empirical evidence, we distinguish between government-mandated social

distancing policies and voluntary self-isolation. We also control for government economic support

that affects the incentive to comply as reported in survey data (e.g., Papageorge et al., 2021;

Hamermesh, 2020). To measure mandated-social distancing and incentives to comply with these

policies we use the stringency and support indices compiled by Oxford COVID-19 Government

Response Tracker project.3 To assess the impact of voluntary social distancing, we allow for a

threshold effect capturing the impact of fear of becoming infected arising from news of rising cases
  3
      Available at https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/research/research-projects/coronavirus-government-response-tracker.



                                                         4
on individual precautionary behavior. The importance of these factors in controlling the effective

rate of transmission is jointly estimated within the context of the epidemic model, allowing for a

lag of two or three weeks between the policy or behavioral changes and the infection outcomes.

      We find that all three determinants of the transmission rate are statistically highly significant

and have the expected signs. However, consistent with the heterogeneity documented in the first

part of the empirical analysis, we also find that when we control for voluntary behavior by adding the

threshold effect, the magnitudes of estimated coefficients on stringency and compliance indicators

decline markedly. This is clear evidence suggesting that the role of mandatory policies might be

overestimated in studies that do not explicitly allow for voluntary self-isolation and herding. In

addition, our estimates suggest that voluntary social distancing alone would not have been sufficient

to bring the R number below one in Europe and to keep it there without substantial contributions

from herd immunity and/or mass vaccination.

      To summarize the main message, our empirical analysis shows that mandatory social distancing

is critical, as voluntary social distancing alone does not seem capable of bringing the reproduction

number below one. Draconian mandatory social distancing, as in the case of China, can succeed.

However, in light of the economic and social costs of such an approach, other countries attempted to

pursue alternative strategies. As a result, epidemic curves show a great deal of heterogeneity. They

show that protracted, albeit not full, China-style lock-downs alone are not sufficient to contain

the epidemic, although they are a necessary ingredient of a policy response aimed at bringing the

effective reproduction number below one. Similarly, it does not seem plausible for voluntary social

distancing to do the job on its own, without relying on herd immunity and/or mass vaccination.


Related Literature A very large body of research investigates the COVID-19 outbreak and the

policies to contain its spread.4 For example, Fang, Wang, and Yang (2020) analyze efforts to

contain the COVID-19 outbreak in China, measuring the effectiveness of the lock-down of Wuhan

and showing that these policies also contributed significantly to reducing the total number of

infections also outside of Wuhan. Similarly, there is ample reduced form evidence on the impact
  4
     See Brodeur et al. (2020), Gupta, Simon, and Wing (2020), and Avery et al. (2020) for surveys of the early
literature through the end 2020.



                                                      5
of mandatory social distancing using state and county level data in the case of the United States,

and for a few other countries. However, there are not many studies on the relative importance of

mandatory and voluntary social distancing, especially for large cross sections of countries.

       Caselli et al. (2020) find that both lock-downs and voluntary social distancing helped contain the

first wave of COVID-19, but mandatory interventions have been critical. Jinjarak et al. (2020) find

that more stringent policies are associated with lower mortality growth rates in a large cross section

of countries but with some heterogeneity depending on demographics, the degree of urbanization

and political freedom, as well as the international travel flows. In general, however, countries with

more stringent policies at the onset of the epidemic realized lower peak mortality rates and exhibited

lower duration during the first epidemic wave. We distinguish not only between mandatory and

voluntary social distancing, but also consider the role of herd immunity in lowering the reproduction

number. To our knowledge, no study which considers voluntary or government-mandated social

distancing also controls for the possibility of herd immunity and distinguishes its impacts on effective

reproduction numbers from the influence of policy and/or behavioral factors.

       A number of studies consider the effects of different intervention strategies ­ such as isolating the

elderly, closing schools and/or workplaces, and alternating work/school schedules ­ which should

lower the average number of contacts of specific age groups, contact locations, or time windows rel-

ative to normal (pre-COVID) patterns using calibrated behavioral SIR or compartmental models.5

We take an empirical/econometrics approach calibrating only the recovery rate,  ; a parameter on

which we have much more precise clinical information.

       Various methods are available in the epidemiological literature to estimate the reproduction

numbers at the beginning and/or in real time during epidemics, but there is no uniform framework.

Estimation approaches that are data-driven and which involve simplifying assumptions include

the use of the number of susceptibles at endemic equilibrium, the average age at infection, the

final size equation, and calculation from the intrinsic growth rate of the number of infections

(Heffernan, Smith, and Wahl 2005). Estimation of reproduction numbers based on different models
   5
    See for example Acemoglu et al. (2020), Akbarpour et al. (2020), Atkeson, Kopecky, and Zha (2020b),Cakmakli,
Demiralp, Kalemli-Ozcan, Yesiltas, and Yildirim (2021), Cakmakli, Demiralp, Kalemli-Ozcan, Yesiltas, and Yildirim
(2020), Matrajt and Leung (2020), Toda (2020), and Chudik, Pesaran, and Rebucci (2020) among many others.



                                                       6
are reviewed by Chowell and Nishiura (2008), Obadia, Haneef, and Bo¨
                                                                   elle (2012), and Nikbakht

et al. (2019). More recent contributions, focusing on estimation of reproduction numbers for the

COVID-19 pandemic based on death statistics include Atkeson, Kopecky, and Zha (2020b), Baqaee

et al. (2020), Korolev (2020) and Toda (2020).

   Three closely related papers are Fern´
                                        andez-Villaverde and Jones (2020), Atkeson, Kopecky, and

Zha (2020a), and Cakmakli and Simsek (2020). Fern´
                                                 andez-Villaverde and Jones (2020) estimate

transmission rates ( t / ) for many jurisdictions as we do based on the number of observed deaths

to infer the number of infections. The rationale is that confirmed infections are subject to signifi-

cant measurement errors due to limited testing. Our estimates require only case data and correct

for measurement errors due to under-reporting associated with testing capacity. Atkeson, Kopecky,

and Zha (2020a) report a set of stylized facts on death rates for a large cross section of countries and

conclude that mortality falls rather uniformly across countries within the first 20-30 days after the

first 25 cumulative deaths and remain low through the summer of 2020. As the paper notes, this

implies that both the effective reproduction numbers and the transmission rates of COVID-19 fall

uniformly from high and heterogeneous initial levels and remain relatively low thereafter. We doc-

ument much more heterogeneity during both the first and subsequent waves. Cakmakli and Simsek

(2020) estimate a Susceptible-Infected-Recovery-Death (SIRD) model allowing for unreported cases

as we do for six large countries. But as noted above, our method of moment estimation only uses

the number of infected cases and does not use data on removed (recoveries plus deaths) that are

particularity unreliable.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses our SIR model with social

distancing. Section 3 discusses the econometric estimation based on a moment condition derived

from an agent-based model. Section 4 reports our estimates of the reproduction number for a

selection of key countries and regions worldwide. Section 5 analyzes the relative importance of

mandatory and voluntary social distancing. Section 6 concludes. An online appendix reports

technical details and supplemental results.




                                                   7
2     SIR model with social distancing

There are many approaches to modelling the spread of epidemics. The basic mathematical model

widely used by researchers is the susceptible-infective-removed (SIR) model advanced by Kermack

and McKendrick (1927). This model and its various extensions have been the subject of a vast

number of studies, and have been applied extensively to investigate the spread of COVID-19. A

comprehensive treatment is provided by Diekmann and Heesterbeek (2000) with further contribu-

tions by Metz (1978), Satsuma et al. (2004), Harko et al. (2014), Salje et al. (2016), amongst

many others.

    The basic SIR model considers a given population of fixed size n, composed of three distinct

groups, those individuals in period t who have not yet contracted the disease and are therefore

susceptible, denoted by St ; the `removed' individuals who can no longer contract the disease,

consisting of recovered and deceased, denoted by Rt ; and those who remain infected at time t and

denoted by It . Thus,

                                           n = St + It + Rt .                                       (1)

As it stands, this is an accounting identity, and it is therefore sufficient to model two of the three

variables (St , It , and Rt ) to obtain the third as the remainder.

    The classic SIR model is deterministic. It is cast in the following set of difference equations (for

t = 1, 2, ..., T )


                                      St+1 - St = -St It ,                                          (2)

                                      It+1 - It = St It - It ,                                      (3)

                                     Rt+1 - Rt = It .                                               (4)


The parameter  is the rate of transmission, while  is the recovery rate. For a given non-zero

initial values S1 and I1 , and the parameter values for  and  , the evolution of the number of

infected and recovered individuals is deterministic and given by the recursive solution of (2)-(4) for

given initial values.


                                                   8
    The evolution of the epidemic crucially depends on the two key parameters  and  . It is easy

to see from equation (2)-(4) that, without any mitigating intervention, the epidemic will spread if

/ = R0 > 1 and will cease only after infecting (R0 - 1)/R0 of the population. The parameter

ratio / = R0 > 1 is referred to as the basic reproduction number, also defined in a stochastic

context as the expected number of secondary cases produced by a single infected individual in

a completely susceptible population. The terminal condition (R0 - 1)/R0 is the herd immunity

threshold. In the case of COVID-19, a number of different estimates have been suggested in the

literature, placing R0 somewhere in the range of 2.4 to 3.9.6 So, the classical SIR model predicts

that in the absence of intervention as much as 2/3 of the population could eventually become

infected before herd immunity is reached.

    Such an outcome would involve unbearable strain on national health care systems and a signifi-

cant loss of life. This well understood possibility triggered unparalleled mitigation and containment

interventions, first by China and South Korea, then Europe, the US and all other countries around

the world. Such interventions, which broadly speaking we refer to as "social distancing" include

case isolation, mandated face mask wearing, banning of gatherings, closures of schools and univer-

sities, and even local and national lock-downs; all aimed at slowing down the transmission rate of

the virus. It is clear that these policies, together with voluntary changes in behavior in response to

the epidemic, make it harder for the virus to transmit between individuals. One way to capture the

impact of social distancing in the above model is to allow the transmission rate parameter,  , to

be time-varying. In the remainder of the paper we will treat  as time-varying, whilst we assume

the recovery rate  is time invariant based on clinical evidence discussed below. We will refer to

 t / as the "effective transmission rate".

    Following Pesaran and Yang (2020), hereafter PY, the transmission rate  and its time-varying

version  t can be represented by  t =  t t , where  t is the individual vulnerability to infection

given contact (or exposure intensity) and t is the average contacts per day. Social distancing,
   6
     For example, using data from Wuhan, Wang et al. (2020) report a pre-intervention reproductive rate of 3.86;
Kucharski et al. (2020) estimate that, in China, the reproductive rate was 2.35 one week before travel restrictions
were imposed on Jan 23, 2020. Ferguson et al. (2020) made the baseline assumption of R0 = 2.4 and also examined
values of 2.0 and 2.6 based on fitting the early growth-rate of the epidemic in Wuhan by Li et al. (2020) and Riou
and Althaus (2020).



                                                        9
be it mandated and/or voluntary, can clearly influence both  t and/or t and will result in time

variation in the transmission rate.

   PY also show that the classic aggregate SIR model (2)-(4) with time-varying transmission rate

can be obtained as an approximation (for a large population n) to an individual-based stochastic

network model of epidemic, where individuals randomly interact with each other. Stochastic simu-

lation results obtained by PY also show that a single group model provides a good approximation

to a multi-group alternative. In PY's setting, the effective reproduction number is given by

                                          t           t
                                  Ret =        st =        (1 - ct ) ,                            (5)
                                                      

where  t / is the effective transmission rate, ct = (n - St )/n = 1 - st is the fraction of popula-

tion that have been infected (cumulation of new infected cases), and 1 - ct is the herd-immunity

component of Ret . In this setting, Ret is the expected number of secondary cases produced by one

infected individual in a population that includes both susceptible and non-susceptible individuals

at time t. It is also worth bearing in mind that at the outset of epidemic outbreak, assuming a fully

susceptible population, we have s0 = 1 (c0 = 0), which in turn ensures that Re0 =  0 / = R0 .

   As the epidemic evolves, the average number of secondary cases caused by a single infected

individual will vary over time as a result of decline in the number of susceptible individuals (due to

immunity or death) and/or changes in behavior due to social distancing. In our empirical analysis,

we provide country-specific estimates of Ret together with the effective transmission rate  t /

which permits assessing the influence of herding. In the last section of the paper, we estimate the

key determinants of  t across a number of European countries. Note that the herding component

of Ret , namely 1 - ct , is given and can not be affected by changes in mitigation policies.




                                                 10
3        Estimating time-varying transmission rates

In order to estimate country-specific time-varying transmission rates,  t , we utilize the following

aggregate (non-linear) moment condition derived from the agent-based stochastic model of PY:

                                           1 - ct+1
                                      Et            | it   = e- t it + O n-1 ,                                  (6)
                                            1 - ct

where it = It /n is the number of infected individuals (scaled by population), and the last term is

the approximation error in n, which we ignore since n is large. Here, it is important to note that

(in large populations as in our data) the transmission rate can change only if the biology of virus

changes (mutations), a vaccine is introduced, or people change behaviors voluntarily or due to policy

interventions. Transmission rate  t in (6) reflects all these factors. However, for most of our sample,

virus mutations are likely to be of secondary importance perhaps with the exception of the last few

weeks. Similarly, vaccinations did not start until late 2020 or early 2021 on all countries, with only

the United Kingdon and Israel making some progress in January 2021. Hence, we attribute the

change in the transmission rate in 2020 primarily to the change in behaviour. In other words, under

the identification assumptions of constant biology of the virus and no vaccinations, time variations

in  t are caused by interventions alone. In contrast, in January 2021 and in the subsequent months,

global roll-out of inoculations can be a gradually more important additional factor in reducing the

transmission rate. Moreover, mutations might also play a more significant role in the moths ahead.

        In estimating  t we face two data-related difficulties. The first difficulty is in obtaining data on

active cases, It = Ct - Rt , where Rt is the number of recoveries and/or dead. This is not straight-

forward because data on Rt either do not exist or are unreliable due to considerable measurement

difficulties. Consider for example Europe. The recorded data on recoveries are unavailable for

Spain and UK; they are of poor quality for France and Italy; and they are relatively close to our

estimated recovery for Austria and Germany. To overcome this problem, we use the SIR model's

recovery equation to impute data on recoveries based on the confirmed cases alone, assuming a

recovery rate  = 1/14. We obtain very similar results if we use  = 1/21.7 The choice  = 1/14
    7
        An alternative, pursued for example by Fern´
                                                   andez-Villaverde and Jones (2020), is to rely only on death data.



                                                           11
is consistent with the assumptions made in designing quarantine policies based on clinical evidence

and also used in calibrated behavioral epidemic models.8

    The second difficulty is with the measurement of confirmed cases, which are likely to be under-

reported, in part due to fact that a non-negligible portion (perhaps about a half) of the cases is

asymptomatic and therefore unlikely to be detected without large-scale testing. To mitigate the

problem of under-reporting, we follow the epidemiological literature (see, for example, Gibbons

et al., 2014) and assume that the magnitude of under-reporting is measured by the multiplication

factor (MF - the ratio of true cases to reported cases). Denoting the observed values of ct and it

by c
   ~t and ~
          it , we have

                                         ct = MF~
                                                ct and it = MF~
                                                              it .

Then the moment condition in terms of observed values (~
                                                       ct and ~
                                                              it ) can be written as

                                          1 - MF~
                                                ct+1
                                    Et               |~
                                                      it , c
                                                           ~t    = e- MF ~
                                                                         it
                                                                            .                                   (7)
                                           1 - MF c
                                                  ~t

We do not know the true M F . We allow for the multiplication factor to be larger than one. We

abstract from time variation in M F , and note that the magnitude of M F will not matter when only

a relatively small fraction of the population has been infected as is true currently for COVID-19

worldwide. Estimation results in PY suggest a M F value of about 5 for most countries, declining

slowly to about 2.5 towards the end of the sample. In figures reported below we use M F = 3

(a conservative value for the end of the sample, where herd immunity plays the most important

role). In the online Appendix, we compare these results with the ones obtained for M F = 5.

Estimates of the reproduction numbers are not sensitive to the choice of M F , whereas estimates of

the effective transmission rate can be sensitive to the choice of M F towards the end of the sample

in those countries where the reported share of infected population is relatively large. In our panel

estimation results for a sample of European countries in Section 5, we report estimates for M F = 3
While some countries might have good death statistics, using COVID-19 death data pose challenges similar to those
raised by cases. The use of death data also has the added disadvantage of being a lagging indicator and could differ
across countries due to factors such as age composition, obesity, and the quality of care system.
   8
     See, for example, the medical evidence documented in Ferguson et al. (2020) which implies a value for  in the
range 0.048 to 0.071. Our results are robust to assuming  = 1/21.



                                                        12
and 5, but the panel estimation results are very similar also for M F = 2 and 7.9

        One additional challenge is that the reported daily data are subject to weekly distortions (e.g.,

the reported number of cases on Sundays is usually lower compared with the infected cases reported

for other days). To deal with this calendar distortion, as is common practice, we take seven-day

moving averages of the reported data used in estimation. But again we note that our results are

robust if we use reported daily cases without averaging. Using the moment condition (7), we

compute rolling-window estimates of the transmission rate as

                                                   t                                      2
                                                             1 - MF~
                                                                   c
                      ^ (W, MF) = Argmin
                       t                                               - e- MF ~
                                                                               i -1
                                                                                              ,              (8)
                                                            1 - MF~
                                                                  c -1
                                               =t-W +1


where W is the rolling window size, which we set to 14 days.

        To estimate  t following (8), we need observations on per capita infected and active cases,

ct and it . Using the recorded number of infected cases, Ct , and population data, ct is readily

available.10 Since It = Ct - Rt , we can obtain it if the number of removed (recovered) cases, Rt , is

available. For all countries we estimate the number of removed (including recoveries and deaths)

by Rt = (1 -  ) Rt-1 + Ct-1 , for t = 2, 3, ...., where the recovery rate  is set to 1/14, and the

process starts from R1 = 0, and reported C1 . We then compute It by subtracting the estimated Rt

from the recorded Ct .



4        COVID-19: A global pandemic with heterogeneous time-varying

         transmission

We are now ready to report our model estimates. In this section we report country-specific estimates

of the reproduction number, Ret . We refer to it below as simply the "R number". We plot it

alongside the effective transmission rate,  t × 14 =  t / , to separately assess the influence of
    9
      The data from the Diamond Princess cruise ship reported by Moriarty et al. (2020) suggest about half of the
COVID-19 cases are asymptomatic, and therefore M F =2 seems to be a good lower bound.
   10
      The COVID-19 data are sourced from the repository of the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE)
at Johns Hopkins University­available at https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19. The population data
(for year 2019) are obtained from the World Bank database, available at https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.
POP.TOTL.



                                                       13
herding from social distancing, for a large sample of countries. In the next section of the paper, we

will identify and estimate factors that contribute to the evolution of  t / , distinguishing between

voluntary and mandatory social distancing for a selected group of European countries that have

experienced similar starts to the outbreaks in March 2020, but with differing outcomes.

       While we estimate the two parameters of interest for all jurisdictions for which JHU reports case

statistics, in this section we report only the results for selected countries and regions.11 Figures

1-8 plot the results. Figure 1 reports results for China and the rest of the world. Figures 2-4 show

results by geographic regions (excluding China): the Northern and Southern Hemispheres (Figure

2) and all main regions of the world (Figures 3-4), including East Asia and Pacific, South Asia,

Eastern Europe and Central Asia, Western Europe, North America, Latin America and Caribbean,

Middle East and North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa. Figures 5-6 report results for selected large

economies. Finally, Figures 7-8 give results for the selected European economies also analyzed in

Section 5 below. The estimates of transmission rates and R-numbers for the regions are based on

aggregate region-specific case statistics rather than averages across country specific estimates.

       Each panel reports two sets of charts. The charts on the left-hand-side of the figures report the

seven-day moving average of the number of reported new infected cases per 100,000 population.

The charts on the right-hand-side report two lines. The solid (red) line is the estimated R-number,
^ et = (1 - ct )
R               ^ / . The dotted (blue) line is the effective transmission rate, ^ × 14 = ^ / . This
                 t                                                                t        t

is the variable that we model in Section 5. Recalling that the effective transmission rate, ^ / ,
                                                                                             t

               ^ et only when ct  0, but as the epidemic spreads more widely we have ct > 0,
coincides with R

herd immunity can eventually start to play a non-negligible role and manifests itself in later stages
                                               ^ et and 
of the epidemic with an increasing gap between R        ^ / , depending on the magnitude of ct .
                                                         t

Also, we expect ^ / to be in the range 0 to 3 (similarly to R
                                                            ^ et ), and R
                                                                        ^ et to be smaller or equal to
                 t

the effective transmission rate as the epidemic progresses. Thus the gap between the red and the

blue lines is a function of st = 1 - ct , the share of susceptible (not yet infected) population.

       We start by estimating the effective transmission rate, ^ / , and hence the R numbers, when
                                                                t

the seven-day moving average of new cases exceeds a threshold of 50 cases to ensure a reasonably
  11
    The full set of estimation results is available on the authors' websites (sites.google.com/site/alexanderchudik/,
pesaran.com, sites.google.com/site/alessandrorebucciphd/).


                                                         14
precise estimate of  t / . Note that at the early stages of the spread of the infection, when both ct

and it are close to zero, estimation of  t / becomes problematic as can be seen directly from (6).

In effect it involves computing the ratio of two very small numbers, each subject to sampling errors.

Note also that, since some countries (in particular China) were able to virtually eradicate the virus

in some sub-periods, there will be gaps in our charts reporting the R numbers. In addition, we
                                                                                         ^ et < 3
start to report estimated R numbers at the beginning of the sample from the day in which R

for the first time. This is to avoid showing widely varying estimated values in the initial days of

the epidemic driven by unusually large growth rates of new confirmed cases, which could reflect

delays in reporting the number of infected cases.


4.1     China and the rest of the world

4.1.1    China

China experienced a large first wave followed by a few small and localized outbreaks (Figure 1).

Two points are worth highlighting. First the R number comes down very fast, in less than a month

during the first wave. This is consistent with disaggregate evidence in Fang, Wang, and Yang

(2020) and also clinical evidence. Second, the effective reproduction number always coincides with

the effective transmission rate in the case of China, given the fact that only a very small fraction

of population has been infected. The number of infected cases in China is 90, 000 × M F out of a

population of 1.4 billion. This is a very small share even if we set M F to 20, which is at the upper

end of the estimates reported for M F across many countries and reviewed in the Introduction.

This confirms herd immunity had no role in the reduction of the effective reproduction number

in the case of China.12 When the epidemic resurfaces, the estimated effective transmission rate

increases sharply, but the extremely small number of cases permitted due to aggressive containment

strategies prevented any new large-scale spread of the virus. Note that under mandatory social
  12
    The effective reproduction number coincides with the effective transmission rate in most other Asian countries.
Nonetheless, even in Asia, we observe a great deal of heterogeneity in terms of the shape of the epidemic curve. Japan
and Indonesia fared better at the start of the pandemic, but did not avoid a large second wave. South Korea, in
contrast, had two waves, one in March 2020 and a second toward the end of 2020, possibly reflecting its decision to
avoid China-style mandatory social distancing, embracing a strategy revolving around testing and tracing with less
restrictive limits on mobility and interactions (results not reported but available from the authors).



                                                         15
distancing the population never reaches herd immunity. So infections recur if containment is relaxed

and the virus has not yet been fully eradicated. Figure 1 shows that China was successful not only

in containing the epidemic at the start of its outbreak, but has thus far also been able to eradicate

it quickly whenever it has re-surfaced through international travel. As we shall see, most other

countries have not been able to accomplish this.


4.1.2    The Rest of the World excluding China

The bottom panel of Figure 1 reports results for the rest of the world excluding China. As we

noted earlier, these estimates are based on aggregate cases, as opposed to averages of country

specific estimates. In the rest of the world, the COVID-19 epidemic started later than in China

and the R number comes down more slowly compared to China, never really falling below one until

the end of 2020. The R number increased from May to July 2020, and then again starting at the

end of August 2020. As a result, the pandemic's incidence was many, many times higher than in

China in terms of cases. Indeed, our estimation results show that even an R number slightly above

one can be devastating once the epidemic has spread widely. Overall, the rest of the world as a

whole never managed to eradicate the epidemic to an extent comparable to China. Not surprisingly,

as restrictions ease during the summer of 2020, the epidemic resurfaces and worsens dramatically.

Moreover, some of the decline in the R number is due to herd immunity, which is extremely costly

in terms of lives and, possibly, long term health consequences for the population.


4.2     Major World Regions

Comparing Northern and Southern Hemispheres reported in Figure 2, we see that climate has made

a difference to both the initial spread, which was faster in the northern winter, and the shape of the

epidemic curve, which was more persistent in the southern hemisphere. It does not, however, make

a significant difference in terms of the epidemic peak; the number of daily new confirmed cases

peaked about 10-12 per 100k population in the Northern Hemisphere, whereas the peak number of

new cases (per 100k population) was about 10 the Southern Hemisphere in January of 2021. In the

South, the R number declined more slowly, but eventually dropped below one for several months


                                                 16
in the middle of 2020. In both hemispheres, the estimates suggest that the COVID-19 transmission

rate was falling in February 2021.

      Figures 3-4 report the estimates at more regional levels of disaggregation.13 A stark difference

emerges between the epidemic peaks reported in the left charts. North America reached a peak of

70 new cases per 100k population. Western Europe together with Eastern Europe and Central Asia

experienced the second largest peaks at about 45-50 new cases per 100k population. Peaks in the

daily new cases in Latin America and Caribbean region are also quite sizeable, but considerably

smaller, staying below 20 new cases per 100k population. In contrast, the largest peak in the daily

new cases is only about 7 in Middle East and North Africa, about 5 in South Asia, and even smaller

peaks of less than 3 new cases per 100k population were achieved in East Asia and Pacific (excl.

China) and Sub-Saharan Africa.

      Large differences can be observed not only in terms of the magnitude of the peaks in new

infections, but also in the trajectory of the epidemic more broadly. South Asia experienced a

protracted single peak culminating in September 2021, which is reflected in the overall R number

not falling below one from the start of the epidemic until early in September 2020. By contrast,

Sub-Saharan Africa experienced two definite peaks (July 2020 and January 2021). North America

and Western Europe experienced three major waves. The first wave occurred in March/April in

both regions. After some significant community spread of the virus, containment policies were

enacted which helped to bring the R number below one in a very short period of time. In North

America, containment measures were relaxed quicker, and therefore the R number did not stay

below one for long, resulting in the second wave in the summer of 2020. By contrast, the R number

stayed below one for longer in Western Europe, until about mid-summer, when the virus began to

spread exponentially again, resulting in the second (and largest) European wave in the Fall. After

the new containment measures, R number declined again, but it did not stay below one for long,

resulting in the third wave of infections in January 2021 in both regions.

      Experience from the remaining regions is more atypical than one might expect from the epidemic

models. New cases in the Middle East and North Africa and, to some extent East Asia and Pacific
 13
      Table A1 in the online Appendix lists countries included in each region.



                                                          17
(excl China), exhibit a broad upward trend throughout 2020 with a number of local peaks; new

cases data for Latin America and Caribbean appear to be subject to much more noise compared

with any other regions, and there is an unusual jump in the daily new cases in Eastern Europe and

Central Asia, driven by the data for Turkey. R numbers closely reflect the first derivative of the

smoothed version of the new cases data in all regions; new cases subside when R falls below one

and increase when R is above one.

   The difference between the solid red lines (R numbers) and the dotted blue lines (effective

transmission rate) is virtually zero in the most successful regions in terms of the total number of

cases, such as Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, suggesting that herd immunity played no role

in these regions due to the relatively small number of overall infections. On the other hand, the

gap between the two lines is largest in North America, followed by Western Europe, showing that

herd immunity has started to contribute more meaningfully to mitigation of the epidemic in these

regions starting in December 2020.


4.3   Selected Large Countries

Clearly the trajectory of the epidemics has been quite heterogeneous across regions. In addition,

there are considerable differences across countries within each region, to which we now turn for

selected large countries. We report estimates for the United States, Brazil, India and Russia in

Figure 5, for South Africa, Australia, Iran and Turkey in Figure 6, and nine European countries in

Figures 7-8--Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Spain, and UK. The

selected countries include most of the G20 economies with the widest regional coverage globally.

   In contrast to China's and the rest of the world, the United States (reported in the top panel of

Figure 5) stands out for the largest gap between the effective reproduction number and the effective

transmission rate since the reopening of the economy in May 2020. The gap continues to widen

throughout the subsequent period, peaking at the end of the sample in February 2021. Only a

few other countries in the world, including the United Kingdom, Israel and some Latin American

countries, display a comparable contribution of herd immunity to the decline in the R number.

The US case also stands out because of the three very distinct waves, with the second and the third


                                                18
re-emerging after a brief fall of the R number below one. This led to a much higher number of

infections per 100,000 people compared to the rest of the world.

   Like the United States, Brazil's estimates also show visible gaps between the R number and the

effective transmission rate starting in mid-2020. The case count in Brazil is more volatile compared

to the United States and the remaining countries, possibly due to differences in the data quality

other than under-reporting controlled for with the multiplication factor. Unlike the US case, Brazil

brought down the R number more gradually, falling below one for the first time only during the

summer of 2020. This resulted in a protracted first wave that peaked in August. The R number

however did not remain below one for long, and in November a second large wave took off.

   India also experienced a protracted first wave. Estimates of the R number in India stayed above

one until late September. Nevertheless, India did not experience a large number of cases per 100k

population, compared with the remaining countries. As a result, herd immunity has not played a

role in India. Russia, by contrast, experienced two large waves. Similarly to the western countries,

Russia managed to bring the R number down relatively fast, but not permanently, resulting in a

larger second wave at the end of 2020.

   A two-wave epidemic trajectory is also observed in the case of South Africa and Australia (in

Figure 6), but with a different time profile. The first wave of the epidemic peaked in July 2020 in

South Africa as authorities were unable to bring the R number below one quickly enough. South

Africa, as the richest country in the region, stands out with much higher infection rates compared

to the rest of Africa. Australia, on the other hand, managed the virus very well. We can see two

small peaks, one in March and the second in July-August 2020, each followed by a rapid decline

in the R number well below one, each time almost eradicating the virus without any discernible

contribution from herd immunity.

   For the two major neighboring countries, Iran and Turkey in the Middle East (the bottom two

panels of Figure 6), the trajectories of the number of new cases differ markedly, with the outbreak

of the virus starting much earlier in Iran due to the close trading relations with China. The initial

spread in Iran began in late February 2020 and peaked in late March after the Iranian New Year

(20th March) and then declined slightly before starting to move up to its second peak in November


                                                 19
2020. By contrast, new cases in Turkey were detected in March and remained low for quite a few

months before rising dramatically to a peak of 165 per 100,000 in December 2020. The associated R

numbers for Iran and Turkey also show very different trajectories, with Turkey's R number hitting

the maximum value of 3 during the December 2020 peak.

    The estimation results for selected European countries are reported in Figures 7-8. We report

the same sample of countries as the one used in the next section for panel estimation of the

transmission rate determinants. The virus outbreak in continental Europe begins with Italy in

early 2020, with the recorded number of infections accelerating rapidly from February 21, 2020

onward. A rapid rise in infections takes place about one week later in Spain, Germany and France,

followed by Austria (not reported) at the end of February. As the rolling estimates show, the R

number fell below one in mid- to late-April in all these countries. As lock-downs were eased during

the summer, however, the transmission rates started to rise again. By the end of the 2020, the R

numbers were much more dispersed, with some countries doing better than others. However, all

large European countries reported in Figures 7-8 show a second wave much larger than the first

one. The United Kingdom, Spain, Portugal and Netherlands exhibit distinct third waves, with

larger case counts compared with their second-waves.

    In summary, only China and a few other countries have been successful in containing the

COVID-19 epidemic well. Contrary to common perception, however, not all countries accomplished

this with the same draconian mandatory social distancing as in China. So we now turn to explaining

the effective transmission rates to better understand the heterogeneity that we described, focusing

on selected European countries reported in Figures 7-8, all experiencing quite similar starting dates

and the initial wave of the epidemic, but quite differing subsequent trajectories.



5    Modelling the effective transmission rates in Europe

We saw earlier that the spread of the epidemic in Europe followed very similar patterns during

the first wave, but diverged significantly towards the end of 2020 both in terms of epidemic peaks,

level of effective reproduction numbers, and the importance of herd immunity in slowing down the



                                                 20
spread of the virus. It is well known that many factors can contribute to the realized evolution

of the epidemics, and particularly the effective reproduction numbers, Ret . Noting that Ret =

(1 - ct )  t / , in this section we develop a panel data model of the time evolution of  t across a

number of European countries jointly with ct in terms of three fundamental drivers: mandatory

and voluntary social distancing, as well as policy support that minimizes lack of compliance with

mandatory social distancing. For policy analysis, it is important that the herding component of

Ret be distinguished from the virus transmission component  t / , as it is the latter that can be

causally altered by mandatory and voluntary changes in social contacts. Recall here that based on

clinical evidence we set  = 1/14.

    Also as noted already, over our sample period, that covers the first ten months of the pan-

demic, the evolution of transmission rates across countries are primarily determined by changes in

behaviour (average contact numbers and exposure intensities per contact), with mutation playing a

secondary role, and vaccination only having a very small role in the case of a few countries towards

the end of our sample. Therefore, in explaining the cross country variations in  t in what follows

we shall focus on policy interventions and behavioural factors. Consistent with the simple decision

theoretic model presented below, as well as a large literature on behavioral epidemic modeling, we

consider three main factors: mandatory social distancing, economic incentives to comply with them

in the form of economic support, and the awareness and information about COVID-19 and its rate

of spread that can affect voluntary social distancing.

    Mandatory social distancing directly reduces the number contacts as well as the exposure in-

tensity. A strong theoretical rationale for imposition of mandated social distancing is the presence

of externalities, i.e. the fact that agents do not internalize in their cost-benefit analysis that their

individual behavior contributes to the aggregate diffusion of the epidemic.14 However, mandated

social distancing imposes economic costs and infringes on individual liberty leading to personal

inconveniences (Hamermesh, 2020).
  14
     See, for example, Bethune and Korinek (2020), Eichenbaum, Rebelo, and Trabandt (2020), and Beck and Wagner
(2020) in the international context. Eichenbaum, Rebelo, and Trabandt (2020), in particular, propose a behavioral
SIR-macro model in which susceptible workers and consumers react to the epidemic risk by reducing their labor
supply and consumption. Infected individuals take the aggregate infection process as given. As a result mandatory
social distancing is optimal even though it is extremely costly in economic terms.



                                                       21
   Economic support to workers, households and small businesses during the pandemic can shape

incentives of individuals to comply with mandatory social distancing, as it weakens the economic

need to interact in work activities. Consider an individual who has a non-teleworkable job and

is fired or furloughed. While this leads to an immediate loss of income, if economic support

is adequate, individuals can weather the pandemic without needing to seek paid employment in

exposed occupations continuing to interact in production activities. Lack of compliance with social

distancing has been documented empirically by Wright et al. (2020). Based on survey evidence,

Papageorge et al. (2021) find that higher income is associated with larger changes in self-protective

behavior, particularly for individuals who cannot telework. They conclude that, both in the United

States and elsewhere, policies which assume universal compliance with self-protective measures or

that otherwise do not account for socio-economic differences in the costs of doing so are unlikely

to be effective or sustainable.

   It is also well understood that risk induces precautionary behavior. Behavioral models of

COVID-19 diffusion show that, as the probability of getting infected rises, individuals lower con-

sumption and leisure activities to avoid infection (see Eichenbaum, Rebelo, and Trabandt (2020),

Toxvaerd (2020), Atkeson (2021), and Gupta, Simon, and Wing (2020)). In particular, Battiston

and Gamba (2020) provide cross section evidence that the R number during a COVID-19 outbreak

is lower the larger the size of the initial wave.


5.1   A simple decision-theoretic model of voluntary social distancing

To further clarify and motivate our empirical approach and to provide some theoretical rationale

behind our modelling strategy, here we introduce a simple decision-theoretic model of social dis-

tancing. Consider an individual j from a fixed population of size n in the epidemic day t, and

suppose the individual in question is faced with the voluntary decision of whether to isolate or

not. Under self-isolation, an individual that does not telework incurs the loss of wages net of any

COVID-19 economic support amounting to (1 -  jt )wjt , plus the inconvenience cost, ajt , of being

isolated, where wjt is the wage and  jt is the percentage of income lost which is compensated by

the government support. For those individuals who can work from home  jt is likely to be 1 or


                                                    22
very close to it. But for many workers who are furloughed or become unemployed,  jt is likely to

be close to zero, unless they are compensated by transfers from the government.

   On the other hand, if the individual decides not to self-isolate then he/she receives the uncertain

pay-off of (1-djt )wjt -djt jt , where djt is an indicator which takes the value of unity if the individual

contracts the disease and zero otherwise. The parameter jt represents the cost of contracting the

disease and is expected to be quite high. We are ruling out the possibility of death as an outcome

and also assume that if the individual does not isolate and get sick does not earn the wage.

   In this setting the individual decides to self-isolate if the sure loss of self-isolating is less than

the expected loss of not self-isolating, namely if


                         (1 -  jt ) wjt + ajt < E djt j - (1 - djt )wjt |It-1 ,                        (9)


where It-1 is the publicly available information that includes ct-1 , the total number of infections.

We assume that the probability of anyone contracting the disease is uniform across the population

and this is correctly perceived to be given by  t-1 . Hence E (djt |It-1 ) =  t-1 , and the condition

for self-isolating in any day t can be written as


                                 (2 -  jt )wjt + ajt <  t-1 (wjt + jt ),


or as
                                   2 -  jt + (ajt /wjt )
                                                         = µjt <  t-1 .                               (10)
                                      1 + jt /wjt

Since  t-1  1, then for individual j to self-isolate we must have µjt < 1 (note that µjt  0, with

µjt = 0 when jt  ) or if

                                     jt /wjt > ajt /wjt + (1 -  jt ).                                 (11)

   This condition clearly illustrates that an individual is more likely to self-isolate if the relative

cost of contracting the disease, jt /wjt , is higher than the inconvenience cost of self-isolating plus

the proportion of wages being lost due to self-isolation. Also, an individual is more likely to self-

isolate voluntarily if the wage loss, measured by  jt , is low thus providing an additional theoretical


                                                     23
argument in favor of compensating some workers for the loss of their wages, not only to main-

tain aggregate demand but also to encourage a larger fraction of the population to comply with

mandatory social distancing. The above formulation could also captures the differential incentive

to self-isolate across different age groups and sectors of economic activity. Given that the epidemic

affects the young and the old differently, with the old being more at risk as compared to the young,

then old > young , and the old are more likely to self-isolate. Similarly, low-wage earners are more

likely to self-isolate as compared to high-wage earners with the same preferences (jt and ajt ),

and facing the same transfer rates,  jt . But the reverse outcome could occur if low-wage earner

face a higher rate of transfer as compared to the high-wage earners. These and many other micro

predictions of the theory are embedded in this specification of voluntary social distancing decision.

      According to this simple model the fraction of population that are willing to socially isolate

voluntarily is given by
                                                  n
                                            -1
                                 pn,t = n               I (1 -  jt )wjt < jt - ajt   ,
                                                 j =1

where I (A) is an indicator function that takes the value of 1 if A holds and zero otherwise. It

is clear that the extent of voluntary social distancing, pn,t , is positively related to the size of the

economic support,  jt , and the perceived net cost of contracting the virus, jt - ajt , which could

rise sharply when epidemic surges and/or if better messaging by health authorities about the true

costs of contracting the disease is provided. To capture voluntary as well as mandatory social

distancing policies, in our statistical analyses we make use of data compiled by the Oxford COVID-

19 Government Response Tracker (OxCGRT) project, which is a standard source of comparable

indices measuring social distancing and other COVID-19 policies across countries.15 In particular,

we use two aggregate indices: the `policy stringency index' (capturing the containment and closure

policies) and the `economic support index' (as a proxy variable for support to comply with the

containment policies). We model precautionary behavior leading to voluntary social distancing

with a threshold effect explained in more detail below.
 15
      Data available at https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/research/research-projects/coronavirus-government-response-tracker.




                                                              24
5.2    Statistical model

The econometric specification that we propose is based on the same framework used in Section

4 for the estimation of the evolution of the R number. Namely, by taking logs on both sides of

equation (6) above and recalling that n is large, we obtain


                               ln [(1 - cj,t+1 )/(1 - cjt )] = - jt ijt + ej,t+1 ,                (12)


where the subscript j denotes individual countries, j = 1, 2, ..., N , and ej,t+1 is an error term,

assumed to be orthogonal to ijt . We complement the structural equation (12) with the following

specification for the transmission rate process


                               jt / = a +  xj,t-p + I (fj,t-p >  f ) + vjt ,                      (13)


where xj,t-p is a vector of regressors, lagged p periods, and the indicator variable, I (fj,t-p >  f ),

is an indicator variable which takes the value of unity if the threshold variable, fjt , also lagged p

periods, goes above the threshold parameter  f , which as a first-order approximation is assumed

to be the same across countries. The choice of the threshold variable, fjt , is discussed below. In

addition to estimating the panel regressions with a common constant term, a, we also check the

robustness of our results by estimating the panel with fixed-effects where we replace a in (13) with

country-specific intercept terms, aj , for j = 1, 2, ..., N .

    As a threshold variable, we use the 7-day moving average of the reported number of new cases

(per 100,000 people), denoted by fjt , as this is the most commonly watched variable used in the

media when reporting on the spread of COVID-19 worldwide. The idea for a threshold effect,

defined in terms of the number of new cases, is to capture possible non-linearities and changes in

people's willingness to isolate consistent with surveys on the role of information diffusion under

COVID-19 (Bursztyn et al., 2020).




                                                       25
   Substituting (13) in (12), we obtain the following estimating equation:

                        ln [(1 - cj,t+1 )/(1 - cjt )]
           yj,t+1 = -                                 = a +  xj,t-p + I (fj,t-p >  f ) + uj,t+1   (14)
                                    ijt

where uj,t+1 is the following composite error term:

                                                            et+1
                                       uj,t+1 = vjt -  -1          .
                                                             ijt

Depending on the assumptions regarding the error terms uj,t+1 , we will report three types of

standard errors for the estimates. First is the standard pooled (or fixed effects) standard errors,

which assumes uj,t+1 is cross-sectionally as well as serially uncorrelated. Our second reported

standard errors, labelled as "robust1", allows for serial correlation and heteroskedasticity, while

our third choice for standard errors, denoted as "robust2", allows uj,t+1 to be correlated both over

time as well as over countries (namely over both j and t dimensions). Further details are provided

in the online Appendix.

   The parameters of interest are a (or country-specific aj ),  , , and  f . Our regressors are

weakly exogenous and therefore the specification in equation (14) can be estimated by least squares,

since the time series dimension of the panel is very large (T = 321 to 343) and the cross-section

dimension is rather small (N = 9). This is in contrast to short panels (T small and N large),

where strict exogeneity is required for consistency of least squares method. Additional concern

with the specification could be omitted variables and the presence of other confounding factors.

The proposed specification (14) is parsimonious and encompasses the main factors considered in

the literature. As contacts and susceptibility are not separately identified in our model, we use

aggregate indices of mandatory, support, and voluntary distancing, and we do not attempt to

disentangle measures targeting the frequency of contacts or individual vulnerability.

   We estimate the parameters of interest jointly using (14), as opposed to using a two-step proce-

dure in which  jt is estimated from (12) first and its determinants are estimated as a second stage

regression from (13), using the estimated values of  jt as the dependent variable from the first

step. The advantage of estimating determinants of the transmission rate directly based on (14) is


                                                    26
that the joint approach allows us to obtain more precise estimates and hence make more accurate

inferences.

   We focus on the nine European countries discussed in Section 4: Belgium, France, Germany,

Italy, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Spain, and the United Kingdom­ so N = 9 is relatively small.

As we shall see, however, the time dimension of our panel is reasonably large (between 321 to 343

days), and we do not expect the relatively small N to be a problem for estimation and inference.

The reason for focusing on these 9 countries is the fact that they experienced a similar start to the

outbreak of the virus, but had differing outcomes subsequently. In this way we are able to exploit the

cross country, as well as time series variations in the case data to identify the effects of mandatory

and voluntary social distancing policies on the effective transmission rates,  jt / . Recall here that

 jt / differs from the effective reproduction number, Rj,et , given by Rj,et = (1 - cjt )  jt / . As we

noted earlier, Rj,et can fall below unity not because of the effectiveness of the mitigating policies,

but simply because an increasingly larger fraction of the population is getting infected, the so called

herd-immunity effect. To avoid the confounding effect of herding on the outcome variable that we

want to explain, we focus on modeling of  jt / and not Rj,et .


5.3   Empirical Results

Consider first the panel regressions without threshold effect:


                                    yj,t+1 = a +  xj,t-p + uj,t+1 ,                               (15)


where yj,t+1 is defined in (14) and j = 1, 2, ..., 9. The regressions are estimated with an unbalanced

panel over the period February 23, 2020 to January 30, 2021, allowing for differences in the start

dates of the outbreaks across the countries. The pooled estimates for this specification are reported

in Table 1. We report results for M F = 3 and M F = 5 (the multiplication factor used to correct for

under-reporting) and the lag orders p = 14 or p = 21 days. As can be seen, both the social distancing

policy index and the index of policy support have the expected signs, and are both statistically

highly significant. The results are robust to alternative MF corrections and lag lengths. Adding



                                                  27
fixed effects slightly lowers the coefficient on the stringency index and increases the coefficient of

the economic support indicator, but does not impact the overall conclusion. Using robust standard

errors increases the estimated standard errors, as to be expected, but these increases are not

sufficiently large to change the inference that we make. Both stringency and economic support

indices remain highly significant.

   Another issue that could impact the inference that we draw is the heterogeneity in the slope

coefficients across countries, namely the consequence of replacing  in (15) by  j . Table 2 reports

country-specific estimates of the coefficients of interest, as well as the associated Mean Group (MG)

estimates together with their standard errors as in Pesaran and Smith (1995). The MG estimates

are computed by taking simple averages of country-specific estimates, with their robust standard

errors proposed by Pesaran and Smith (1995). An important advantage of the MG estimates is their

robustness to slope heterogeneity, in which case MG is a consistent estimator of the average slopes.

An additional advantage of the MG estimates is the robustness to weak cross-sectional correlations

of the country-specific estimates (Chudik and Pesaran, 2019). The country-specific results continue

to provide strong support for both explanatory factors. The reported MG estimates in Table 2 are

all highly statistically significant and close to the fixed effect estimates in Table 1, which provide

further evidence of the robustness of our main results to slope heterogeneity.

   Table 3 adds the threshold variable to (15). The estimated threshold effects are also highly

statistically significant. Interestingly, the stringency and support indices now have smaller coef-

ficients, pointing to a possible upward bias in estimating the effectiveness of mandatory social

distancing policies if the voluntary mitigating effects, driven by better information dissemination

or the fear factor, are ignored. These results suggest that the role of mandatory policies might be

overestimated in studies that do not explicitly allow for voluntary changes in behavior.

   The estimated coefficients in Table 3 of our preferred specification that includes the threshold

effect predicts an R number of around 5.11 (0.16) without any changes in behavior, be it voluntary

and/or mandatory, with its standard error given in brackets. This is the reported estimated value

of the common intercept, , in Table 3, which is higher than the basic reproduction number of

3 - 4 assumed in the literature. In our earlier specifications that ignore the threshold effect in


                                                 28
Table 1, the estimated reproduction number lies in a range between 3.87 to 4.13 (see the common

intercept in Table 1). The contribution of the threshold effect to reducing the R number is quite

large, estimated in a tight range between -2.19 and -2.35, bringing the R number down from 5.11

to just below 3.16

       The contribution from the economic support index can also be interpreted as voluntary to the

extent to which it captures the working of incentives to comply with mandatory restrictions as

we discussed earlier. Our estimates of the contribution of the economic support to the change in

the R number range between -0.13 and -1.05, suggesting a high degree of heterogeneity across the

specifications in Table 3, in contrast to the coefficients estimated for the other variables, which lie

in a rather narrow range.17

       Together with the contribution from the threshold effect, the upper bound on the impact of

voluntary changes in behavior, therefore, is estimated to be reduced R numbers ranging from 1.7

to 2.8, which is still well above unity. Recall that we need to bring the R number below one before

we are confident in falling case numbers. Hence, our estimates suggest that voluntary behavior

alone is not sufficient to bring the R number below one without substantial contributions from

herd immunity.

       In contrast, the estimates of the coefficients of the stringency index lie in the narrow range

of -2.14 to -2.39 (see Table 3). We conclude from this exercise that mandatory social distancing

in conjunction with the effects from the voluntary social distancing can bring the R below one

without any additional help from the herding component. The estimates of the stringency index

coefficients in Tables 1 and 3 also show that omitting to control for voluntary behavior can lead to

overestimation of the impact of mandatory social distancing.

       Finally, given the highly infectious nature of COVID-19, with its basic reproduction number

estimated to be between 3 to 4, mandatory policies are likely to be effective if combined with mass

vaccination programs, and the present research should be viewed as an interim report on a complex
  16
     Interestingly, the threshold effect kicks in at relatively very low levels of infections. In particular, the estimated
threshold value is only 0.12 cases per 100,000 population.
  17
     Regarding the interpretation of the estimated coefficients of the stringency and economic support variables, we
note here that we have divided the 0-100 Oxford stringency and economic support indices by 100 so that our scaled
variables take values between 0 (no restrictions/economic support) and 1 (maximum restrictions/economic support
as defined by Hale et al., 2020).


                                                            29
continuously evolving process.



6    Conclusions

This paper makes two related contributions. It first estimates effective reproduction numbers for

all jurisdictions for which JHU reports COVID-19 statistics based on a moment condition that can

be derived from an agent-based stochastic network epidemic model. It then explains their evolution

distinguishing between herding, voluntary, mandatory social distancing and incentive to comply in

a group of European countries with similar experiences at the outset of the pandemic but different

outcomes subsequently.

    From a methodological perspective, the econometric framework that we propose permits distin-

guishing, at any jurisdictional level, between changes in the effective reproduction number due to

herd immunity and changes due to variation in the average contact or the susceptibility to infection,

which are the structural determinant of the epidemic diffusion. At the empirical level, using only

JHU daily COVID-19 case statistics, the paper provides estimates of transmission rates, allowing

for the under-reporting of infected cases in available COVID case statistics.

    Importantly, it is shown that while targeted mandated policies can be very useful in flattening

the epidemic curve, especially at the onset of the epidemic, they are not necessarily sufficient.

In some cases, countries with seemingly different social distancing policies achieved quite similar

outcomes in terms of number of infections and reproduction numbers. There are also a small

number of countries, for example Taiwan, Tanzania and Vietnam, that did not implement China's

draconian measures, yet have managed so far to accomplish similar low levels of infections and

transmission rates.

    Consistent with this result, when we turn to explain effective transmission rates in Europe we

find that all considered factors played a significant role: the stringency of the mandatory policies

implemented, the economic support and the threshold which captures the voluntary component

of social distancing. However, our estimates suggest that voluntary social distancing alone is not

sufficient to bring the R number below one and to keep it there without substantial contributions



                                                 30
from herd immunity. We also find that the role of the mandatory component, which is shown in

the literature (including this paper) to be critical in containing and controlling the rapid spread

of the virus, could be overestimated when voluntary mitigating drivers are neglected. Our main

conclusions are robust to lag orders, error heteroskedasticity, error serial correlation, fixed effects

and slope heterogeneity.


References
  Acemoglu, D., V. Chernozhukov, I. Werning, and M. D. Whinston (2020). Optimal targeted lockdowns in
     a multi-group SIR model. NBER Working Paper No. 27102.
  Akbarpour, M., C. Cook, A. Marzuoli, S. Mongey, A. Nagaraj, M. Saccarola, P. Tebaldi, S. Vasserman, and
     H. Yang (2020). Socioeconomic network heterogeneity and pandemic policy response. NBER Working
     Paper No. 27374.
  Atkeson, A. (2021). A parsimonious behavioral SEIR model of the 2020 COVID epidemic in the United
     States and the United Kingdom. NBER Working Paper No. 28434.
  Atkeson, A., K. Kopecky, and T. Zha (2020a). Four stylized facts about COVID-19. NBER Working Paper
     No. 27719.
  Atkeson, A., K. A. Kopecky, and T. A. Zha (2020b). Estimating and forecasting disease scenarios for
     COVID-19 with an SIR Model. NBER Working Paper No. 27335.
  Avery, C., W. Bossert, A. Clark, G. Ellison, and S. F. Ellison (2020). An economist's guide to epidemiology
     models of infectious disease. Journal of Economic Perspectives 34 (4), 79­104.
  Baqaee, D., E. Farhi, M. Mina, and J. H. Stock (2020). Policies for a second wave. Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity (forthcoming) .
  Battiston, P. and S. Gamba (2020). COVID-19: R0 is lower where outbreak is larger. Health Policy 125,
     141­147.
  Beck, T. and W. Wagner (2020). National containment policies and international cooperation. CEPR
     Discussion Paper No. DP14668.
  Bethune, Z. A. and A. Korinek (2020). Covid-19 infection externalities: Trading off lives vs. livelihoods.
     NBER Working Paper No. 27009.
  Brodeur, A., D. M. Gray, A. Islam, and S. Bhuiyan (2020). A literature review of the economics of
     COVID-19. IZA Discussion Paper No. 13411.
  Bursztyn, L., A. Rao, C. P. Roth, and D. H. Yanagizawa-Drott (2020). Misinformation during a pandemic.
     NBER Working Paper No. 27417.
  Cakmakli, C., S. Demiralp, S. Kalemli-Ozcan, S. Yesiltas, and M. Yildirim (2021). The economic case
     for global vaccinations: An epidemiological model with international production networks. NBER
     Working Paper No. 28395.




                                                    31
Cakmakli, C., S. Demiralp, S. Kalemli-Ozcan, S. Yesiltas, and M. A. Yildirim (2020). COVID-19 and
   emerging markets: An epidemiological model with international production networks and capital
   flows. IMF Working Paper No. 20/133.
Cakmakli, C. and Y. Simsek (2020). Bridging the COVID-19 data and the epidemiological model using
   time varying parameter SIRD model. Koc University-TUSIAD Economic Research Forum Working
   Paper No. 2013.
Caselli, F., F. Grigoli, W. Lian, and D. Sandri (2020). The great lockdown: dissecting the economic effects.
   International Monetary Fund. World Economic Outlook , 65­84.
Chowell, G. and H. Nishiura (2008). Quantifying the transmission potential of pandemic influenza. Physics
   of Life Reviews 5 (1), 50­77.
Chudik, A. and M. H. Pesaran (2019). Mean group estimation in presence of weakly cross-correlated
   estimators. Economics Letters 175, 101­105.
Chudik, A., M. H. Pesaran, and A. Rebucci (2020). Voluntary and mandatory social distancing: Evidence
   on COVID-19 exposure rates from Chinese provinces and selected countries. NBER Working Paper
   27039.
Diekmann, O. and J. Heesterbeek (2000). Mathematical Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases: Model Build-
   ing, Analysis and Interpretation. John Wiley & Son, New York, ISBN: 0471986828.
Eichenbaum, M. S., S. Rebelo, and M. Trabandt (2020). The macroeconomics of epidemics. NBER Working
   Paper No. 26882.
Fang, H., L. Wang, and Y. Yang (2020). Human mobility restrictions and the spread of the novel coron-
   avirus (2019-nCoV) in China. NBER Working Paper No. 26906.
Ferguson, N., P. Walker, C. Whittaker, and et al (2020). Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions
   (NPIs) to reduce COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand. Imperial College London COVID-19
   Reports, Report No. 9, 16 March 2020.
Fern´
    andez-Villaverde, J. and C. I. Jones (2020). Estimating and simulating a SIRD model of COVID-19
   for many countries, states, and cities. NBER working paper No. 27128.
Gibbons, C. L., M.-J. J. Mangen, D. Plass, and et al (2014). Measuring underreporting and under-
   ascertainment in infectious disease datasets: a comparison of methods. BMC Public Health 14:147,
   1471­2458.
Gupta, S., K. I. Simon, and C. Wing (2020). Mandated and voluntary social distancing during the covid-19
   epidemic: A review.
Hale, T., N. Angrist, T. Boby, E. Cameron-Blake, L. Hallas, B. Kira, S. Majumdar, A. Petherick,
   T. Phillips, H. Tatlow, and S. Webster (2020). Variation in government responses to COVID-19.
   University of Oxford, Blavatnik School Working Paper BSG-WP-2020/032, Version 10.0, December
   2020.
Hamermesh, D. S. (2020). Lock-downs, loneliness and life satisfaction. NBER Working Paper No. 27018.
Harko, T., F. S. Lobo, and M. Mak (2014). Exact analytical solutions of the Susceptible-Infected-Recovered
   (SIR) epidemic model and of the SIR model with equal death and birth rates. Applied Mathematics
   and Computation 236, 184­194.


                                                   32
Havers, F. P., C. Reed, T. Lim, J. M. Montgomery, J. D. Klena, A. J. Hall, A. M. Fry, D. L. Cannon,
   C.-F. Chiang, A. Gibbons, et al. (2020). Seroprevalence of antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 in 10 sites in
   the United States, March 23-May 12, 2020. JAMA Internal Medicine 180, 1576­1586.
Heffernan, J. M., R. J. Smith, and L. M. Wahl (2005). Perspectives on the basic reproductive ratio. Journal
    of the Royal Society Interface 2 (4), 281­293.
Jagodnik, K., F. Ray, F. M. Giorgi, and A. Lachmann (2020). Correcting under-reported COVID-19 case
   numbers: estimating the true scale of the pandemic. Preprint medRvix .
Jinjarak, Y., R. Ahmed, S. Nair-Desai, W. Xin, and J. Aizenman (2020). Accounting for global COVID-19
    diffusion patterns, January­April 2020. Economics of disasters and climate change 4 (3), 515­559.
Kermack, W. O. and A. G. McKendrick (1927). A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics.
   Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 22 (772), 700­721.
Korolev, I. (2020). Identification and estimation of the SEIRD epidemic model for COVID-19. Journal of
   Econometrics 220, 63­85.
Kucharski, A. J., T. W. Russell, C. Diamond, Y. Liu, J. Edmunds, S. Funk, and R. M. Eggo (2020). Early
   dynamics of transmission and control of COVID-19: A mathematical modelling study. The Lancet
   Infectious Diseases .
Li, Q., X. Guan, P. Wu, X. Wang, L. Zhou, Y. Tong, ..., and Z. Feng (2020). Early transmission dynamics
    in Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia. New England Journal of Medicine 382 (13),
    1199­1207.
Li, R., S. Pei, B. Chen, Y. Song, T. Zhang, W. Yang, and J. Shaman (2020). Substantial undocumented
    infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). Science 368 (6490),
    489­493.
Matrajt, L. and T. Leung (2020). Evaluating the effectiveness of social distancing interventions to delay
   or flatten the epidemic curve of coronavirus disease. Emerging Infectious Diseases 26 (8), 1740­1748.
Metz, J. A. J. (1978). The epidemic in a closed population with all susceptibles equally vulnerable; some
   results for large susceptible populations and small initial infections. Acta Biotheoretica 27, 75­123.
Moriarty, L., M. Plucinski, B. Marston, and et al. (2020). Public health responses to COVID-19 outbreaks
   on cruise ships - worldwide, February-March 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR),
   26 March 2020, 69:347-352.
Nikbakht, R., M. R. Baneshi, A. Bahrampour, and A. Hosseinnataj (2019). Comparison of methods to
   estimate basic reproduction number (R0) of influenza, using Canada 2009 and 2017-18 A (H1N1) data.
   Journal of Research in Medical Sciences 24, 24­67.
Obadia, T., R. Haneef, and P.-Y. Bo¨elle (2012). The R0 package: A toolbox to estimate reproduction
   numbers for epidemic outbreaks. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 12 (1), 1­9.
Papageorge, N. W., M. V. Zahn, M. Belot, E. Van den Broek-Altenburg, S. Choi, J. C. Jamison, and
   E. Tripodi (2021). Socio-demographic factors associated with self-protecting behavior during the
   Covid-19 pandemic. Journal of Population Economics 34, 691­738.
Pesaran, M. H. and R. Smith (1995). Estimating long-run relationships from dynamic heterogeneous
   panels. Journal of Econometrics 68 (1), 79­113.


                                                  33
Pesaran, M. H. and C. F. Yang (2020). Matching theory and evidence on COVID-19 using a stochastic
   network SIR model. CESifo Working Paper No. 8695.
Rahmandad, H., T. Y. Lim, and J. Sterman (2020). Behavioral dynamics of COVID-19: Estimating
   under-reporting, multiple waves, and adherence fatigue across 92 nations. System Dynamics Review
   (forthcoming) .
Riou, J. and C. L. Althaus (2020). Pattern of early human-to-human transmission of Wuhan 2019 novel
   coronavirus (2019-nCoV), December 2019 to January 2020. Eurosurveillance 25 (4).
Salje, H., D. A. Cummings, and J. Lessler (2016). Estimating infectious disease transmission distances
    using the overall distribution of cases. Epidemics 17, 10­18.
Satsuma, J., R. Willox, A. Ramani1, B. Grammaticos, and A. Carstea (2004). Extending the SIR epidemic
    model. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 336, 369­375.
Stock, J. H. (2020). Random testing is urgently needed. Manuscript,                     available   at:
   http://www.igmchicago.org/covid-19/random-testing-is-urgently-needed/.
Toda, A. A. (2020). Susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) dynamics of COVID-19 and economic impact.
   Preprint arXiv: 2003.11221.
Toxvaerd, F. (2020). Equilibrium social distancing. Cambridge Working Papers in Economics No. 2021,
   Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge.
Wang, C., L. Liu, X. Hao, H. Guo, Q. Wang, J. Huang, ..., and T. Wu (2020). Evolving epidemiology and
  impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 in Wuhan,
  China. medRxiv .
Wright, A. L., K. Sonin, J. Driscoll, and J. Wilson (2020). Poverty and economic dislocation reduce
   compliance with covid-19 shelter-in-place protocols. Journal of Economic Behavior Organization 180,
   544­554.




                                                34
        Figure 1: New cases (left) and R numbers (right) for China and the rest of the world

                                                              China
      0.35                                             0.35            3                                          3


       0.3                                             0.3
                                                                      2.5                                         2.5

      0.25                                             0.25
                                                                       2                                          2

       0.2                                             0.2
                                                                      1.5                                         1.5
      0.15                                             0.15

                                                                       1                                          1
       0.1                                             0.1

                                                                      0.5                                         0.5
      0.05                                             0.05


        0                                              0               0                                          0
             Feb 04
             Feb 18
             Mar 03
             Mar 17
             Mar 31




             Feb 02
             Feb 16
             Mar 02
             Mar 16




                                                                            Feb 04
                                                                            Feb 18
                                                                            Mar 03
                                                                            Mar 17
                                                                            Mar 31




                                                                            Feb 02
                                                                            Feb 16
                                                                            Mar 02
                                                                            Mar 16
             Apr 14
             Apr 28




             Aug 04
             Aug 18
             Sep 01
             Sep 15
             Sep 29
             Oct 13
             Oct 27




                                                                            Apr 14
                                                                            Apr 28
             Nov 10
             Nov 24
             Dec 08
             Dec 22




                                                                            Aug 04
                                                                            Aug 18
                                                                            Sep 01
                                                                            Sep 15
                                                                            Sep 29
                                                                            Oct 13
                                                                            Oct 27
             May 12
             May 26




                                                                            May 12
                                                                            May 26




                                                                            Nov 10
                                                                            Nov 24
                                                                            Dec 08
                                                                            Dec 22
              Jul 07
              Jul 21




                                                                             Jul 07
                                                                             Jul 21
             Jun 09
             Jun 23




             Jan 05
             Jan 19




                                                                            Jun 09
                                                                            Jun 23




                                                                            Jan 05
                                                                            Jan 19
                                          2020-2021                                                   2020-2021




                                                   World Excl. China
        14                                             14              3                                          3


        12                                             12
                                                                      2.5                                         2.5

        10                                             10

                                                                       2                                          2
         8                                             8


         6                                             6
                                                                      1.5                                         1.5

         4                                             4

                                                                       1                                          1
         2                                             2


         0                                             0              0.5                                         0.5
             Mar 23




             Feb 08
             Feb 22
             Mar 08




                                                                            Mar 23




                                                                            Feb 08
                                                                            Feb 22
                                                                            Mar 08
             Apr 06
             Apr 20




             Aug 10
             Aug 24
             Sep 07
             Sep 21
             Oct 05
             Oct 19




                                                                            Apr 06
                                                                            Apr 20
             Nov 02
             Nov 16
             Nov 30
             Dec 14
             Dec 28




                                                                            Aug 10
                                                                            Aug 24
                                                                            Sep 07
                                                                            Sep 21
                                                                            Oct 05
                                                                            Oct 19
             May 04
             May 18




                                                                            May 04
                                                                            May 18




                                                                            Nov 02
                                                                            Nov 16
                                                                            Nov 30
                                                                            Dec 14
                                                                            Dec 28
              Jul 13
              Jul 27




                                                                             Jul 13
                                                                             Jul 27
             Jun 01
             Jun 15
             Jun 29




             Jan 11
             Jan 25




                                                                            Jun 01
                                                                            Jun 15
                                                                            Jun 29




                                                                            Jan 11
                                                                            Jan 25
                                           2020-2021                                                  2020-2021




Notes: The figure plots a seven-day moving average of the number of reported new cases per 100k population (left
charts), the R number, R^ et (right charts, solid red line), and the effective transmission rate, ^ × 14 = ^ / (right
                                                                                                t            t
                           ^ et = (1 - MF~
charts, dotted blue line). R             ct ) ^ / , where  = 1/14, and MF=3 for each country. ^ is estimated using
                                               t                                               t
(8), where the number of active infections is computed using the data on confirmed cases minus imputed removed
cases. The number of removed (recoveries + deaths) is imputed recursively using Rt = (1 -  ) Rt-1 + Ct-1 for all
countries.




                                                               35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 25                                                                           Mar 23
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 08                                                                           Apr 06
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 22                                                                           Apr 20
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 06                                                                           May 04
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 20                                                                           May 18
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 03                                                                           Jun 01
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 17                                                                           Jun 15
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 01                                                                          Jun 29
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 15                                                                           Jul 13
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 29                                                                           Jul 27
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 12                                                                           Aug 10




                                                         charts), the R number, R
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 26                                                                           Aug 24
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 09                                                                           Sep 07
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 23                                                                           Sep 21
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 07                                                                           Oct 05
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 21                                                                           Oct 19
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 04                                                                           Nov 02
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 18                                                                           Nov 16
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 02                                                                           Nov 30
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 16                                                                           Dec 14
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 30                                                                           Dec 28
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 13                                                                           Jan 11
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 27                                                                           Jan 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 10                                                                           Feb 08




     charts, dotted blue line). See notes to Figure 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 24                                                                           Feb 22




                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 10                                                                           Mar 08




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14




36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               South Hemisphere




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3




                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 25                                                                           Mar 23
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 08                                                                           Apr 06
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 22                                                                           Apr 20
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 06                                                                           May 04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     North Hemisphere Excl. China




                                                                                                                                                                                             May 20                                                                           May 18
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 03                                                                           Jun 01
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 17                                                                           Jun 15
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 01                                                                          Jun 29
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 15                                                                           Jul 13
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 29                                                                           Jul 27
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 12                                                                           Aug 10
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 26                                                                           Aug 24
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 09                                                                           Sep 07
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 23                                                                           Sep 21
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 07                                                                           Oct 05
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 21                                                                           Oct 19
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 04                                                                           Nov 02
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 18                                                                           Nov 16




                                                                                 ^ et (right charts, solid red line), and the effective transmission rate, 
                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 02                                                                           Nov 30
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 16                                                                           Dec 14
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 30                                                                           Dec 28
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 13                                                                           Jan 11
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 27                                                                           Jan 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 10                                                                           Feb 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 24                                                                           Feb 22




                                                                                                                                                           ^ × 14 = 
                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2020-2021




                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 10                                                                           Mar 08
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5




                                                         Notes: The figure plots a seven-day moving average of the number of reported new cases per 100k population (left
                                                                                                                                                                    ^ / (right
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 2: New cases (left) and R numbers (right) for North and South Hemispheres (excl. China).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  50




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 26                                                                                                 Apr 01                                                                                              Mar 20                                                                                      Mar 29
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 09                                                                                                 Apr 15                                                                                              Apr 03                                                                                      Apr 12
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 23                                                                                                 Apr 29                                                                                              Apr 17                                                                                      Apr 26
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 07                                                                                                 May 13                                                                                              May 01                                                                                      May 10
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 21                                                                                                 May 27                                                                                              May 15                                                                                      May 24
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 04                                                                                                 Jun 10                                                                                              May 29                                                                                      Jun 07
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 18                                                                                                 Jun 24                                                                                              Jun 12                                                                                      Jun 21
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 02                                                                                                 Jul 08                                                                                             Jun 26                                                                                       Jul 05
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 16                                                                                                 Jul 22                                                                                              Jul 10                                                                                      Jul 19
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 30                                                                                                Aug 05                                                                                               Jul 24                                                                                     Aug 02
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 13                                                                                                 Aug 19                                                                                              Aug 07                                                                                      Aug 16




                                                         charts), the R number, R
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 27                                                                                                 Sep 02                                                                                              Aug 21                                                                                      Aug 30
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 10                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sep 04                                                                                      Sep 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sep 16
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 24                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sep 18                                                                                      Sep 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sep 30
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 08                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct 02                                                                                      Oct 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct 14
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 22                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct 16                                                                                      Oct 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct 28
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 05                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct 30                                                                                      Nov 08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nov 11
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 19                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nov 13                                                                                      Nov 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nov 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 03                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nov 27                                                                                      Dec 06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 09                                                                                              Dec 11
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 23                                                                                              Dec 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 31                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan 03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan 06                                                                                              Jan 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan 20                                                                                              Jan 22
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 28                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan 31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feb 03                                                                                              Feb 05
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Feb 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feb 17                                                                                              Feb 19




     charts, dotted blue line). See notes to Figure 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Feb 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mar 03




                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mar 05                                                                                      Mar 14
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mar 17                                                                                              Mar 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  50




37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    North America




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Western Europe




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3




                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 26                                                                                                 Apr 01                                                                                              Mar 20                                                                                      Mar 29
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 09                                                                                                 Apr 15                                                                                              Apr 03                                                                                      Apr 12
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 23                                                                                                 Apr 29                                                                                              Apr 17                                                                                      Apr 26




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Latin America and Caribbean
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 07                                                                                                 May 13                                                                                              May 01                                                                                      May 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Eastern Europe and Central Asia
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 21                                                                                                 May 27                                                                                              May 15                                                                                      May 24
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 04                                                                                                 Jun 10                                                                                              May 29                                                                                      Jun 07
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 18                                                                                                 Jun 24                                                                                              Jun 12                                                                                      Jun 21
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 02                                                                                                 Jul 08                                                                                             Jun 26                                                                                       Jul 05
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 16                                                                                                 Jul 22                                                                                              Jul 10                                                                                      Jul 19
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 30                                                                                                Aug 05                                                                                               Jul 24                                                                                     Aug 02
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 13                                                                                                 Aug 19                                                                                              Aug 07                                                                                      Aug 16
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 27                                                                                                 Sep 02                                                                                              Aug 21                                                                                      Aug 30
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 10                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sep 04                                                                                      Sep 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sep 16
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 24                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sep 18                                                                                      Sep 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sep 30
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 08                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct 02                                                                                      Oct 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct 14
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 22                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct 16                                                                                      Oct 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct 28
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 05                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nov 11                                                                                                                                                                                          Nov 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 19                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nov 13




                                                                                 ^ et (right charts, solid red line), and the effective transmission rate, 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nov 25                                                                                                                                                                                          Nov 22




                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 03                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nov 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 09                                                                                                                                                                                          Dec 06
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 17                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dec 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 23                                                                                                                                                                                          Dec 20
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 31                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dec 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan 06                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan 03
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 14                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan 08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan 20                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan 17
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 28                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feb 03                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan 31
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 11                                                                                                                                                                                                     Feb 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feb 17                                                                                                                                                                                          Feb 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 3: New cases (left) and R numbers (right) for selected geographic regions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Feb 19




                                                                                                                                                           ^ × 14 = 
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Feb 28




                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mar 03




                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mar 05
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mar 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mar 17                                                                                              Mar 19




                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.5




                                                         Notes: The figure plots a seven-day moving average of the number of reported new cases per 100k population (left
                                                                                                                                                                    ^ / (right
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 25                                                                                 Mar 01                                                                                                  Mar 21                                                                   Mar 07
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 08                                                                                 Mar 15                                                                                                  Apr 04                                                                   Mar 21
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 22                                                                                 Mar 29                                                                                                  Apr 18                                                                   Apr 04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Apr 12                                                                                                                                                                           Apr 18
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 06                                                                                                                                                                                         May 02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Apr 26                                                                                                                                                                           May 02
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 20                                                                                                                                                                                         May 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    May 10                                                                                                                                                                           May 16
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 03                                                                                                                                                                                         May 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    May 24                                                                                                                                                                           May 30
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 17                                                                                 Jun 07                                                                                                  Jun 13
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 01                                                                                                                                                                                        Jun 27                                                                   Jun 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jun 21                                                                                                                                                                           Jun 27
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 15                                                                                 Jul 05                                                                                                  Jul 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jul 25                                                                   Jul 11
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 29                                                                                 Jul 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Aug 08                                                                    Jul 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 12                                                                                 Aug 02




                                                         charts), the R number, R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Aug 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 26                                                                                 Aug 16                                                                                                  Aug 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Aug 22
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 09                                                                                 Aug 30                                                                                                  Sep 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sep 05
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 23                                                                                 Sep 13                                                                                                  Sep 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sep 19
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 07                                                                                 Sep 27                                                                                                  Oct 03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct 03
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 21                                                                                 Oct 11                                                                                                  Oct 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct 17
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 04                                                                                 Oct 25                                                                                                  Oct 31                                                                   Oct 31
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 18                                                                                 Nov 08                                                                                                  Nov 14                                                                   Nov 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nov 22                                                                                                  Nov 28
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 02                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Nov 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 06                                                                                                  Dec 12
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 16                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dec 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 20                                                                                                  Dec 26
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 30                                                                                 Jan 03                                                                                                                                                                           Dec 26
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 13                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan 09                                                                   Jan 09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan 17
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 27                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan 23                                                                   Jan 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan 31
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 10                                                                                                                                                                                         Feb 06                                                                   Feb 06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feb 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Feb 20




     charts, dotted blue line). See notes to Figure 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 24                                                                                 Feb 28                                                                                                                                                                           Feb 20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 10                                                                                 Mar 14                                                                                                  Mar 06                                                                   Mar 06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5




38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            South Asia




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 25                                                                                 Apr 01                                                                                                  Mar 21                                                                   Mar 07
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 08                                                                                 Apr 15                                                                                                  Apr 04                                                                   Mar 21
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 22                                                                                 Apr 29                                                                                                  Apr 18                                                                   Apr 04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Middle East and North Africa




                                                                                                                                                                                             May 06                                                                                 May 13                                                                                                  May 02                                                                   Apr 18
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 20                                                                                 May 27                                                                                                  May 16                                                                   May 02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          East Asia and Pacific (Excl. China)
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 03                                                                                 Jun 10                                                                                                  May 30                                                                   May 16
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 17                                                                                                                                                                                         Jun 13                                                                   May 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jun 24
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 01                                                                                                                                                                                        Jun 27                                                                   Jun 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jul 08
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 15                                                                                                                                                                                         Jul 11                                                                  Jun 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jul 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jul 25                                                                   Jul 11
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 29                                                                                Aug 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Aug 08                                                                    Jul 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 12                                                                                 Aug 19                                                                                                                                                                           Aug 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 26                                                                                 Sep 02                                                                                                  Aug 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Aug 22
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 09                                                                                 Sep 16                                                                                                  Sep 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sep 05
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 23                                                                                                                                                                                         Sep 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sep 30                                                                                                                                                                           Sep 19
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 07                                                                                                                                                                                         Oct 03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct 14                                                                                                                                                                           Oct 03
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 21                                                                                                                                                                                         Oct 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct 28                                                                                                                                                                           Oct 17
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 04                                                                                                                                                                                         Oct 31                                                                   Oct 31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nov 11
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 18                                                                                                                                                                                         Nov 14




                                                                                 ^ et (right charts, solid red line), and the effective transmission rate, 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nov 25                                                                                                                                                                           Nov 14




                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 02                                                                                                                                                                                         Nov 28                                                                   Nov 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 09
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 16                                                                                                                                                                                         Dec 12                                                                   Dec 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 23
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 30                                                                                                                                                                                         Dec 26                                                                   Dec 26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan 06                                                                                                  Jan 09
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan 09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan 20                                                                                                  Jan 23
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 27                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feb 03                                                                                                  Feb 06
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Feb 06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feb 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 4: New cases (left) and R numbers (right) for selected geographic regions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Feb 20                                                                   Feb 20




                                                                                                                                                           ^ × 14 = 
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 24




                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mar 03




                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 10                                                                                                                                                                                         Mar 06                                                                   Mar 06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mar 17




                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2.5




                                                         Notes: The figure plots a seven-day moving average of the number of reported new cases per 100k population (left
                                                                                                                                                                    ^ / (right
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 14                                                                            Apr 06                                                                  Mar 29                                                                         Mar 29
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 28                                                                            Apr 20                                                                  Apr 12                                                                         Apr 12
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 12                                                                            May 04                                                                  Apr 26                                                                         Apr 26
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 26                                                                            May 18                                                                  May 10                                                                         May 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jun 01                                                                  May 24                                                                         May 24
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jun 15                                                                  Jun 07                                                                         Jun 07
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jun 29                                                                  Jun 21                                                                         Jun 21
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jul 05                                                                         Jul 05
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 21                                                                            Jul 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jul 19                                                                         Jul 19
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 04                                                                             Jul 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Aug 02                                                                         Aug 02
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 18                                                                            Aug 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Aug 16                                                                         Aug 16




                                                         charts), the R number, R
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 01                                                                            Aug 24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Aug 30                                                                         Aug 30
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 15                                                                            Sep 07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sep 13                                                                         Sep 13
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 29                                                                            Sep 21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sep 27                                                                         Sep 27
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 13                                                                            Oct 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oct 11                                                                         Oct 11
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 27                                                                            Oct 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oct 25                                                                         Oct 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 10                                                                            Nov 02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Nov 08                                                                         Nov 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 24                                                                            Nov 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Nov 22                                                                         Nov 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Nov 30                                                                  Dec 06                                                                         Dec 06
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dec 14                                                                  Dec 20                                                                         Dec 20
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dec 28                                                                  Jan 03                                                                         Jan 03
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan 11                                                                  Jan 17                                                                         Jan 17
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan 25                                                                  Jan 31                                                                         Jan 31
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Feb 08                                                                  Feb 14                                                                         Feb 14
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 16




     charts, dotted blue line). See notes to Figure 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Feb 22                                                                  Feb 28                                                                         Feb 28




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2020-2021

                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 02




                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mar 08                                                                  Mar 14                                                                         Mar 14
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      US




39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   India
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Brazil




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Russia




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3




                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 14                                                                            Apr 06                                                                  Mar 29                                                                         Mar 29
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 28                                                                            Apr 20                                                                  Apr 12                                                                         Apr 12
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 12                                                                            May 04                                                                  Apr 26                                                                         Apr 26
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 26                                                                            May 18                                                                  May 10                                                                         May 10
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 09                                                                            Jun 01                                                                  May 24                                                                         May 24
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 23                                                                            Jun 15                                                                  Jun 07                                                                         Jun 07
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 07                                                                           Jun 29                                                                  Jun 21                                                                         Jun 21
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 21                                                                            Jul 13                                                                  Jul 05                                                                         Jul 05
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 04                                                                             Jul 27                                                                  Jul 19                                                                         Jul 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Aug 10                                                                  Aug 02                                                                         Aug 02
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Aug 24                                                                  Aug 16                                                                         Aug 16
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sep 07                                                                  Aug 30                                                                         Aug 30
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sep 21                                                                  Sep 13                                                                         Sep 13
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Oct 05                                                                  Sep 27                                                                         Sep 27
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 13                                                                                                                                                    Oct 11                                                                         Oct 11
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 27                                                                            Oct 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Nov 02                                                                  Oct 25                                                                         Oct 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 10                                                                                                                                                    Nov 08                                                                         Nov 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 24                                                                            Nov 16




                                                                                 ^ et (right charts, solid red line), and the effective transmission rate, 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Nov 22                                                                         Nov 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Nov 30




                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 08                                                                                                                                                    Dec 06                                                                         Dec 06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dec 14
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 22                                                                                                                                                    Dec 20                                                                         Dec 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dec 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 5: New cases (left) and R numbers (right) for selected countries




                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 05                                                                                                                                                    Jan 03                                                                         Jan 03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan 11
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 19                                                                                                                                                    Jan 17                                                                         Jan 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 02                                                                                                                                                    Jan 31                                                                         Jan 31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Feb 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 16                                                                                                                                                    Feb 14                                                                         Feb 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Feb 22




                                                                                                                                                           ^ × 14 = 
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 02                                                                                                                                                    Feb 28                                                                         Feb 28




                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mar 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 16                                                                                                                                                    Mar 14                                                                         Mar 14




                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.5




                                                         Notes: The figure plots a seven-day moving average of the number of reported new cases per 100k population (left
                                                                                                                                                                    ^ / (right
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          35




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   140
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     180




                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            18




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 01                                                                                             Mar 07                                                                              Mar 24                                                                        Mar 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 15                                                                                             Mar 21                                                                              Apr 07                                                                        Apr 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 29                                                                                             Apr 04                                                                              Apr 21                                                                        Apr 22
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 13                                                                                             Apr 18                                                                              May 05                                                                        May 06
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 27                                                                                             May 02                                                                              May 19                                                                        May 20
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 10                                                                                             May 16                                                                              Jun 02                                                                        Jun 03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                May 30                                                                              Jun 16                                                                        Jun 17
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jun 13                                                                              Jun 30                                                                         Jul 01
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jun 27                                                                               Jul 14                                                                        Jul 15
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jul 11                                                                              Jul 28                                                                        Jul 29
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 05                                                                                              Jul 25                                                                             Aug 11                                                                        Aug 12
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 19




                                                         charts), the R number, R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug 08                                                                              Aug 25                                                                        Aug 26
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 02                                                                                             Aug 22                                                                              Sep 08                                                                        Sep 09
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 16                                                                                             Sep 05                                                                              Sep 22                                                                        Sep 23
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 30                                                                                             Sep 19                                                                              Oct 06                                                                        Oct 07
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 14                                                                                             Oct 03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct 20                                                                        Oct 21
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 28                                                                                             Oct 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nov 03                                                                        Nov 04
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 11                                                                                             Oct 31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nov 17                                                                        Nov 18
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 25                                                                                             Nov 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Nov 28                                                                              Dec 01                                                                        Dec 02
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 09                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec 12                                                                                                                                                            Dec 16
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 23                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec 29                                                                        Dec 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec 26
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 06                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan 12                                                                        Jan 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan 09
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 20                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan 26                                                                        Jan 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan 23
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 03                                                                                                                                                                                 Feb 09                                                                        Feb 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Feb 06
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 17                                                                                                                                                                                 Feb 23                                                                        Feb 24




     charts, dotted blue line). See notes to Figure 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Feb 20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2020-2021

                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 03




                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mar 06                                                                              Mar 09                                                                        Mar 10
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          35




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   140
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     180




40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Iran




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Turkey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Australia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               South Africa




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3




                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 01                                                                                             Mar 07                                                                              Mar 24                                                                        Mar 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 15                                                                                             Mar 21                                                                              Apr 07                                                                        Apr 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 29                                                                                             Apr 04                                                                              Apr 21                                                                        Apr 22
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 13                                                                                             Apr 18                                                                              May 05                                                                        May 06
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 27                                                                                             May 02                                                                              May 19                                                                        May 20
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 10                                                                                             May 16                                                                              Jun 02                                                                        Jun 03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                May 30                                                                              Jun 16                                                                        Jun 17
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jun 13                                                                              Jun 30                                                                         Jul 01
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jun 27                                                                               Jul 14                                                                        Jul 15
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jul 11
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 05                                                                                                                                                                                  Jul 28                                                                        Jul 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jul 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 19                                                                                                                                                                                 Aug 11                                                                        Aug 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 02                                                                                                                                                                                 Aug 25                                                                        Aug 26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug 22
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 16                                                                                                                                                                                 Sep 08                                                                        Sep 09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sep 05
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 30                                                                                             Sep 19                                                                              Sep 22                                                                        Sep 23
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 14                                                                                             Oct 03                                                                              Oct 06                                                                        Oct 07
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 28                                                                                             Oct 17                                                                              Oct 20                                                                        Oct 21
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 11                                                                                             Oct 31                                                                              Nov 03                                                                        Nov 04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nov 17                                                                        Nov 18




                                                                                 ^ et (right charts, solid red line), and the effective transmission rate, 
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 25                                                                                             Nov 14




                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Nov 28                                                                              Dec 01                                                                        Dec 02
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec 12                                                                              Dec 15                                                                        Dec 16
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec 26                                                                              Dec 29                                                                        Dec 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 6: New cases (left) and R numbers (right) for selected countries




                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan 09                                                                              Jan 12                                                                        Jan 13
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan 23                                                                              Jan 26                                                                        Jan 27
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Feb 06                                                                              Feb 09                                                                        Feb 10
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 17                                                                                             Feb 20




                                                                                                                                                           ^ × 14 = 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feb 23                                                                        Feb 24




                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 03




                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mar 06                                                                              Mar 09                                                                        Mar 10
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 17




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.5




                                                         Notes: The figure plots a seven-day moving average of the number of reported new cases per 100k population (left
                                                                                                                                                                    ^ / (right
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    140
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          160




                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 23                                                                                  Mar 15                                                         Mar 23                                                                             Mar 22                                                                                        Mar 27
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 06                                                                                  Mar 29                                                         Apr 06                                                                             Apr 05                                                                                        Apr 10
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 20                                                                                  Apr 12                                                         Apr 20                                                                             Apr 19                                                                                        Apr 24
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 04                                                                                  Apr 26                                                         May 04                                                                             May 03                                                                                        May 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 18                                                                                  May 10                                                         May 18                                                                             May 17                                                                                        May 22
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 01                                                                                  May 24                                                         Jun 01                                                                             May 31                                                                                        Jun 05
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 15                                                                                  Jun 07                                                         Jun 15                                                                             Jun 14                                                                                        Jun 19
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 29                                                                                  Jun 21                                                         Jun 29                                                                             Jun 28                                                                                         Jul 03
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 13                                                                                  Jul 05                                                         Jul 13                                                                             Jul 12                                                                                        Jul 17
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 27                                                                                  Jul 19                                                         Jul 27                                                                             Jul 26                                                                                        Jul 31
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 10                                                                                  Aug 02                                                         Aug 10                                                                             Aug 09                                                                                        Aug 14




                                                         charts), the R number, R
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 24                                                                                  Aug 16                                                         Aug 24                                                                             Aug 23                                                                                        Aug 28
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 07                                                                                  Aug 30                                                         Sep 07                                                                             Sep 06                                                                                        Sep 11
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 21                                                                                  Sep 13                                                         Sep 21                                                                             Sep 20                                                                                        Sep 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 05                                                                                  Sep 27                                                         Oct 05                                                                             Oct 04                                                                                        Oct 09
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 19                                                                                  Oct 11                                                         Oct 19                                                                             Oct 18                                                                                        Oct 23
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 02                                                                                  Oct 25                                                         Nov 02                                                                             Nov 01                                                                                        Nov 06
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 16                                                                                  Nov 08                                                         Nov 16                                                                             Nov 15                                                                                        Nov 20
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 30                                                                                  Nov 22                                                         Nov 30                                                                             Nov 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dec 06                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dec 04
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 14                                                                                                                                                 Dec 14                                                                             Dec 13                                                                                        Dec 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dec 20                                                                                                                                            Dec 27
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 28                                                                                                                                                 Dec 28                                                                                                                                                                           Jan 01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan 03
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 11                                                                                                                                                 Jan 11                                                                             Jan 10                                                                                        Jan 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan 17
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 25                                                                                                                                                 Jan 25                                                                             Jan 24                                                                                        Jan 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan 31
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 08                                                                                                                                                 Feb 08                                                                             Feb 07                                                                                        Feb 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Feb 14
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 22                                                                                                                                                 Feb 22                                                                             Feb 21




     charts, dotted blue line). See notes to Figure 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Feb 28                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Feb 26




                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 08                                                                                                                                                 Mar 08                                                                             Mar 07                                                                                        Mar 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mar 14




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    140
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          160




41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                France
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Belgium




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Germany




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Netherlands




                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3




                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 23                                                                                  Mar 15                                                         Mar 23                                                                             Mar 22                                                                                        Mar 27
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 06                                                                                  Mar 29                                                         Apr 06                                                                             Apr 05                                                                                        Apr 10
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 20                                                                                  Apr 12                                                         Apr 20                                                                             Apr 19                                                                                        Apr 24
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 04                                                                                  Apr 26                                                         May 04                                                                             May 03                                                                                        May 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 18                                                                                  May 10                                                         May 18                                                                             May 17                                                                                        May 22
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 01                                                                                  May 24                                                         Jun 01                                                                             May 31                                                                                        Jun 05
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 15                                                                                  Jun 07                                                         Jun 15                                                                             Jun 14                                                                                        Jun 19
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 29                                                                                  Jun 21                                                         Jun 29                                                                             Jun 28                                                                                         Jul 03
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 13                                                                                  Jul 05                                                         Jul 13                                                                             Jul 12                                                                                        Jul 17
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 27                                                                                  Jul 19                                                         Jul 27                                                                             Jul 26                                                                                        Jul 31
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 10                                                                                  Aug 02                                                         Aug 10                                                                             Aug 09                                                                                        Aug 14
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 24                                                                                  Aug 16                                                         Aug 24                                                                             Aug 23                                                                                        Aug 28
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 07                                                                                  Aug 30                                                         Sep 07                                                                             Sep 06                                                                                        Sep 11
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 21                                                                                  Sep 13                                                         Sep 21                                                                             Sep 20                                                                                        Sep 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 05                                                                                  Sep 27                                                         Oct 05                                                                             Oct 04                                                                                        Oct 09
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 19                                                                                  Oct 11                                                         Oct 19                                                                             Oct 18                                                                                        Oct 23
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 02                                                                                  Oct 25                                                         Nov 02                                                                             Nov 01                                                                                        Nov 06
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 16                                                                                  Nov 08                                                         Nov 16                                                                             Nov 15                                                                                        Nov 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nov 22




                                                                                 ^ et (right charts, solid red line), and the effective transmission rate, 
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 30                                                                                                                                                 Nov 30                                                                             Nov 29




                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dec 06                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dec 04
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 14                                                                                                                                                 Dec 14                                                                             Dec 13                                                                                        Dec 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dec 20                                                                                                                                            Dec 27
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 28                                                                                                                                                 Dec 28                                                                                                                                                                           Jan 01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan 03
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 11                                                                                                                                                 Jan 11                                                                             Jan 10                                                                                        Jan 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan 17
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 25                                                                                                                                                 Jan 25                                                                             Jan 24                                                                                        Jan 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan 31
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 08                                                                                                                                                 Feb 08                                                                             Feb 07                                                                                        Feb 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Feb 14
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 22                                                                                                                                                 Feb 22                                                                             Feb 21                                                                                        Feb 26




                                                                                                                                                           ^ × 14 = 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Feb 28




                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mar 07




                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 08                                                                                                                                                 Mar 08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 7: New cases (left) and R numbers (right) for sample of European countries




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mar 14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mar 12




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3




                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5




                                                         Notes: The figure plots a seven-day moving average of the number of reported new cases per 100k population (left
                                                                                                                                                                    ^ / (right
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    140




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70




                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 25                                                                                              Mar 22                                                                                                  Mar 27                                                                                  Mar 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 08                                                                                              Apr 05                                                                                                  Apr 10                                                                                  Apr 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 22                                                                                              Apr 19                                                                                                  Apr 24                                                                                  Apr 22
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 06                                                                                              May 03                                                                                                  May 08                                                                                  May 06
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 20                                                                                              May 17                                                                                                  May 22                                                                                  May 20
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 03                                                                                              May 31                                                                                                  Jun 05                                                                                  Jun 03
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 17                                                                                              Jun 14                                                                                                  Jun 19                                                                                  Jun 17
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 01                                                                                             Jun 28                                                                                                   Jul 03                                                                                  Jul 01
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 15                                                                                              Jul 12                                                                                                  Jul 17                                                                                  Jul 15
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 29                                                                                              Jul 26                                                                                                  Jul 31                                                                                  Jul 29
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 12                                                                                              Aug 09                                                                                                  Aug 14                                                                                  Aug 12




                                                         charts), the R number, R
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 26                                                                                              Aug 23                                                                                                  Aug 28                                                                                  Aug 26
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 09                                                                                              Sep 06                                                                                                  Sep 11                                                                                  Sep 09
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 23                                                                                              Sep 20                                                                                                  Sep 25                                                                                  Sep 23
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 07                                                                                              Oct 04                                                                                                  Oct 09                                                                                  Oct 07
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 21                                                                                              Oct 18                                                                                                  Oct 23                                                                                  Oct 21
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 04                                                                                              Nov 01                                                                                                  Nov 06                                                                                  Nov 04
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 18                                                                                              Nov 15                                                                                                  Nov 20                                                                                  Nov 18
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 02                                                                                              Nov 29                                                                                                  Dec 04                                                                                  Dec 02
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 16                                                                                              Dec 13                                                                                                  Dec 18                                                                                  Dec 16
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 30                                                                                              Dec 27                                                                                                  Jan 01                                                                                  Dec 30
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 13                                                                                              Jan 10                                                                                                  Jan 15                                                                                  Jan 13
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 27                                                                                              Jan 24                                                                                                  Jan 29                                                                                  Jan 27
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 10                                                                                              Feb 07                                                                                                  Feb 12                                                                                  Feb 10
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 24                                                                                              Feb 21                                                                                                                                                                                          Feb 24




     charts, dotted blue line). See notes to Figure 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Feb 26




                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 10                                                                                              Mar 07                                                                                                  Mar 12                                                                                  Mar 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    140




42
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Poland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Portugal




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    United Kingdom




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3




                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 25                                                                                              Mar 22                                                                                                  Mar 27                                                                                  Mar 25
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 08                                                                                              Apr 05                                                                                                  Apr 10                                                                                  Apr 08
                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 22                                                                                              Apr 19                                                                                                  Apr 24                                                                                  Apr 22
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 06                                                                                              May 03                                                                                                  May 08                                                                                  May 06
                                                                                                                                                                                             May 20                                                                                              May 17                                                                                                  May 22                                                                                  May 20
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 03                                                                                              May 31                                                                                                  Jun 05                                                                                  Jun 03
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 17                                                                                              Jun 14                                                                                                  Jun 19                                                                                  Jun 17
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 01                                                                                             Jun 28                                                                                                   Jul 03                                                                                  Jul 01
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 15                                                                                              Jul 12                                                                                                  Jul 17                                                                                  Jul 15
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 29                                                                                              Jul 26                                                                                                  Jul 31                                                                                  Jul 29
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 12                                                                                              Aug 09                                                                                                  Aug 14                                                                                  Aug 12
                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 26                                                                                              Aug 23                                                                                                  Aug 28                                                                                  Aug 26
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 09                                                                                              Sep 06                                                                                                  Sep 11                                                                                  Sep 09
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 23                                                                                              Sep 20                                                                                                  Sep 25                                                                                  Sep 23
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 07                                                                                              Oct 04                                                                                                  Oct 09                                                                                  Oct 07
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 21                                                                                              Oct 18                                                                                                  Oct 23                                                                                  Oct 21
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 04                                                                                              Nov 01                                                                                                  Nov 06                                                                                  Nov 04
                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 18                                                                                              Nov 15                                                                                                  Nov 20                                                                                  Nov 18




                                                                                 ^ et (right charts, solid red line), and the effective transmission rate, 
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 02                                                                                              Nov 29                                                                                                                                                                                          Dec 02




                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dec 04
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 16                                                                                              Dec 13                                                                                                  Dec 18                                                                                  Dec 16
                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 30                                                                                              Dec 27                                                                                                  Jan 01                                                                                  Dec 30
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 13                                                                                              Jan 10                                                                                                  Jan 15                                                                                  Jan 13
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 27                                                                                              Jan 24                                                                                                  Jan 29                                                                                  Jan 27
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 10                                                                                              Feb 07                                                                                                  Feb 12                                                                                  Feb 10
                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 24                                                                                              Feb 21                                                                                                  Feb 26                                                                                  Feb 24




                                                                                                                                                           ^ × 14 = 
                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mar 07




                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mar 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 8: New cases (left) and R numbers (right) for sample of European countries




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mar 12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5




                                                         Notes: The figure plots a seven-day moving average of the number of reported new cases per 100k population (left
                                                                                                                                                                    ^ / (right
   Table 1: Pooled panel estimation results in the baseline specification without threshold
                                                                effects


                                        Specifications with common constant                             Specifications with fixed effects (FE)
                 Lag order:              p = 14                          p = 21                          p = 14                          p = 21
     Multiplication Factor:       MF = 3          MF = 5          MF = 3          MF = 5          MF = 3          MF = 5          MF = 3          MF = 5
       Stringency Index              -3.37           -3.34           -3.40           -3.37           -3.12           -3.07           -3.23           -3.20
     standard s.e. (t-ratio)   0.12 (-27.9)    0.12 (-27.2)    0.12 (-28.9)    0.12 (-28.2)    0.12 (-25.1)    0.13 (-24.4)    0.12 (-26.2)    0.13 (-25.5)
      robust1 s.e. (t-ratio)   0.22 (-15.0)    0.23 (-14.8)    0.21 (-16.1)    0.21 (-15.9)    0.20 (-15.2)    0.21 (-14.9)    0.20 (-16.2)    0.20 (-15.9)
      robust2 s.e. (t-ratio)    0.36 (-9.3)     0.36 (-9.2)     0.39 (-8.6)     0.39 (-8.6)     0.77 (-4.0)     0.77 (-4.0)     0.76 (-4.3)     0.76 (-4.2)
     Economic Support                -0.97           -0.94           -0.64           -0.61           -1.61           -1.60           -1.05           -1.03
     standard s.e. (t-ratio)   0.08 (-12.3)    0.08 (-11.8)     0.08 (-8.1)     0.08 (-7.6)    0.09 (-17.0)    0.10 (-16.6)    0.09 (-11.2) 0.10 (-10.8)
      robust1 s.e. (t-ratio)    0.13 (-7.4)     0.13 (-7.2)     0.12 (-5.5)     0.12 (-5.2)     0.17 (-9.7)     0.17 (-9.6)     0.17 (-6.2)     0.17 (-6.1)
      robust2 s.e. (t-ratio)    0.22 (-4.3)     0.22 (-4.2)     0.19 (-3.3)     0.19 (-3.2)     0.40 (-4.0)     0.40 (-4.0)     0.38 (-2.8)     0.38 (-2.7)
         Constant terms
Common (robust t-ratio)        4.13 (10.6)     4.13 (10.6)     3.87 (10.0)     3.87 (10.0)          -               -               -               -
       FE (robust t-ratio):
                 Belgium            -               -               -               -            4.41 (5.7)     4.44 (5.7)       4.00 (5.3)     4.02 (5.4)
                   France           -               -               -               -           4.46 (5.7)      4.46 (5.7)      4.11 (5.4)      4.11 (5.4)
                Germany             -               -               -               -           3.92 (5.7)      3.91 (5.7)      3.70 (5.5)      3.69 (5.5)
                      Italy         -               -               -               -           4.35 (5.6)      4.35 (5.6)      4.05 (5.5)      4.04 (5.5)
             Netherlands            -               ­               -               -           4.39 (5.7)      4.39 (5.7)      3.96 (5.3)      3.96 (5.3)
                   Poland           -               -               -               -           3.91 (5.8)      3.90 (5.8)      3.63 (5.7)      3.63 (5.7)
                 Portugal           -               -               -               -           4.39 (5.7)      4.40 (5.7)      4.08 (5.5)      4.10 (5.5)
                     Spain          -               -               -               -           4.78 (5.6)      4.80 (5.6)      4.36 (5.2)      4.38 (5.3)
       United Kingdom               -               -               -               -           4.93 (5.6)      4.92 (5.6)      4.42 (5.2)      4.42 (5.2)
                 R-squared              0.35            0.33            0.35            0.33            0.39            0.38            0.38            0.36



Notes: Total number of observations is 2991 with N = 9 countries, Tmin = 321 and Tmax = 343 days. The estimation
sample is unbalanced at the beginning. Starting dates of individual country samples are: 6-March-2020 (Belgium),
1-March-2020 (France), 1-March-2020 (Germany), 23-February-2020 (Italy), 6-March-2020 (Netherlands), 16-March-
2020 (Poland), 14-March-2020 (Portugal), 2-March-2020 (Spain), and 2-March-2020 (United Kingdom). The last
period is 30-January-2021 for all countries. "Robust1" standard errors are robust to serial correlation only (Newey-
West type correction), whereas "robust2" standard errors are robust to serial correlation as well as cross-sectional
correlation. See online Appendix for a description of the estimation of standard errors. Oxford stringency and
economic support indices are divided by 100 so that they take values between zero and one.




                                                                    43
                    Table 2: Individual country and mean group estimation results


                 Stringency         s.e. (t-ratio)         Economic        s.e. (t-ratio)                        s.e. (t-ratio)
                    Index       robust       standard      Support      robust      standard     Constant     robust      standard    R2
      Belgium       -3.48     0.53 (-6.6)    0.41 (-8.5)    -1.46     0.39 (-3.7) 0.29 (-5.1)      4.57     0.30 (15.1) 0.21 (22.0)   0.43
        France      -3.48     0.58 (-6.0)    0.49 (-7.1)    -1.14     0.36 (-3.2) 0.34 (-3.4)      4.41     0.53 (8.3) 0.26 (16.9)    0.29
     Germany        -4.15     0.80 (-5.2)    0.45 (-9.2)    -2.50     0.52 (-4.8) 0.41 (-6.0)      4.92     0.58 (8.6) 0.22 (22.6)    0.49
         Italy      -3.73     0.53 (-7.1) 0.21 (-17.4)      -2.53     0.42 (-6.0) 0.16 (-15.7)     5.33     0.57 (9.4) 0.18 (29.2)    0.59
   Netherlands      -2.53     0.33 (-7.7) 0.22 (-11.6)      -1.54     0.33 (-4.6) 0.18 (-8.4)      4.03     0.30 (13.3) 0.13 (30.4)   0.57
       Poland       -1.82     0.37 (-5.0) 0.17 (-10.7)      -0.52     0.43 (-1.2) 0.16 (-3.2)      2.65     0.41 (6.5) 0.12 (22.6)    0.31
      Portugal      -4.03     0.66 (-6.1)    0.42 (-9.6)    -1.59     0.48 (-3.3) 0.37 (-4.3)      5.03     0.55 (9.1) 0.22 (23.0)    0.47
        Spain       -3.93     0.87 (-4.5)    0.80 (-4.9)    -1.89     0.67 (-2.8) 0.55 (-3.4)      5.58     0.82 (6.8) 0.38 (14.7)    0.27
          UK        -2.79     0.77 (-3.6)    0.61 (-4.6)    -1.09     0.63 (-1.7) 0.38 (-2.9)      4.29     0.42 (10.1) 0.14 (31.4)   0.61


Mean Group          -3.33     0.25 (-13.5)        -         -1.59     0.20 (-7.7)                  4.53     0.27 (16.7)       -


Notes: This table reports findings for specifications with lag order p = 14 and multiplication factor M F = 5. See
notes to Table 1.




                                                               44
      Table 3: Pooled panel estimation results in the specification with threshold effects


                                      Specifications with common constant                              Specifications with fixed effects (FE)
               Lag order:              p = 14                          p = 21                           p = 14                            p = 21
   Multiplication Factor:       MF = 3          MF = 5          MF = 3          MF = 5          MF = 3           MF = 5           MF = 3           MF = 5
 Stringency Index                  -2.17           -2.14           -2.25           -2.23           -2.39            -2.35            -2.34            -2.31
   standard s.e. (t-ratio)   0.13 (-17.2)    0.13 (-16.6)    0.12 (-18.7)    0.12 (-18.1)    0.12 (-19.1)     0.13 (-18.4)     0.12 (-18.9)     0.13 (-18.3)
    robust1 s.e. (t-ratio)   0.17 (-12.8)    0.17 (-12.6)    0.15 (-15.4)    0.15 (-15.1)    0.17 (-14.2)     0.17 (-13.9)     0.14 (-16.2)     0.15 (-15.9)
    robust2 s.e. (t-ratio)   0.22 (-10.0)     0.22 (-9.6)    0.18 (-12.3)    0.19 (-11.8)     0.35 (-6.8)      0.36 (-6.6)      0.41 (-5.7)      0.41 (-5.6)
 Economic Support                  -0.29           -0.27           -0.16           -0.13           -1.05            -1.04            -0.41            -0.40
   standard s.e. (t-ratio)    0.08 (-3.6)     0.08 (-3.3)     0.08 (-2.1)     0.08 (-1.7)    0.10 (-11.0)     0.10 (-10.7)      0.09 (-4.4)      0.10 (-4.2)
    robust1 s.e. (t-ratio)    0.11 (-2.7)     0.11 (-2.5)     0.09 (-1.8)     0.09 (-1.5)     0.14 (-7.4)      0.14 (-7.4)      0.12 (-3.5)      0.12 (-3.4)
    robust2 s.e. (t-ratio)    0.11 (-2.7)     0.11 (-2.5)     0.09 (-1.8)     0.09 (-1.5)     0.20 (-5.2)      0.20 (-5.2)      0.17 (-2.4)      0.18 (-2.3)
 Threshold variable                -2.29           -2.29           -2.35           -2.35           -2.24            -2.23            -2.20            -2.19
   standard s.e. (t-ratio)   0.11 (-21.0)    0.11 (-20.5)    0.11 (-22.1)    0.11 (-21.6)    0.13 (-17.7)     0.13 (-17.3)     0.11 (-20.1)     0.11 (-19.6)
    robust1 s.e. (t-ratio)   0.14 (-16.5)    0.14 (-16.4)    0.12 (-20.0)    0.12 (-19.9)    0.18 (-12.5)     0.18 (-12.4)     0.15 (-15.1)     0.15 (-14.9)
    robust2 s.e. (t-ratio)   0.16 (-13.9)    0.17 (-13.7)    0.12 (-19.2)    0.12 (-18.8)     0.37 (-6.0)      0.37 (-6.0)      0.41 (-5.3)      0.42 (-5.3)
                threshold             0.12            0.12            0.12            0.12            0.007            0.007            0.002            0.002
         Constant terms
 common (robust t-ratio)     5.11 (31.0)     5.11 (30.7)     5.11 (41.6)     5.11 (41.0)          -                -                -                -
     FE (robust t-ratio):
                 Belgium          -               -               -               -          5.73 (16.6)      5.74 (16.7)      5.10 (13.7)      5.12 (13.7)
                   France         -               -               -               -          5.79 (17.1)      5.79 (17.1)      5.24 (14.0)      5.24 (13.9)
                Germany           -               -               -               -          5.41 (17.9)      5.38 (17.7)      5.02 (15.0)      5.00 (14.9)
                     Italy        -               -               -               -          5.70 (17.0)      5.69 (16.9)      5.20 (14.3)      5.18 (14.2)
             Netherlands          -               ­               -               -          5.72 (17.3)      5.71 (17.3)      5.09 (13.9)      5.09 (13.9)
                  Poland          -               -               -               -          5.40 (18.5)      5.38 (18.3)      4.95 (15.1)      4.94 (14.9)
                Portugal          -               -               -               -          5.78 (17.2)      5.79 (17.2)      5.29 (14.3)      5.30 (14.2)
                    Spain         -               -               -               -          6.04 (16.4)      6.05 (16.4)      5.41 (13.4)      5.42 (13.3)
        United Kingdom            -               -               -               -          6.10 (16.4)      6.09 (16.3)      5.42 (13.1)      5.41 (13.0)
               R-squared              0.43            0.41            0.44            0.42             0.45             0.43             0.45             0.44



Notes: Number of observations is 2991 with N = 9 countries, Tmin = 321 and Tmax = 343 days. "Robust1" standard
errors are robust to serial correlation only (Newey-West type correction), whereas "robust2" standard errors are
robust to serial correlation as well as cross-sectional correlation. See notes to Table 1.




                                                                      45
A     Online Appendix to "COVID-19 Time-varying Reproduction Numbers World-
      wide: Herding, Mandatory and Voluntary Social Distancing"




           Alexander Chudik                      M. Hashem Pesaran                               Alessandro Rebucci


                                                        March 15, 2021




    This online appendix is organized as follows. Section A.1 provides details regarding the estima-
tion of standard errors in pooled regressions. Section A.2 provides regions definitions. Section A.3
provides comparisons of the estimated R numbers for M F = 3 and 5, and Section A.4 provides
comparisons of the estimated effective transmission rates for M F = 3 and 5.

A.1     Conducting inference about the pooled panel results
Consider the panel data model (15), which, for convenience, can be equivalently written as

                                                        yjt =   jt + ujt ,

for j = 1, 2, ..., N , where  jt = 1, xj,t-p-1 . We allow for unbalanced panel by assuming t = 1, 2, ..., Tj .
Let  ^ be the pooled estimator. We have

                                                                          -1
                                                    N    Tj                     N    Tj
                                      ^ - = 
                                                               jt  jt                       jt ujt .
                                                   j =1 t=1                     j =1 t=1


Variance of ^ is given by

                                                   -1                                                             -1
                                  N    Tj                            N     Tj                    N     Tj
                 V ar(^) =                    jt  jt      V ar                   jt ujt                      jt  jt       .
                                  j =1 t=1                           j =1 t=1                   j =1 t=1


Assuming E  jt ujt = 0, we obtain
                                        -1                                                                                    -1
                       N    Tj                     N     Tj   N      Tj                                     N    Tj
         V ar(^) =                 jt  jt                                 E  jt  jt ujt ujt                             jt  jt     .
                       j =1 t=1                    j =1 t=1 j =1 t =1                                       j =1 t=1




                                                               A.1
A.1.1     Inference robust to serial correlation of errors

Let
                                                                         N     Tj
                                                           1
                                             QnT =      N
                                                                                     jt  jt ,
                                                        j =1    Tj      j =1 t=1

and                                                                                                 
                                      N                            Tj     Tj
                                               Tj    1
                              SnT =           N
                                                                               E  jt  jt ujt ujt  ,
                                      j =1    h=1 Th
                                                     Tj            t=1 t =1

then
                                                               1
                                          V ar(^) =
                                                            N
                                                                         Q- 1     -1
                                                                          nT SnT QnT .
                                                            j =1    Tj
We estimate SnT by the Newey-West method, extended to our panel setup:

                                                           N
                                               ^ nT =                    Tj         ^j ,
                                               S                        N
                                                                                    S
                                                           j =1         h=1    Th

where
                                                      mj
                                   ^j = 
                                   S    ^ j,0 +            w ( , mj ) ^ j, + ^ j,               ,         (A.1)
                                                      =1

and
                                                        Tj
                                          ^ j, = 1
                                                                    jt  j,t- u
                                                                             ^jt u
                                                                                 ^j,t- ,
                                                 Tj
                                                      t= +1

         ^jt = yjt - 
in which u           ^  jt . We set

                                               w ( , mj ) = 1 -                        ,
                                                                             mj + 1
and mj = mj,nT is chosen to be a suitable increasing function of the sample size. We set mj,nT to be the
                    1/3
integer part of (Tj )     .


A.1.2     Inference robust to serial and cross-sectional correlation of errors

Allowing for correlation of errors over time, as well as across units (countries) requires a different estimator
of SnT . It is useful to re-write SnT as

                                                            T       T
                                               SnT =                      hnt hnt ,
                                                           t=1 t =1


where
                                                    hnt =                 jt ujt ,
                                                               j Nt




                                                                A.2
in which we use Nt as the index set of cross-section units with available observations for a period t. SnT is
estimated as
                                                    m
                                  ^ nT = 
                                  S      ^ ·,0 +         w ( , m) ^ ·, + ^ ·,           ,              (A.2)
                                                    =1

where
                                            T
                                ^ ·, = 1
                                                   ^ nt h
                                                   h    ^ nt- , for         = 0, 1, ..., m,
                                       T
                                           t= +1

and
                                                hnt =            jt u
                                                                    ^jt .
                                                         j Nt

m = mnT is chosen to be a suitable increasing function of the sample size. We set mnT to be the integer
part of T 1/3 .




                                                         A.3
A.2     Regions definitions

                                    Table A1: Regions definitions

      East Asia and Pacific
      Australia, Brunei, Cambodia, China, South Korea, Fiji, Indonesia, Japan, Laos, Malaysia,
      Marshall Islands, Mongolia, Burma, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Philippines,
      Samoa, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Taiwan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Vanuatu, Vietnam

      Eastern Europe and Central Asia
      Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Georgia,
      Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Montenegro, Moldova, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Tajikistan,
      North Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, Uzbekistan

      Western Europe
      Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
      Germany, Greece, Holy See, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
      Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, San Marino,
      Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom

      North America
      United States, Canada

      Latin America and Caribbean
      Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
      Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala,
      Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
      Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname,
      Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela

      Middle East and North Africa
      Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Oman,
      Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen

      South Asia
      Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka

      SubSaharan Africa
      Eastern and Southern Africa and West and Central Africa

      Eastern and Southern Africa
      Angola, Botswana, Burundi, Comoros, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya,
      Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Rwanda, Seychelles, Somalia,
      South Africa, South Sudan, Sudan, Uganda, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe

      West and Central Africa
      Benin, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
      Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Kinshasa), Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon,
      Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria,
      Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Togo




                                                  A.4
A.3         Comparison of estimated R numbers for selected countries and regions for two
            choices of multiplication factors, MF=5 and MF=3


Figure A.1: Comparisons of estimated R numbers for China and the rest of the world for two
choices of multiplication factors, MF=5 (solid red line) and MF=3 (dotted black line)

                          China                                             World Excl. China
       3                                             3             3                                           3



      2.5                                            2.5
                                                                 2.5                                           2.5


       2                                             2
                                                                   2                                           2

      1.5                                            1.5

                                                                 1.5                                           1.5
       1                                             1


                                                                   1                                           1
      0.5                                            0.5



       0                                             0           0.5                                           0.5
            Feb 04
            Feb 18
            Mar 03
            Mar 17
            Mar 31




            Feb 02
            Feb 16
            Mar 02
            Mar 16




                                                                       Mar 23




                                                                       Feb 08
                                                                       Feb 22
                                                                       Mar 08
            Apr 14
            Apr 28




            Aug 04
            Aug 18
            Sep 01
            Sep 15
            Sep 29
            Oct 13
            Oct 27




                                                                       Apr 06
                                                                       Apr 20




                                                                       Oct 05
                                                                       Oct 19
            May 12
            May 26




            Nov 10
            Nov 24
            Dec 08
            Dec 22




                                                                       Aug 10
                                                                       Aug 24
                                                                       Sep 07
                                                                       Sep 21
                                                                       May 04
                                                                       May 18




                                                                       Nov 02
                                                                       Nov 16
                                                                       Nov 30
                                                                       Dec 14
                                                                       Dec 28
             Jul 07
             Jul 21




                                                                        Jul 13
                                                                        Jul 27
            Jun 09
            Jun 23




            Jan 05
            Jan 19




                                                                       Jun 01
                                                                       Jun 15
                                                                       Jun 29




                                                                       Jan 11
                                                                       Jan 25
                                         2020-2021                                                 2020-2021




                                      ^ et , using MF=5 (solid red line) and MF=3 (dotted black line).
Notes: The figure plots the R number, R



Figure A.2: Comparisons of estimated R numbers for North and South Hemispheres (excl. China)
for two choices of multiplication factors, MF=5 (solid red line) and MF=3 (dotted black line)

               North Hemisphere Excl. China                                 South Hemisphere
        3                                            3            3                                            3



      2.5                                            2.5         2.5                                           2.5



        2                                            2            2                                            2



      1.5                                            1.5         1.5                                           1.5



        1                                            1            1                                            1



      0.5                                            0.5         0.5                                           0.5
            Mar 23




            Feb 08
            Feb 22
            Mar 08




                                                                       Mar 25




                                                                       Feb 10
                                                                       Feb 24
                                                                       Mar 10
            Apr 06
            Apr 20




            Aug 10
            Aug 24
            Sep 07
            Sep 21
            Oct 05
            Oct 19




                                                                       Apr 08
                                                                       Apr 22
            Nov 02
            Nov 16
            Nov 30
            Dec 14
            Dec 28




                                                                       Aug 12
                                                                       Aug 26
                                                                       Sep 09
                                                                       Sep 23
                                                                       Oct 07
                                                                       Oct 21
            May 04
            May 18




                                                                       May 06
                                                                       May 20




                                                                       Nov 04
                                                                       Nov 18
                                                                       Dec 02
                                                                       Dec 16
                                                                       Dec 30
             Jul 13
             Jul 27




                                                                        Jul 01
                                                                        Jul 15
                                                                        Jul 29
            Jun 01
            Jun 15
            Jun 29




            Jan 11
            Jan 25




                                                                       Jun 03
                                                                       Jun 17




                                                                       Jan 13
                                                                       Jan 27




                                         2020-2021                                                2020-2021




                                      ^ et , using MF=5 (solid red line) and MF=3 (dotted black line).
Notes: The figure plots the R number, R




                                                           A.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3




                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5




                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                           Mar 21                                                               Mar 07                                                                         Mar 20                                                                        Mar 01
                                                                                                                           Apr 04                                                               Mar 21                                                                         Apr 03                                                                        Mar 15
                                                                                                                           Apr 18                                                               Apr 04                                                                         Apr 17                                                                        Mar 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                Apr 18                                                                         May 01                                                                        Apr 12
                                                                                                                           May 02
                                                                                                                                                                                                May 02                                                                                                                                                       Apr 26
                                                                                                                           May 16                                                                                                                                              May 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                May 16                                                                                                                                                       May 10
                                                                                                                           May 30                                                                                                                                              May 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                May 30                                                                                                                                                       May 24
                                                                                                                           Jun 13                                                                                                                                              Jun 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                Jun 13                                                                                                                                                       Jun 07
                                                                                                                           Jun 27                                                                                                                                              Jun 26                                                                        Jun 21
                                                                                                                            Jul 11                                                              Jun 27                                                                          Jul 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jul 11                                                                                                                                                       Jul 05
                                                                                                                            Jul 25                                                                                                                                              Jul 24                                                                        Jul 19
                                                                                                                           Aug 08                                                                Jul 25                                                                        Aug 07                                                                        Aug 02
                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug 08                                                                         Aug 21
                                                                                                                           Aug 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Aug 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug 22
                                                                                                                           Sep 05                                                                                                                                              Sep 04                                                                        Aug 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                Sep 05
                                                                                                                           Sep 19                                                                                                                                              Sep 18                                                                        Sep 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                Sep 19
                                                                                                                           Oct 03                                                                                                                                              Oct 02                                                                        Sep 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                Oct 03
                                                                                                                           Oct 17                                                                                                                                              Oct 16                                                                        Oct 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                Oct 17




                                                                                                                                                               South Asia
                                                                                                                           Oct 31                                                                                                                                              Oct 30                                                                        Oct 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                Oct 31
                                                                                                                           Nov 14                                                                                                                                              Nov 13                                                                        Nov 08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Western Europe
                                                                                                                                                                                                Nov 14
                                                                                                                           Nov 28                                                                                                                                              Nov 27                                                                        Nov 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                Nov 28
                                                                                                                           Dec 12                                                                                                                                              Dec 11                                                                        Dec 06
                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec 12
                                                                                                                           Dec 26                                                                                                                                              Dec 25                                                                        Dec 20




      Notes: The figure plots the R number, R
                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec 26                                                                                                                                                       Jan 03
                                                                                                                           Jan 09                                                               Jan 09                                                                         Jan 08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Middle East and North Africa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan 22                                                                        Jan 17
                                                                                                                           Jan 23                                                               Jan 23                                                                                                                                                       Jan 31
                                                                                                                           Feb 06                                                               Feb 06                                                                         Feb 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 East Asia and Pacific (Excl. China)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 14
                                                                                                                           Feb 20                                                               Feb 20                                                                         Feb 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021




                                                                                                               2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                    2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2020-2021
                                                                                                                           Mar 06                                                               Mar 06                                                                         Mar 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mar 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3




                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5




                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5




A.6
                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5




                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3




                                                                                                                           Mar 25                                                               Mar 29                                                                         Mar 26                                                                        Apr 01
                                                                                                                           Apr 08                                                               Apr 12                                                                         Apr 09                                                                        Apr 15
                                                                                                                           Apr 22                                                               Apr 26                                                                         Apr 23                                                                        Apr 29
                                                                                                                           May 06                                                               May 10                                                                         May 07                                                                        May 13
                                                                                                                           May 20                                                               May 24                                                                         May 21                                                                        May 27
                                                                                                                           Jun 03                                                               Jun 07                                                                         Jun 04                                                                        Jun 10
                                                                                                                           Jun 17                                                               Jun 21                                                                         Jun 18                                                                        Jun 24
                                                                                                                            Jul 01                                                               Jul 05                                                                         Jul 02                                                                        Jul 08
                                                                                                                            Jul 15                                                               Jul 19                                                                         Jul 16                                                                        Jul 22
                                                                                                                            Jul 29                                                              Aug 02                                                                          Jul 30                                                                       Aug 05
                                                                                                                           Aug 12                                                               Aug 16                                                                         Aug 13                                                                        Aug 19
                                                                                                                           Aug 26                                                               Aug 30                                                                         Aug 27                                                                        Sep 02
                                                                                                                           Sep 09                                                               Sep 13                                                                         Sep 10                                                                        Sep 16
                                                                                                                           Sep 23                                                               Sep 27                                                                         Sep 24                                                                        Sep 30
                                                                                                                           Oct 07                                                               Oct 11                                                                         Oct 08                                                                        Oct 14
                                                                                                                           Oct 21                                                               Oct 25                                                                         Oct 22                                                                        Oct 28
                                                                                                                           Nov 04                                                               Nov 08                                                                         Nov 05                                                                        Nov 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    North America


                                                                                                                           Nov 18                                                               Nov 22                                                                         Nov 19                                                                        Nov 25




                                                                                                                                                               Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                           Dec 02                                                               Dec 06                                                                         Dec 03                                                                        Dec 09
                                                                                                                           Dec 16                                                               Dec 20                                                                         Dec 17                                                                        Dec 23
                                                                                                                           Dec 30                                                               Jan 03                                                                         Dec 31                                                                        Jan 06
                                                                                                                           Jan 13                                                               Jan 17                                                                         Jan 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Latin America and Caribbean




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 20
                                                                                                                           Jan 27                                                               Jan 31                                                                         Jan 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Eastern Europe and Central Asia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 03




                                            ^ et , using MF=5 (solid red line) and MF=3 (dotted black line).
                                                                                                                           Feb 10                                                               Feb 14                                                                         Feb 11                                                                        Feb 17
                                                                                                                           Feb 24                                                                                                                                              Feb 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       two choices of multiplication factors, MF=5 (solid red line) and MF=3 (dotted black line)




                                                                                                                                                                                                Feb 28                                                                                                                                                       Mar 03




                                                                                                               2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                    2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021




                                                                                                                           Mar 10                                                               Mar 14                                                                         Mar 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 17




                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3




                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure A.3: Comparisons of estimated R numbers for main geographic regions (excl. China) for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3




                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.5




                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                           Mar 07                                                                     Mar 25                                                             Apr 06                                                   Mar 28
                                                                                                                           Mar 21                                                                     Apr 08                                                             Apr 20                                                   Apr 11
                                                                                                                           Apr 04                                                                     Apr 22                                                             May 04                                                   Apr 25
                                                                                                                           Apr 18                                                                     May 06                                                             May 18                                                   May 09
                                                                                                                           May 02                                                                     May 20                                                             Jun 01                                                   May 23
                                                                                                                           May 16                                                                     Jun 03                                                             Jun 15                                                   Jun 06
                                                                                                                           May 30                                                                     Jun 17                                                             Jun 29                                                   Jun 20
                                                                                                                           Jun 13                                                                      Jul 01                                                             Jul 13                                                   Jul 04
                                                                                                                           Jun 27                                                                      Jul 15                                                                                                                      Jul 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jul 27
                                                                                                                            Jul 11                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug 01
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jul 29                                                            Aug 10
                                                                                                                            Jul 25                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Aug 12                                                             Aug 24
                                                                                                                           Aug 08                                                                                                                                                                                                 Aug 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Aug 26                                                             Sep 07
                                                                                                                           Aug 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sep 09                                                             Sep 21                                                   Sep 12
                                                                                                                           Sep 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      US



                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sep 23                                                                                                                      Sep 26




                                                                                                                                                                                 Iran
                                                                                                                           Sep 19                                                                                                                                        Oct 05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             India
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Oct 07                                                             Oct 19                                                   Oct 10
                                                                                                                           Oct 03
                                                                                                                           Oct 17                                                                     Oct 21                                                             Nov 02                                                   Oct 24




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              South Africa
                                                                                                                           Oct 31                                                                     Nov 04                                                                                                                      Nov 07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nov 16
                                                                                                                           Nov 14                                                                     Nov 18                                                                                                                      Nov 21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nov 30
                                                                                                                           Nov 28                                                                     Dec 02                                                                                                                      Dec 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dec 14
                                                                                                                           Dec 12                                                                     Dec 16                                                                                                                      Dec 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dec 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan 02




      Notes: The figure plots the R number, R
                                                                                                                           Dec 26                                                                     Dec 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan 11
                                                                                                                           Jan 09                                                                     Jan 13                                                                                                                      Jan 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan 25
                                                                                                                           Jan 23                                                                     Jan 27                                                                                                                      Jan 30
                                                                                                                           Feb 06                                                                                                                                        Feb 08
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Feb 10                                                                                                                      Feb 13
                                                                                                                           Feb 20                                                                                                                                        Feb 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Feb 24                                                                                                                      Feb 27




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2020-2021




                                                                                                               2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                          2020-2021
                                                                                                                           Mar 06                                                                                                                                        Mar 08                                                   Mar 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mar 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3




                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.5




                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.5




A.7
                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                       1.5
                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.5




                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3




                                                                                                                           Apr 01                                                                     Mar 24                                                             Apr 14                                                   Mar 29
                                                                                                                           Apr 15                                                                     Apr 07                                                             Apr 28                                                   Apr 12
                                                                                                                           Apr 29                                                                     Apr 21                                                             May 12                                                   Apr 26
                                                                                                                           May 13                                                                     May 05                                                             May 26                                                   May 10
                                                                                                                           May 27                                                                     May 19                                                             Jun 09                                                   May 24
                                                                                                                           Jun 10                                                                     Jun 02                                                             Jun 23                                                   Jun 07
                                                                                                                           Jun 24                                                                     Jun 16                                                              Jul 07                                                  Jun 21
                                                                                                                            Jul 08                                                                    Jun 30                                                                                                                       Jul 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jul 21
                                                                                                                            Jul 22                                                                     Jul 14                                                                                                                      Jul 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Aug 04
                                                                                                                           Aug 05                                                                      Jul 28                                                                                                                     Aug 02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               plication factors, MF=5 (solid red line) and MF=3 (dotted black line)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Aug 18
                                                                                                                           Aug 19                                                                     Aug 11                                                                                                                      Aug 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Aug 25                                                             Sep 01
                                                                                                                           Sep 02                                                                                                                                                                                                 Aug 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sep 08                                                             Sep 15
                                                                                                                           Sep 16                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sep 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sep 22                                                             Sep 29
                                                                                                                           Sep 30                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sep 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Brazil




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oct 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Russia




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Oct 06




                                                                                                                                                                                 Turkey
                                                                                                                           Oct 14                                                                                                                                                                                                 Oct 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Australia

                                                                                                                                                                                                      Oct 20                                                             Oct 27                                                   Oct 25
                                                                                                                           Oct 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Nov 03                                                             Nov 10                                                   Nov 08
                                                                                                                           Nov 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Nov 17                                                             Nov 24                                                   Nov 22
                                                                                                                           Nov 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dec 01                                                             Dec 08                                                   Dec 06
                                                                                                                           Dec 09
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dec 15                                                             Dec 22                                                   Dec 20
                                                                                                                           Dec 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dec 29                                                             Jan 05                                                   Jan 03
                                                                                                                           Jan 06
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jan 12                                                             Jan 19                                                   Jan 17
                                                                                                                           Jan 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jan 26                                                             Feb 02                                                   Jan 31
                                                                                                                           Feb 03




                                            ^ et , using MF=5 (solid red line) and MF=3 (dotted black line).
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Feb 09                                                             Feb 16                                                   Feb 14
                                                                                                                           Feb 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Feb 23                                                                                                                      Feb 28
                                                                                                                           Mar 03                                                                                                                                        Mar 02




                                                                                                               2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                          2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mar 09                                                                                                                      Mar 14
                                                                                                                           Mar 17                                                                                                                                        Mar 16




                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3




                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                       1.5
                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure A.4: Comparisons of estimated R numbers for selected countries for two choices of multi-
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                            Mar 27                                                         Mar 23                                                                          Mar 23                                                        Mar 23
                                                                                                                                                                                            Apr 10                                                         Apr 06                                                                          Apr 06                                                        Apr 06
                                                                                                                                                                                            Apr 24                                                         Apr 20                                                                          Apr 20                                                        Apr 20
                                                                                                                                                                                            May 08                                                         May 04                                                                          May 04                                                        May 04
                                                                                                                                                                                            May 22                                                         May 18                                                                          May 18                                                        May 18
                                                                                                                                                                                            Jun 05                                                         Jun 01                                                                          Jun 01                                                        Jun 01
                                                                                                                                                                                            Jun 19                                                         Jun 15                                                                          Jun 15                                                        Jun 15
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jul 03                                                        Jun 29                                                                          Jun 29                                                        Jun 29
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jul 17                                                         Jul 13                                                                          Jul 13                                                        Jul 13
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jul 31                                                         Jul 27                                                                          Jul 27                                                        Jul 27
                                                                                                                                                                                            Aug 14                                                         Aug 10                                                                          Aug 10                                                        Aug 10
                                                                                                                                                                                            Aug 28                                                         Aug 24                                                                          Aug 24                                                        Aug 24
                                                                                                                                                                                            Sep 11                                                         Sep 07                                                                          Sep 07                                                        Sep 07
                                                                                                                                                                                            Sep 25                                                         Sep 21                                                                          Sep 21                                                        Sep 21
                                                                                                                                                                                            Oct 09                                                         Oct 05                                                                          Oct 05                                                        Oct 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Belgium




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Portugal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Germany
                                                                                                                                                                                            Oct 23                                                         Oct 19                                                                          Oct 19                                                        Oct 19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                                                            Nov 06                                                         Nov 02                                                                          Nov 02                                                        Nov 02
                                                                                                                                                                                            Nov 20                                                         Nov 16                                                                          Nov 16                                                        Nov 16




                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                     2.5




                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                            Dec 04                                                         Nov 30                                                                          Nov 30                                                        Nov 30
                                                                                                                           Mar 25                                                                                                                          Dec 14                                                                          Dec 14                                                        Dec 14
                                                                                                                                                                                            Dec 18
                                                                                                                           Apr 08                                                                                                                          Dec 28                                                                          Dec 28                                                        Dec 28
                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan 01




      Notes: The figure plots the R number, R
                                                                                                                           Apr 22                                                                                                                          Jan 11                                                                          Jan 11                                                        Jan 11
                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan 15
                                                                                                                           May 06                                                                                                                          Jan 25                                                                          Jan 25                                                        Jan 25
                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan 29
                                                                                                                           May 20                                                                                                                          Feb 08                                                                          Feb 08                                                        Feb 08
                                                                                                                                                                                            Feb 12
                                                                                                                           Jun 03                                                                                                                          Feb 22                                                                          Feb 22                                                        Feb 22
                                                                                                                                                                                            Feb 26




                                                                                                                                                                                2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2020-2021




                                                                                                                           Jun 17                                                                                                                          Mar 08                                                                          Mar 08                                                        Mar 08
                                                                                                                                                                                            Mar 12
                                                                                                                            Jul 01




                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3




                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5




                                                                                                                            Jul 15
                                                                                                                            Jul 29
                                                                                                                           Aug 12
                                                                                                                           Aug 26
                                                                                                                           Sep 09
                                                                                                                           Sep 23




A.8
                                                                                                                           Oct 07
                                                                                                                           Oct 21
                                                                                                                           Nov 04
                                                                                                                           Nov 18




                                                                                                                                                               United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3




                                                                                                                           Dec 02                                                           Mar 19                                                         Mar 25                                                                          Mar 15                                                        Mar 22
                                                                                                                           Dec 16                                                           Apr 02                                                         Apr 08                                                                          Mar 29                                                        Apr 05
                                                                                                                           Dec 30                                                           Apr 16                                                         Apr 22                                                                          Apr 12                                                        Apr 19
                                                                                                                           Jan 13                                                           Apr 30                                                         May 06                                                                          Apr 26                                                        May 03
                                                                                                                           Jan 27                                                           May 14                                                         May 20                                                                          May 10                                                        May 17
                                                                                                                           Feb 10                                                           May 28                                                         Jun 03                                                                          May 24                                                        May 31
                                                                                                                           Feb 24                                                           Jun 11                                                         Jun 17                                                                          Jun 07                                                        Jun 14




                                                                                                               2020-2021
                                                                                                                           Mar 10                                                           Jun 25                                                          Jul 01                                                                         Jun 21                                                        Jun 28




                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jul 09                                                         Jul 15                                                                          Jul 05                                                        Jul 12




                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jul 23                                                         Jul 29                                                                          Jul 19                                                        Jul 26
                                                                                                                                                                                            Aug 06                                                         Aug 12                                                                          Aug 02                                                        Aug 09
                                                                                                                                                                                            Aug 20                                                         Aug 26                                                                          Aug 16                                                        Aug 23
                                                                                                                                                                                            Sep 03                                                         Sep 09                                                                          Aug 30                                                        Sep 06
                                                                                                                                                                                            Sep 17                                                         Sep 23                                                                          Sep 13                                                        Sep 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Italy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                            Oct 01                                                                                                                                         Sep 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 France




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oct 04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Poland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oct 07
                                                                                                                                                                                            Oct 15                                                                                                                                         Oct 11                                                        Oct 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oct 21
                                                                                                                                                                                            Oct 29                                                                                                                                         Oct 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of multiplication factors, MF=5 (solid red line) and MF=3 (dotted black line)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Nov 04                                                                                                                                        Nov 01
                                                                                                                                                                                            Nov 12                                                                                                                                         Nov 08                                                        Nov 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Nov 18
                                                                                                                                                                                            Nov 26                                                                                                                                         Nov 22                                                        Nov 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dec 02
                                                                                                                                                                                            Dec 10                                                                                                                                         Dec 06                                                        Dec 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dec 16
                                                                                                                                                                                            Dec 24                                                                                                                                         Dec 20                                                        Dec 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dec 30
                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan 07                                                                                                                                         Jan 03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jan 13                                                                                                                                        Jan 10
                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan 21                                                                                                                                         Jan 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jan 27                                                                                                                                        Jan 24
                                                                                                                                                                                            Feb 04                                                                                                                                         Jan 31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Feb 10                                                                                                                                        Feb 07




                                            ^ et , using MF=5 (solid red line) and MF=3 (dotted black line).
                                                                                                                                                                                            Feb 18                                                                                                                                         Feb 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Feb 24                                                                                                                                        Feb 21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Feb 28




                                                                                                                                                                                2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                                            Mar 04                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mar 07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mar 10                                                                          Mar 14
                                                                                                                                                                                            Mar 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3




                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure A.5: Comparisons of estimated R numbers for sample of European countries for two choices
A.4          Comparison of estimated transmission rates for selected countries for two
            choices of multiplication factors, MF=5 and MF=3


Figure A.6: Comparison of estimated transmission rates for China and the rest of the world for
two choices of multiplication factors, MF=5 (solid blue line) and MF=3 (dotted black line)

                          China                                            World Excl. China
       3                                             3             3                                          3



      2.5                                            2.5
                                                                 2.5                                          2.5


       2                                             2
                                                                   2                                          2

      1.5                                            1.5

                                                                 1.5                                          1.5
       1                                             1


                                                                   1                                          1
      0.5                                            0.5



       0                                             0           0.5                                          0.5
            Feb 04
            Feb 18
            Mar 03
            Mar 17
            Mar 31




            Feb 02
            Feb 16
            Mar 02
            Mar 16




                                                                       Mar 23




                                                                       Feb 08
                                                                       Feb 22
                                                                       Mar 08
            Apr 14
            Apr 28




            Aug 04
            Aug 18
            Sep 01
            Sep 15
            Sep 29
            Oct 13
            Oct 27




                                                                       Apr 06
                                                                       Apr 20
            Nov 10
            Nov 24
            Dec 08
            Dec 22




                                                                       Aug 10
                                                                       Aug 24
                                                                       Sep 07
                                                                       Sep 21
                                                                       Oct 05
                                                                       Oct 19
            May 12
            May 26




                                                                       May 04
                                                                       May 18




                                                                       Nov 02
                                                                       Nov 16
                                                                       Nov 30
                                                                       Dec 14
                                                                       Dec 28
             Jul 07
             Jul 21




                                                                        Jul 13
                                                                        Jul 27
            Jun 09
            Jun 23




            Jan 05
            Jan 19




                                                                       Jun 01
                                                                       Jun 15
                                                                       Jun 29




                                                                       Jan 11
                                                                       Jan 25
                                         2020-2021                                                2020-2021




Notes: The figure plots the effective transmission rate ^ × 14 = ^ / using multiplication factor MF=5 (solid blue
                                                         t        t
line) and MF=3 (dotted black line).



Figure A.7: Comparison of estimated transmission rates for North and South Hemispheres (excl.
China) for two choices of multiplication factors, MF=5 (solid blue line) and MF=3 (dotted black
line)

               North Hemisphere Excl. China                                South Hemisphere
        3                                            3            3                                           3



      2.5                                            2.5         2.5                                          2.5



        2                                            2            2                                           2



      1.5                                            1.5         1.5                                          1.5



        1                                            1            1                                           1



      0.5                                            0.5         0.5                                          0.5
            Mar 23




            Feb 08
            Feb 22
            Mar 08




                                                                       Mar 25




                                                                       Feb 10
                                                                       Feb 24
                                                                       Mar 10
            Apr 06
            Apr 20




            Aug 10
            Aug 24
            Sep 07
            Sep 21
            Oct 05
            Oct 19




                                                                       Apr 08
                                                                       Apr 22
            Nov 02
            Nov 16
            Nov 30
            Dec 14
            Dec 28




                                                                       Aug 12
                                                                       Aug 26
                                                                       Sep 09
                                                                       Sep 23
                                                                       Oct 07
                                                                       Oct 21
            May 04
            May 18




                                                                       May 06
                                                                       May 20




                                                                       Nov 04
                                                                       Nov 18
                                                                       Dec 02
                                                                       Dec 16
                                                                       Dec 30
             Jul 13
             Jul 27




                                                                        Jul 01
                                                                        Jul 15
                                                                        Jul 29
            Jun 01
            Jun 15
            Jun 29




            Jan 11
            Jan 25




                                                                       Jun 03
                                                                       Jun 17




                                                                       Jan 13
                                                                       Jan 27




                                         2020-2021                                                2020-2021




Notes: The figure plots the effective transmission rate ^ × 14 = ^ / using multiplication factor MF=5 (solid blue
                                                         t        t
line) and MF=3 (dotted black line).




                                                           A.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3




                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 21                                                               Mar 07                                                                         Mar 20                                                                        Mar 01
                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 04                                                               Mar 21                                                                         Apr 03                                                                        Mar 15
                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 18                                                               Apr 04                                                                         Apr 17                                                                        Mar 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Apr 18                                                                         May 01                                                                        Apr 12
                                                                                                                                                                             May 02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  May 02                                                                                                                                                       Apr 26
                                                                                                                                                                             May 16                                                                                                                                              May 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  May 16                                                                                                                                                       May 10
                                                                                                                                                                             May 30                                                                                                                                              May 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  May 30                                                                                                                                                       May 24
                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 13                                                                                                                                              Jun 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jun 13                                                                                                                                                       Jun 07
                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 27                                                                                                                                              Jun 26                                                                        Jun 21
                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 11                                                              Jun 27                                                                          Jul 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jul 11                                                                                                                                                       Jul 05
                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 25                                                                                                                                              Jul 24                                                                        Jul 19
                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 08                                                                Jul 25                                                                        Aug 07                                                                        Aug 02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Aug 08                                                                         Aug 21
                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Aug 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Aug 22
                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 05                                                                                                                                              Sep 04                                                                        Aug 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sep 05
                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 19                                                                                                                                              Sep 18                                                                        Sep 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sep 19
                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 03                                                                                                                                              Oct 02                                                                        Sep 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Oct 03
                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 17                                                                                                                                              Oct 16                                                                        Oct 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Oct 17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 South Asia
                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 31                                                                                                                                              Oct 30                                                                        Oct 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Oct 31




       line) and MF=3 (dotted black line).
                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 14                                                                                                                                              Nov 13                                                                        Nov 08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Western Europe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Nov 14
                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 28                                                                                                                                              Nov 27                                                                        Nov 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Nov 28
                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 12                                                                                                                                              Dec 11                                                                        Dec 06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dec 12
                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 26                                                                                                                                              Dec 25                                                                        Dec 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dec 26                                                                                                                                                       Jan 03
                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 09                                                               Jan 09                                                                         Jan 08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Middle East and North Africa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan 22                                                                        Jan 17
                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 23                                                               Jan 23                                                                                                                                                       Jan 31
                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 06                                                               Feb 06                                                                         Feb 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   East Asia and Pacific (Excl. China)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Feb 14
                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 20                                                               Feb 20                                                                         Feb 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Feb 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 06                                                               Mar 06                                                                         Mar 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mar 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mar 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3




                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2.5




                                             Notes: The figure plots the effective transmission rate  t




A.10
                                                                                                     ^ × 14 = 
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3




                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 25                                                               Mar 29                                                                         Mar 26                                                                        Apr 01
                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 08                                                               Apr 12                                                                         Apr 09                                                                        Apr 15
                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 22                                                               Apr 26                                                                         Apr 23                                                                        Apr 29
                                                                                                                                                                             May 06                                                               May 10                                                                         May 07                                                                        May 13
                                                                                                                                                                             May 20                                                               May 24                                                                         May 21                                                                        May 27
                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 03                                                               Jun 07                                                                         Jun 04                                                                        Jun 10
                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 17                                                               Jun 21                                                                         Jun 18                                                                        Jun 24
                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 01                                                               Jul 05                                                                         Jul 02                                                                        Jul 08
                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 15                                                               Jul 19                                                                         Jul 16                                                                        Jul 22
                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 29                                                              Aug 02                                                                          Jul 30                                                                       Aug 05
                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 12                                                               Aug 16                                                                         Aug 13                                                                        Aug 19
                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 26                                                               Aug 30                                                                         Aug 27                                                                        Sep 02
                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 09                                                               Sep 13                                                                         Sep 10                                                                        Sep 16
                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 23                                                               Sep 27                                                                         Sep 24                                                                        Sep 30
                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 07                                                               Oct 11                                                                         Oct 08                                                                        Oct 14
                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 21                                                               Oct 25                                                                         Oct 22                                                                        Oct 28
                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 04                                                               Nov 08                                                                         Nov 05                                                                        Nov 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      North America


                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 18                                                               Nov 22                                                                         Nov 19                                                                        Nov 25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 02                                                               Dec 06                                                                         Dec 03                                                                        Dec 09
                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 16                                                               Dec 20                                                                         Dec 17                                                                        Dec 23
                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 30                                                               Jan 03                                                                         Dec 31                                                                        Jan 06
                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 13                                                               Jan 17                                                                         Jan 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Latin America and Caribbean




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan 20
                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 27                                                               Jan 31                                                                         Jan 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Eastern Europe and Central Asia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Feb 03
                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 10                                                               Feb 14                                                                         Feb 11                                                                        Feb 17
                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 24                                                               Feb 28                                                                         Feb 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mar 03




                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 10                                                               Mar 14                                                                         Mar 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mar 17




                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3




                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         for two choices of multiplication factors, MF=5 (solid blue line) and MF=3 (dotted black line)




                                                                                                              ^ / using multiplication factor MF=5 (solid blue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure A.8: Comparison of estimated transmission rates for main geographic regions (excl. China)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3




                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 07                                                                     Mar 25                                                             Apr 06                                                   Mar 28
                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 21                                                                     Apr 08                                                             Apr 20                                                   Apr 11
                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 04                                                                     Apr 22                                                             May 04                                                   Apr 25
                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 18                                                                     May 06                                                             May 18                                                   May 09
                                                                                                                                                                             May 02                                                                     May 20                                                             Jun 01                                                   May 23
                                                                                                                                                                             May 16                                                                     Jun 03                                                             Jun 15                                                   Jun 06
                                                                                                                                                                             May 30                                                                     Jun 17                                                             Jun 29                                                   Jun 20
                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 13                                                                      Jul 01                                                             Jul 13                                                   Jul 04
                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 27                                                                      Jul 15                                                                                                                      Jul 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul 27
                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 11                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug 01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jul 29                                                            Aug 10
                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 25                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Aug 12                                                             Aug 24
                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 08                                                                                                                                                                                                 Aug 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Aug 26                                                             Sep 07
                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sep 09                                                             Sep 21                                                   Sep 12
                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        US



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sep 23                                                                                                                      Sep 26




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Iran
                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 19                                                                                                                                        Oct 05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               India
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oct 07                                                             Oct 19                                                   Oct 10
                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 03
                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 17                                                                     Oct 21                                                             Nov 02                                                   Oct 24




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                South Africa
                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 31                                                                     Nov 04                                                                                                                      Nov 07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Nov 16




       line) and MF=3 (dotted black line).
                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 14                                                                     Nov 18                                                                                                                      Nov 21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Nov 30
                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 28                                                                     Dec 02                                                                                                                      Dec 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dec 14
                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 12                                                                     Dec 16                                                                                                                      Dec 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dec 28
                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 26                                                                     Dec 30                                                                                                                      Jan 02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jan 11
                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 09                                                                     Jan 13                                                                                                                      Jan 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jan 25
                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 23                                                                     Jan 27                                                                                                                      Jan 30
                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 06                                                                                                                                        Feb 08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Feb 10                                                                                                                      Feb 13
                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 20                                                                                                                                        Feb 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Feb 24                                                                                                                      Feb 27




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 06                                                                                                                                        Mar 08                                                   Mar 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mar 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3




                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.5




                                             Notes: The figure plots the effective transmission rate  t




A.11
                                                                                                     ^ × 14 = 
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3




                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 01                                                                     Mar 24                                                             Apr 14                                                   Mar 29
                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 15                                                                     Apr 07                                                             Apr 28                                                   Apr 12
                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 29                                                                     Apr 21                                                             May 12                                                   Apr 26
                                                                                                                                                                             May 13                                                                     May 05                                                             May 26                                                   May 10
                                                                                                                                                                             May 27                                                                     May 19                                                             Jun 09                                                   May 24
                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 10                                                                     Jun 02                                                             Jun 23                                                   Jun 07
                                                                                                                                                                             Jun 24                                                                     Jun 16                                                              Jul 07                                                  Jun 21
                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 08                                                                    Jun 30                                                                                                                       Jul 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul 21
                                                                                                                                                                              Jul 22                                                                     Jul 14                                                                                                                      Jul 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Aug 04
                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 05                                                                      Jul 28                                                                                                                     Aug 02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Aug 18
                                                                                                                                                                             Aug 19                                                                     Aug 11                                                                                                                      Aug 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Aug 25                                                             Sep 01
                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 02                                                                                                                                                                                                 Aug 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sep 08                                                             Sep 15
                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 16                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sep 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sep 22                                                             Sep 29
                                                                                                                                                                             Sep 30                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sep 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Brazil




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oct 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Russia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oct 06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Turkey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 multiplication factors, MF=5 (solid blue line) and MF=3 (dotted black line)




                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 14                                                                                                                                                                                                 Oct 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Australia

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oct 20                                                             Oct 27                                                   Oct 25
                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Nov 03                                                             Nov 10                                                   Nov 08
                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Nov 17                                                             Nov 24                                                   Nov 22
                                                                                                                                                                             Nov 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dec 01                                                             Dec 08                                                   Dec 06
                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dec 15                                                             Dec 22                                                   Dec 20
                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dec 29                                                             Jan 05                                                   Jan 03
                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan 12                                                             Jan 19                                                   Jan 17
                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan 26                                                             Feb 02                                                   Jan 31
                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Feb 09                                                             Feb 16                                                   Feb 14
                                                                                                                                                                             Feb 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Feb 23                                                                                                                      Feb 28
                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 03                                                                                                                                        Mar 02




                                                                                                                                                                 2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mar 09                                                                                                                      Mar 14
                                                                                                                                                                             Mar 17                                                                                                                                        Mar 16




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3




                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5




                                                                                                              ^ / using multiplication factor MF=5 (solid blue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure A.9: Comparison of estimated transmission rates for selected countries for two choices of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mar 27                                                         Mar 23                                                                          Mar 23                                                        Mar 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Apr 10                                                         Apr 06                                                                          Apr 06                                                        Apr 06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Apr 24                                                         Apr 20                                                                          Apr 20                                                        Apr 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          May 08                                                         May 04                                                                          May 04                                                        May 04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          May 22                                                         May 18                                                                          May 18                                                        May 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jun 05                                                         Jun 01                                                                          Jun 01                                                        Jun 01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jun 19                                                         Jun 15                                                                          Jun 15                                                        Jun 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul 03                                                        Jun 29                                                                          Jun 29                                                        Jun 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul 17                                                         Jul 13                                                                          Jul 13                                                        Jul 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul 31                                                         Jul 27                                                                          Jul 27                                                        Jul 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Aug 14                                                         Aug 10                                                                          Aug 10                                                        Aug 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Aug 28                                                         Aug 24                                                                          Aug 24                                                        Aug 24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sep 11                                                         Sep 07                                                                          Sep 07                                                        Sep 07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sep 25                                                         Sep 21                                                                          Sep 21                                                        Sep 21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Oct 09                                                         Oct 05                                                                          Oct 05                                                        Oct 05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Belgium




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Portugal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Germany
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Oct 23                                                         Oct 19                                                                          Oct 19                                                        Oct 19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Nov 06                                                         Nov 02                                                                          Nov 02                                                        Nov 02




   line) and MF=3 (dotted black line).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Nov 20                                                         Nov 16                                                                          Nov 16                                                        Nov 16




                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dec 04                                                         Nov 30                                                                          Nov 30                                                        Nov 30
                                                                                                                                                                         Mar 25                                                                                                                          Dec 14                                                                          Dec 14                                                        Dec 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dec 18
                                                                                                                                                                         Apr 08                                                                                                                          Dec 28                                                                          Dec 28                                                        Dec 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan 01
                                                                                                                                                                         Apr 22                                                                                                                          Jan 11                                                                          Jan 11                                                        Jan 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan 15
                                                                                                                                                                         May 06                                                                                                                          Jan 25                                                                          Jan 25                                                        Jan 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan 29
                                                                                                                                                                         May 20                                                                                                                          Feb 08                                                                          Feb 08                                                        Feb 08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Feb 12
                                                                                                                                                                         Jun 03                                                                                                                          Feb 22                                                                          Feb 22                                                        Feb 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Feb 26




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                         Jun 17                                                                                                                          Mar 08                                                                          Mar 08                                                        Mar 08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mar 12
                                                                                                                                                                          Jul 01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5




                                                                                                                                                                          Jul 15
                                                                                                                                                                          Jul 29
                                                                                                                                                                         Aug 12




                                         Notes: The figure plots the effective transmission rate 
                                                                                                                                                                         Aug 26




                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                                                                         Sep 09
                                                                                                                                                                         Sep 23




A.12
                                                                                                                                                                         Oct 07
                                                                                                                                                                         Oct 21
                                                                                                                                                                         Nov 04
                                                                                                                                                                         Nov 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                             United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3




                                                                                                 ^ × 14 = 
                                                                                                                                                                         Dec 02




                                                                                                           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mar 19                                                         Mar 25                                                                          Mar 15                                                        Mar 22
                                                                                                                                                                         Dec 16                                                           Apr 02                                                         Apr 08                                                                          Mar 29                                                        Apr 05
                                                                                                                                                                         Dec 30                                                           Apr 16                                                         Apr 22                                                                          Apr 12                                                        Apr 19
                                                                                                                                                                         Jan 13                                                           Apr 30                                                         May 06                                                                          Apr 26                                                        May 03
                                                                                                                                                                         Jan 27                                                           May 14                                                         May 20                                                                          May 10                                                        May 17
                                                                                                                                                                         Feb 10                                                           May 28                                                         Jun 03                                                                          May 24                                                        May 31
                                                                                                                                                                         Feb 24                                                           Jun 11                                                         Jun 17                                                                          Jun 07                                                        Jun 14




                                                                                                                                                             2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                         Mar 10                                                           Jun 25                                                          Jul 01                                                                         Jun 21                                                        Jun 28




                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul 09                                                         Jul 15                                                                          Jul 05                                                        Jul 12




                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul 23                                                         Jul 29                                                                          Jul 19                                                        Jul 26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Aug 06                                                         Aug 12                                                                          Aug 02                                                        Aug 09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Aug 20                                                         Aug 26                                                                          Aug 16                                                        Aug 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sep 03                                                         Sep 09                                                                          Aug 30                                                        Sep 06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sep 17                                                         Sep 23                                                                          Sep 13                                                        Sep 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Italy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Oct 01                                                                                                                                         Sep 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               France




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oct 04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Poland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oct 07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Oct 15                                                                                                                                         Oct 11                                                        Oct 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oct 21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Oct 29                                                                                                                                         Oct 25                                                        Nov 01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nov 04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Nov 12                                                                                                                                         Nov 08                                                        Nov 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nov 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Nov 26                                                                                                                                         Nov 22                                                        Nov 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dec 02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dec 10                                                                                                                                         Dec 06                                                        Dec 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dec 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dec 24                                                                                                                                         Dec 20                                                        Dec 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dec 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan 07                                                                                                                                         Jan 03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan 13                                                                                                                                        Jan 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan 21                                                                                                                                         Jan 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan 27                                                                                                                                        Jan 24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         choices of multiplication factors, MF=5 (solid blue line) and MF=3 (dotted black line)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Feb 04                                                                                                                                         Jan 31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Feb 10                                                                                                                                        Feb 07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Feb 18                                                                                                                                         Feb 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Feb 24                                                                                                                                        Feb 21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Feb 28




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2020-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2020-2021




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mar 04                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mar 07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mar 10                                                                          Mar 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mar 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5




                                                                                                          ^ / using multiplication factor MF=5 (solid blue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure A.10: Comparison of estimated transmission rates for sample of European countries for two
