                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE EFFECT OF MACROECONOMIC UNCERTAINTY ON HOUSEHOLD SPENDING

                                        Olivier Coibion
                                      Dimitris Georgarakos
                                      Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                          Geoff Kenny
                                        Michael Weber

                                       Working Paper 28625
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28625


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




We thank Justus Meyer for excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the European Central Bank or any
other institution with which the authors are affiliated. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Olivier Coibion, Dimitris Georgarakos, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Geoff Kenny, and
Michael Weber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Effect of Macroeconomic Uncertainty on Household Spending
Olivier Coibion, Dimitris Georgarakos, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Geoff Kenny, and Michael
Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 28625
March 2021
JEL No. E21,E3,E4,E5

                                         ABSTRACT

Using a new survey of European households, we study how exogenous variation in the
macroeconomic uncertainty perceived by households affects their spending decisions. We use
randomized information treatments that provide different types of information about the first and/
or second moments of future economic growth to generate exogenous changes in the perceived
macroeconomic uncertainty of some households. The effects on their spending decisions relative
to an untreated control group are measured in follow-up surveys. Higher macroeconomic
uncertainty induces households to reduce their spending on non-durable goods and services in
subsequent months as well as to engage in fewer purchases of larger items such as package
holidays or luxury goods. Moreover, uncertainty reduces household propensity to invest in
mutual funds. These results support the notion that macroeconomic uncertainty can impact
household decisions and have large negative effects on economic outcomes.

Olivier Coibion                                 Geoff Kenny
Department of Economics                         European Central Bank
University of Texas at Austin                   Sonnenmannstrasse 20
2225 Speedway                                   60314 Frankfurt
Austin, TX 78712                                Germany
and NBER                                        geoff.kenny@ecb.int
ocoibion@gmail.com
                                                Michael Weber
Dimitris Georgarakos                            Booth School of Business
European Central Bank                           University of Chicago
Sonnemannstrasse 20 (Main Building)             5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
60314 Frankfurt am Main                         Chicago, IL 60637
Germany                                         and NBER
dimitris.georgarakos@ecb.int                    michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and IZA
and also NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
"Volatility, according to some measures, has been over five times as high over the past six months
as it was in the first half of 2007. The resulting uncertainty has almost surely contributed to a
decline in spending."                                         CEA Chair Christina Romer (2009)


1      Introduction
"Almost surely." The idea that high uncertainty induces households to spend less and firms to
reduce their investment and employment is intuitive and consistent with many theoretical models.
It is also omnipresent in policymakers' discussions of the economy, particularly during times of
crisis. Yet, as emphasized in Bloom's (2014) survey of the literature on uncertainty, the empirical
evidence on these channels is at best "suggestive" and "more empirical work on the effects of
uncertainty would be valuable, particularly work which can identify clear causal relationships." In
this paper, we use randomized control trials (RCTs) in a new large cross-country survey of
European households to induce exogenous variation in the macroeconomic uncertainty perceived
by households and study the causal effects of the resulting change in uncertainty on their spending
relative to that of untreated households. We find that higher uncertainty leads to sharply reduced
spending by households on both non-durables and services in subsequent months as well as on
some durable and luxury goods and services. In short, we provide direct causal evidence that the
"almost surely" can be safely dropped: higher uncertainty makes households spend less on
average.
       Our results are based on a new, population-representative survey of households in Europe
implemented by the European Central Bank (ECB). This survey spans the six largest euro area
countries and thousands of households. In September 2020, we made use of the significant
dispersion in professional forecasts about GDP growth in the euro area and implemented
information treatments to randomly selected subsets of respondents to affect their expectations and
uncertainty about future economic growth. Some treatments primarily affected first moments of
household expectations (e.g., by telling them about average professional forecasts of future GDP
growth), some affected the second moments of their expectations (e.g., by telling them about the
uncertainty in professional forecasts of future GDP growth), and some affected both (e.g., by
telling them both about the average level and the uncertainty in professional forecasts of future
growth). The differential effects of these information treatments on the first and second moments
of households' growth expectations allow us to identify exogenous variation in the perceived
macroeconomic uncertainty of households. With follow-up surveys that measured household

                                                                                                 1
spending along different dimensions, we can then characterize the extent to which changes in
uncertainty drive household spending decisions.
       Our main result is that higher uncertainty, holding constant the first moment of
expectations, reduces the spending of households over the next several months. The effect is
economically large. In contrast, we find little effect of the first moment of expectations on
household spending. As emphasized in Bloom (2014), a central challenge in the uncertainty
literature has been separately identifying the effects of expectations about first and second
moments, since most large uncertainty events are also associated with significant deteriorations in
the expected economic outlook. Our results suggest that, at least when it comes to households, it
is uncertainty that is driving declines in spending rather than concerns about the expected path of
the economy. These declines in spending stemming from rising uncertainty mainly regard
discretionary spending such as health and personal care products and services, entertainment,
holidays and luxury goods. Spending is most affected by uncertainty for those individuals working
in riskier sectors, as well as households whose investment portfolios are most exposed to risky
financial assets. We also find that when individuals face higher uncertainty, they report that they
would be less likely to allocate new financial investments to mutual funds or cryptocurrencies.
These results indicate that macroeconomic uncertainty affects not just spending decisions but also
likely portfolio allocations. On the other hand, we show that (exogenously induced) uncertainty
does not influence household attitudes towards investing in real estate.
       These results contribute to a growing literature on uncertainty building on the seminal work
of Bloom (2009). Work in this literature has focused empirically on how to measure uncertainty
and quantify the effect of uncertainty on aggregate conditions (e.g., Bloom et al. 2018; Baker,
Bloom and Davis 2016; Jurado, Ludvigson and Ng 2015; Berger, Dew-Becker and Giglio 2019)
and theoretically on understanding the different channels through which uncertainty can affect
decision-making (e.g., Leduc and Liu 2016, Basu and Bundick 2017). Much of this work has
emphasized the effect of uncertainty on firms' decisions (Guiso and Parigi 1999; Bloom, Bond
and van Reenen 2007; Baker, Bloom and Davis 2016; Gulen and Ion 2016). There has been more
limited research with mixed results on how households respond to uncertainty. Ben-David et al.
(2018), for example, find that U.S. households who are more uncertain about future economic
outcomes are more cautious in their consumption and investment decisions, while Khan and
Knotek (2011) conclude that uncertainty shocks have only modest effects, at best, on household


                                                                                                 2
spending. Christelis et al. (2020b), using Dutch survey data, find that household uncertainty about
future consumption induces a strong precautionary savings behavior. Dietrich et al. (2020)
consider the possible implications of the rise in uncertainty during the COVID-19 pandemic.
       A key challenge in the uncertainty literature is identifying exogenous variation in
uncertainty, since large uncertainty episodes are typically associated with events that affect first
moments as well as second moments (e.g., 9/11 attacks, Brexit, etc.). Baker, Bloom, and Terry
(2020) utilize natural experiments like political shocks or natural disasters to try to identify
uncertainty shocks. A more common strategy is to utilize timing restrictions in VARs (e.g., Caldara
et al. 2016, Jurado, Ludvigson and Ng 2015, Bachmann, Elstner and Sims 2013). In contrast to
this earlier body of work, we apply RCT methods to help identify exogenous changes in
uncertainty. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to apply such methods to create
exogenous variation in the uncertainty of households that can then be used to characterize how
uncertainty affects spending and portfolio decisions. Moreover, given that we use micro data we
can explore the likely heterogeneous effects that uncertainty has across various population
segments.
       Our paper is part of a broader research agenda that is incorporating RCT methods in large
scale surveys of households and firms to address macroeconomic questions. Roth and Wohlfart
(2020), for example, use information treatments about the economic outlook to study how
households' expectations about future growth affect their consumption plans. Armantier et al.
(2016) and Cavallo, Cruces and Perez-Truglia (2017) study how different types of information
about inflation or monetary policy affect households' inflation expectations. Coibion,
Gorodnichenko and Weber (2019) and Coibion et al. (2019) follow a similar strategy to show that
exogenous variation in households' inflation expectations affect their subsequent spending
decisions. Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Kumar (2018) use RCT methods to study how firms'
expectations affect their subsequent pricing, investment and employment decisions. Relative to
this earlier body of work, we are the first to use this identification strategy to characterize how
economic uncertainty affects the spending decisions of households and their investment attitudes.
       Our RCT results exploit a new monthly survey of households that provides harmonized
information across the six largest euro area countries (Belgium, Germany, France, Italy, the
Netherlands and Spain). The survey offers nationally representative data with interviews of
approximately 10,000 households per wave. The survey covers a wide range of questions on


                                                                                                  3
household expectations and behavior, similar to the coverage of the Survey of Consumer
Expectations run by the New York Federal Reserve, but its scale is significantly larger. In
September 2020, we were able to implement a special-purpose survey beyond the regular survey
modules. In this special survey, randomly selected households were provided with certain types of
information (or no information) about either euro area GDP growth, uncertainty about that future
growth, or country-specific measures of growth. Subsequent waves in October 2020 and January
2021 allowed us to assess whether household spending and investment varied with the information
treatments.
       Our results support one of the main mechanisms via which uncertainty is thought to affect
macroeconomic outcomes. The clear evidence we document on household spending speaks
directly to policy discussions involving the extent to which high levels of uncertainty may depress
economic activity. Our treatments provide information to households about forecasts and
disagreement among professional forecasters for euro area growth without any reference to
COVID-19. As we show, these information treatments introduce sufficient variation in household
expectations and uncertainty to identify the effects of both the first and second moments on
household behaviour. The COVID-19 epidemic has been associated with exceptionally high levels
of uncertainty for certain groups of households and has contributed to a reduction in their spending
(Binder 2020). Yet, our inference is not driven by pandemic-induced uncertainty per se as
households impacted by the pandemic are equally represented in the control and treatment groups.
Still, our treatments may introduce proportionally higher macroeconomic uncertainty to
households that are susceptible to the effects of COVID-19. In view of this, we also use our
approach to shed light on such heterogeneous treatment effects by considering households with a
different exposure to COVID-19 (e.g., split households by sector of employment).
       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the survey. Section 3 presents results
on how the information treatments affect expectations. Section 4 then provides evidence on the
extent to which exogenous changes in uncertainty change household spending and investment
decisions. Section 5 concludes.


2.     Data and Survey Design

We use micro data from the ECB's Consumer Expectations Survey (CES), a new online high-
frequency panel survey measuring euro area consumer expectations and behavior. The new survey

                                                                                                  4
builds on recent international experiences and advances in survey methodology and design, as
reflected, for example, in the New York Fed's Survey of Consumer Expectations (SCE). The CES
has a number of novel features that make it easier to explore the transmission of economic shocks
in the euro area via the household sector. In what follows we provide a brief summary of the main
survey features. Georgarakos and Kenny (2021) provide a more detailed description of the CES
and ECB (2021) contains a first evaluation of the survey.
     The CES was launched in a pilot phase in January 2020 and quickly achieved its target
sample size of approximately 10,000 households by April 2020. Households are interviewed on a
monthly basis in the six largest euro area economies: Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, the
Netherlands and Spain. The sample is comprised of anonymized household-level responses from
approximately 2,000 households in France, Germany, Spain and Italy and 1,000 households in
Belgium and the Netherlands. Respondents are invited to answer online questionnaires every
month and leave the panel between 12 and 18 months after joining. Three out of four participants
in the four largest euro area countries are recruited by phone via random dialing while the
remainder are drawn from existing samples. Survey weights are employed to help ensure that the
data are nationally representative. As the six countries currently covered by the CES account
collectively for more than 85% of the euro area GDP, the survey also provides good coverage for
the overall household sector in the euro area.
       Each respondent completes a background questionnaire upon survey recruitment. This
provides a range of important information that hardly changes on a monthly frequency (e.g., family
situation, household annual income, accumulated wealth). More time-sensitive information, e.g.,
on expectations, is collected in a series of monthly, quarterly and special-purpose questionnaires.
Our results are based on four specific waves of the survey (August, September and October 2020
as well as January 2021). The September wave was augmented to incorporate a special-purpose
survey in which we implemented our RCT and asked additional questions.
       Table 1 provides descriptive statistics about respondents. For example, the average age of
the respondent is 49 and the average household after-tax income is 34.4 thousand euro per year for
an average household size of 2.6. Around 46% of respondents are working full-time with another
13% working part-time, 24% are out of the labor force, while the remaining 17% are either looking
for a job or on leave from work (either temporarily or long-term). Most respondents are quite
educated, with 53% reporting that they had completed some tertiary schooling.


                                                                                                 5
        The additional questions focus partly on the expectations of households about aggregate
economic growth, both in levels and in terms of uncertainty. To measure their initial beliefs about
euro area growth, we first ask the following question (Appendix C provides the detailed translated
questionnaire):

        "Please give your best guess about the lowest growth rate (your prediction for the most
        pessimistic scenario for the euro area growth rate over the next 12 months) and the highest
        growth rate (your most optimistic prediction)."

From the answers about how low and how high economic growth (denoted with  and 
respectively) could potentially be, we compute the moments of the subjective distribution of
economic growth by assuming that it follows a simple triangular distribution around ( +  )/2
(see Guiso, Jappelli and Pistaferri 2002). Based on the elicited values for  ,  , we compute the
household-specific mean forecast of growth and the uncertainty in their forecast as the standard
deviation of the distribution of expected economic growth. The formulas of these statistics are
reported in Appendix B.1
        Summary statistics from this question are reported in Table 2. We present both the raw
mean, uncertainty, and cross-sectional standard deviations across all respondents and within each
country, as well as Huber-robust versions of these moments to systematically control for outliers.
The average forecast of growth of the euro area was around 0.2% with a large standard deviation
of 12.3%. Using robust methods yields a mean forecast of 1.5% and a cross-sectional standard
deviation of 6.5%, indicating pervasive disagreement across households. Households are also very
uncertain, with the Huber-robust average household level of uncertainty being 1.5%. But just as
with the mean forecasts, there is a lot of heterogeneity across households in the amount of
uncertainty associated with their forecasts, indicating that some households are quite confident in
their beliefs while others are extremely uncertain.
        This heterogeneity in beliefs can also be seen in Figure 1. Panel A plots the distribution of
mean forecasts across all countries as well as by country, and Panel B does the same for the


1
  Following their answers to this question, respondents are also asked a more cognitively demanding question, namely
to assign a probability of growth being higher than the average of the two: "What do you think is the percentage
chance that the growth rate of the euro area economy over the next 12 months will be greater than ([low growth
rate]+[high growth rate])/2%?" We use this information to calculate a split triangular distribution and we check the
robustness of our baseline results when such distribution is assumed; e.g., compare Table 4 (symmetric triangular
distribution) and Appendix Table 3 (flexible triangular distribution).

                                                                                                                  6
distribution of uncertainty in forecasts. In terms of mean forecasts, we can observe some
significant differences across countries. For example, the mean forecasts of Belgian and Dutch
households are significantly more pessimistic than those of Italian and Spanish households
although the cross-sectional dispersion in forecasts is broadly similar. Panel B confirms that while
many households are relatively confident in their forecasts, there is a large tail of people who report
much more uncertainty in their forecasts about future euro area growth. Germans report the highest
level of uncertainty on average, after adjusting for outliers, but all countries display significant
heterogeneity in the degree of macroeconomic uncertainty across their citizens. Generally,
households with more extreme negative/positive views for the growth rate of GDP in the euro area
have higher uncertainty in their forecasts (Appendix Figure 1).
       Following the initial measurement of household views about the macroeconomic outlook
for the euro area, the information treatment was implemented. Households were randomly
allocated to one of five groups. The first was a control group that received no information. The
second group (Treatment 1) was told about the average professional forecast for euro area growth:

       "The average prediction among professional forecasters is that the euro area economy
       will grow at a rate of 5.6% in 2021. By historical standards, this is a strong growth."

The treatment includes both a quantitative forecast (5.6% for 2021) as well as a qualitative one
("strong growth"). The combination of quantitative and qualitative information was designed to
provide a clear positive signal about the first moment to recipients.
       The third group (Treatment 2) received information about the amount of disagreement
across professional forecasters. Specifically, the information provided was

       "Professional forecasters are uncertain about economic growth in the euro area in 2021,
       with the difference between the most optimistic and the most pessimistic predictions
       being 4.8 percentage points. By historical standards, this is a big difference."

As with the previous information treatment, the statement includes both quantitative and
qualitative information about disagreement. The purpose was to make clear that the provided level
of disagreement across professionals was high because households might not be familiar with the
extent to which professionals disagree about the outlook. This treatment was therefore explicitly
meant to make clear to households that the economic outlook was particularly uncertain. One
should also note that the two quoted numbers in the first two treatment arms (5.6 and 4.8) look

                                                                                                     7
comparable in terms of magnitude, thus it is unlikely that the effects we estimate are driven by
biases due to size effects.
        The fourth group (Treatment 3) was provided with a combination of the previous two,
providing information about both the average forecast and disagreement among professional
forecasts. Specifically, it read

        "The average prediction among professional forecasters is that the euro area economy
        will grow at a rate of 5.6% in 2021. By historical standards, this is a strong growth. At the
        same time, professional forecasters are uncertain about economic growth in the euro area
        in 2021, with the difference between the most optimistic and the most pessimistic
        predictions being 4.8 percentage points. By historical standards, this is a big difference."

As with the two previous treatments, both qualitative and quantitative information about the
outlook was provided. The purpose of this treatment was to help identify any interaction effect of
providing information about first and second moments of macroeconomic forecasts on households'
beliefs and decisions.
        The final group (Treatment 4) was told about disagreement among professional forecasters
about the economic outlook of the specific country in which a given household resides:

        "Professional forecasters are uncertain about economic growth in the country you are
        living in in 2021, with the difference between the most optimistic and the most pessimistic
        predictions being <X%> percentage points. By historical standards, this is a big
        difference."

The purpose of this treatment was to protect against the possibility that households would be
unaffected by information about the euro area. Providing information about their country was
therefore a way to assess whether they placed disproportionate weight on country-specific
information when thinking about the broader economic outlook. On the other hand, the design of
this treatment arm implies that there is significant variation in the intensity of the underlying
treatment information by country (e.g., the professional forecasters' disagreement that is
communicated to respondents varies from 5.2 percentage points in France to 8.4 percentage points
in Spain).
        Following the information treatments (the control group goes straight to the rest of the
survey), respondents were asked a few follow-up questions to measure the instantaneous effect of
the treatments. In particular, we aim to again measure households' expected output growth and


                                                                                                   8
their uncertainty but without re-using the exact same question (to avoid survey fatigue). We do so
by first asking the following:

       "What do you think will be the approximate growth rate in the euro area over the next 12
       months for each of the scenarios below? We start with your prediction for the most
       pessimistic scenario for the euro area growth rate over the next 12 months (LOWEST
       growth rate) and end with your most optimistic prediction (HIGHEST growth rate)."

Respondents are then asked to provide specific growth rates for three different scenarios: the
lowest outcome scenario, a medium scenario, and the highest outcome scenario. Once they have
provided forecasts of growth rates for each scenario, we then ask them to assign probabilities to
each scenario:

       "Please assign a percentage chance to each growth rate to indicate how likely you think
       it is that this growth rate will actually happen in the euro area economy over the next 12
       months. Your answers can range from 0 to 100, where 0 means there is absolutely no
       chance that this growth rate will happen, and 100 means that it is absolutely certain that
       this growth rate will happen. The sum of the points you allocate should total to 100."

This question follows the structure developed by Altig et al. (2020) to measure the uncertainty of
firms about their future sales. Unlike them, we restrict the set of scenarios to three rather than five
to simplify the question for households. This question allows us to measure both mean forecasts
and the uncertainty of the forecasts for each household without repeating the same triangular
question used to extract prior beliefs.
       Finally, in every quarter households are asked to report their spending over the previous
month for a range of different categories including: 1) food, beverages, groceries, tobacco; 2)
restaurants, cafes, canteens; 3) housing (incl. rent); 4) utilities; 5) furnishing, housing equipment,
small appliances and routine maintenance of the house; 6) debt payment; 7) clothing, footwear; 8)
health care and personal care products; 9) transport; 10) travel, recreation, entertainment and
culture; 11) education; and 12) other. The survey design for this question follows that of the
American Life Panel (ALP). That is, after they insert the amounts, respondents see a summary
screen displaying spending by category and the implied total monthly spending. Subsequently,
respondents can double check and amend the originally provided figures (see Appendix C). We
measure total non-durable consumption as the sum of the total amount spent on these categories
excluding debt payments.


                                                                                                     9
       Making use of the panel structure of the survey, we utilize information on non-durable
consumption from the quarterly module in October 2020. It is worth noting that reported amounts
refer to consumption in September, i.e., the period following the implementation of our RCT. This
way, we are able to track the spending behaviour of households in the immediate aftermath of our
RCT by relying on an independent module that was fielded one month later and thus our findings
are less likely to suffer from short-term framing effects that information treatments may create. In
addition, we use equivalent spending measures reported in the January 2021 wave (i.e., referring
to spending three months after the treatment). This allows tracking both the immediate and more
persistent effects of changes in uncertainty on household spending.
       While self-reported spending naturally has some associated measurement error due to
rounding and the difficulty of recalling spending on specific categories with precision, the quality
of the reported information has generally been found to be high (see ECB 2021). Similarly,
Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber (2019) document consistency between self-reported spending
and scanner-tracked spending of U.S. households participating in the Nielsen Homescan Panel. In
any case, one should note that the RCT is robust by design to measurement error in reported
consumer spending.
       In addition to this non-durable consumption measure, households were asked in October if
they had purchased any of the following large durable or luxury goods over the previous month:
1) house; 2) car; 3) other durable goods (e.g., home appliance, furniture, electronic items incl.
gadgets); 4) travel vacation; or 5) luxury goods (e.g., jewellery, watches). Jointly, these questions
allow us to assess whether expectations about future aggregate economic conditions, in terms of
both first and second moments, lead to changes in monthly spending on non-durable goods and
services and/or on larger durable good purchases.
       Finally, in order to assess whether such expectations are likely to impact household
investment behavior, we ask respondents to complete a hypothetical portfolio allocation task. In
particular, after the information treatments, households are asked to characterize how they would
invest hypothetical funds across different financial asset classes. Specifically, they were asked:

       "Imagine that you receive 10,000 to save or invest in financial assets. Please indicate in
       which of the following asset categories you will save/invest this amount."




                                                                                                     10
The categories among which they can choose to invest are: 1) current and savings accounts; 2)
stocks and shares; 3) mutual funds and collective investments; 4) retirement or pension products;
5) short term bonds; 6) long term bonds; and 7) Bitcoin or other crypto assets. Moreover,
respondents were asked in the October wave of the survey to indicate on a 1 (`very bad') to 5
(`very good') scale their views on investment in real estate:

         "Is buying real estate in your neighbourhood today a good or a bad investment?"

We utilize information from this question to examine whether first and second moment
expectations about economic growth causally affect household views on investing in real estate.


3.       The Effects of Information Treatments on Expectations

The key to characterizing whether and how uncertainty affects economic decisions is identifying
exogenous variation in uncertainty. Our RCT approach was designed precisely for this purpose by
using information treatments that provide different types of information about first and second
moments of economic activity in the euro area.
         To assess the effects of different information treatments on expectations, we run
regressions of the form:
  = 0 + 0  + 4
             =1  ×  {   }
                                                                                               (1)
                           + 4
                             =1     ×  {   } ×  +  ,
where i denotes respondent,  denotes the respondent's prior belief,  refers to the
respondent's posterior belief, and  {   } is an indicator variable if respondent i is in
                                                                                           4
treatment group j. The omitted category is the control group, so that coefficients  =1 and
     4
 =1 can be interpreted as being relative to the control group. We run these regressions for

beliefs about the level of future economic growth and the uncertainty about economic growth
separately. In each case, we use Huber-robust regressions to systematically control for outliers and
also control for country fixed effects. We also eliminate roughly 14% of households that according
to para-data spent virtually no time (less than three seconds) on the screen showing the information
treatments.




                                                                                                 11
       By regressing posterior beliefs on prior beliefs, this specification is consistent with
Bayesian learning in which agents form beliefs as a combination of their priors and the signals
they receive. As discussed in Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Kumar (2018), the weight on their prior
belief (coefficients ) is an indication of how noisy/informative they perceive the signals to be.
The coefficient on the prior belief for treated households (0 + 1 , 0 + 2 , 0 + 3 , 0 + 4 )
should generally be between 0 and 1, with a value of 1 indicating that no weight is being assigned
to new information and full weight is being assigned to prior beliefs. A coefficient of zero on priors
for treated households indicates that agents are changing their beliefs fully to the provided signal
regardless of their prior beliefs. We allow this slope coefficient to vary across treatment groups.
This variation informs us about the extent to which agents respond to different signals in updating
                               4
their beliefs. Coefficients  =1 inform us where the signal is relative to the average prior belief.

       We present results of these regressions in Table 3, for mean expectations in columns 1-3
and uncertainty about growth in columns 4-6, both for the full sample (columns 1 and 4) as well
as for households in the Northern countries of Belgium, France, Germany, and the Netherlands
(columns 2 and 5) and for households in the Southern countries of Spain and Italy (columns 3 and
6). Looking first at the results for the control group (row 1), we see that the coefficients on prior
beliefs are approximately 0.75 for growth expectations and 0.60 for uncertainty. Given that this
group is provided no information, one might expect the slope coefficient to be 1. But because the
prior and posterior expectations are measured using different questions, the noise introduced by
this approach leads to a benchmark coefficient on priors which is less than 1. These results are
indistinguishable across regions.
       Overall, the treatments are largely successful in generating variation in both the first and
second moments of household beliefs. Considering first the effects on beliefs about the level of
future growth (columns 1-3), we see that treatments 1 and 3 lead to large revisions in beliefs toward
the provided signal, since the resulting coefficients on the prior beliefs for these treatments (0 +
1 and 0 + 3 ) are less than 0.2. Thus, informing households about the forecast of professional
forecasters for the future growth rate of the euro area (which is included in both treatments) leads
households to significantly revise the first moment of their beliefs. And since the coefficients on
the two treatments are almost identical, this implies that the marginal effect of providing
information about the disagreement among forecasters (which is included in treatment 3 but not
treatment 1) once mean forecasts are included is minimal when it comes to the expectations of

                                                                                                   12
households for the future growth rate. A similar message comes from looking at the coefficients
on the prior beliefs for households in treatments 2 and 4, which only provide information about
disagreement among forecasters. In each case, the coefficient on the prior (0 + 2 and 0 + 4 )
is only marginally smaller than it is for the control group (0 ). This result can also be seen clearly
in Panel A of Figure 2, which plots the prior beliefs about future growth rates of respondents
against their posterior beliefs in binscatter form separately for each treatment group. Beliefs for
households receiving information only about the disagreement among forecasters line up very
closely with those of the control group, indicating that this information does not lead households
to change their views much about the first moments of growth. In contrast, treatments 1 and 3 that
include information about the mean forecasts of professionals clearly lead to much larger revisions
in beliefs. Interestingly, households in Spain and Italy seem to respond more strongly to all of the
treatments in terms of first moment beliefs than do households in Northern countries (column 2
vs. column 3 in Table 3).
       Turning to the effects on uncertainty (columns 4-6), Table 3 documents that treatment 1,
which only involved providing information about the mean forecast of professionals leads to large
revisions in uncertainty of households, as the associated slope coefficient (0 + 1 ) is less than
0.2. Providing information about the disagreement among professionals in addition to providing
information about the mean forecast (treatment 3) further reduces the slope coefficient (0 + 3 )
but not in a statistically significant way. For comparison, providing information only about
disagreement among forecasters about euro area growth (treatment 2) leads to a large reduction in
the slope coefficient relative to the control group, but not as large as that coming from treatment
1. Providing information only about disagreement among forecasters about growth in the
respondent's home country has an even smaller effect on their uncertainty about euro area growth,
indicating that households draw different inferences from country-specific information than they
do from euro area information. Unlike what was the case with households' forecasts of the level
of growth, we see no meaningful differences in how people respond to treatments across
geographic areas. Panel B of Figure 2 presents a visual depiction of these results with non-
parametric estimates of the relationship between uncertainty posteriors and priors. We observe a
similar pattern although the results suggest that the effects are particularly strong for households




                                                                                                   13
with high initial levels of uncertainty.2 Treatment 1, despite only including information about the
mean forecast of professionals, leads to pronounced revisions in uncertainty, surpassed only by
the treatment which includes information about both professionals' forecasts in levels and
disagreement. The treatment involving only disagreement about euro area growth (treatment 2)
leads to significant revisions in beliefs, but less than the treatment involving only the mean
forecast. Finally, the treatment about country-specific disagreement (treatment 4) has only limited
effects on uncertainty.
         In short, the information treatments lead to revisions in the beliefs of households about
both the future level of growth and the uncertainty about growth. Importantly, these treatments do
not lead to the same pattern of revisions across treatments. The treatment involving country-
specific forecaster disagreement conveys little information about either the level or uncertainty of
future euro area growth. In contrast, the two treatments that include the first moment of growth
have large effects on beliefs about both the level of growth and uncertainty about that growth. In
turn, the treatment focusing on disagreement among professional forecasters about euro area
growth has small effects on beliefs about the level of growth but large effects on uncertainty about
growth. Hence, we can interpret these treatments as creating exogenous differential movements in
the first and second moments of households' beliefs about future growth. Furthermore, the strong
predictive power of the information treatments in accounting for posterior beliefs indicates that
they can serve as powerful instruments in regressions that estimate the effects of these beliefs on
household decisions.


4.       The Effects of Uncertainty on Household Decisions
With a source of exogenous variation in beliefs about future economic growth and uncertainty in
those beliefs, we are in a position to assess the extent to which those beliefs translate into the
economic decisions of households. Specifically, we examine whether exogenous variation in
macroeconomic expectations and uncertainty affects consumer spending on durable and non-
durable goods as well as potential allocation of funds into various asset classes.




2
 If we use the log of uncertainty, Panel B of Figure 2 becomes linear like Panel A. Using the log of uncertainty in
subsequent results yields the same qualitative results as using the level of uncertainty. Because there is no strong a
priori reason to use the log of uncertainty, we focus on level specifications.

                                                                                                                   14
4.1    Spending on Non-durable Goods and Services
For the regular monthly spending of households, we regress their ex-post spending on beliefs:
 (log  ) × 100 = 1  + 1  + 0  + 0                                                                (2)
                          + +  ,
where the dependent variable is the log of reported household spending in the last month,
 is the posterior (after treatment) belief of household i for the future growth rate of GDP
in the euro area and  is the posterior (after treatment) uncertainty of household i about
the future growth rate of euro area GDP. We control for prior beliefs ( and  )
as well as a vector of household controls (age, household size, log income, education, liquidity
status and country fixed effects). Note that equation (2) does not estimate a consumption Euler
equation; instead, it is best interpreted as estimating the reduced form ex-post response of
consumption to changes in perceived macroeconomic uncertainty and outlook.
       We then instrument for each set of posterior beliefs using the treatments as follows:
  = 0 + 3
        =1  ×  {   }                                                                             (3')

              + 3
                =1  ×  {   } × 
                               


              + 3
                =1  ×  {   } × 
                               


              +
  =  0 + 3
         =1  ×  {   }                                                                           (3'')

              + 3  
                =1  ×  {   } × 
                               


              + 3
                =1  ×  {   } × 
                               


              +
Note that we drop households that receive treatment 4 because this treatment has low predictive
power for either set of posterior beliefs, as documented in Table 3. Following Coibion,
Gorodnichenko and Weber (2019) and Coibion et al. (2019), the first stage is estimated by Huber
regression and a jackknife approach is used in the second stage to control for outliers in both stages.
       Results for estimation equation (2) are reported in Table 4. First, the information treatments
provide a strong source of variation in the first stage (column 1): the first-stage F-statistic for
forecasts of the level of growth is around 130 while the first-stage F-statistic for uncertainty about
growth is almost 30. This indicates that the RCT approach is successful in generating strong



                                                                                                    15
exogenous variation in beliefs to help identify the causal effect of macroeconomic uncertainty on
household spending.3
        The main result of this regression is that higher uncertainty about euro area growth leads
to lower household spending both immediately and over the course of subsequent months. The
implied order of magnitude is large. Recall from Table 2 that the cross-sectional standard deviation
of uncertainty is just above one percentage point. Thus, the estimated coefficient corresponds
approximately to the effect of increasing uncertainty by one standard deviation. Table 4 suggests
that a one standard deviation increase in uncertainty lowers monthly spending by almost 5
percentage points both on impact and three months later, a large and persistent effect. This provides
unique causal evidence that the macroeconomic uncertainty perceived by households negatively
affects their spending.
        Our finding of a large negative effect of macroeconomic uncertainty on household
complements and builds upon earlier evidence suggesting a negative link between the two. For
example, Christelis et al. (2020b) estimate within an Euler equation framework that a one
percentage point increase in the uncertainty perceived by households about their future
consumption growth (measured as the standard deviation implied by the reported distribution for
consumption growth rate) is associated with approximately a one percentage point decrease in the
growth rate of their consumption. These estimates are not directly comparable: the uncertainty
measures are different (macroeconomic uncertainty in our case vs. a household's consumption
uncertainty in Christelis et al.) as are the econometric specifications (we estimate a reduced form
response of ex-post spending whereas Christelis et al. estimate consumption Euler equations), the
settings (COVID-19 period in the euro area vs. the Netherlands in 2014-2015) and the
identification strategy (we utilize an RCT to generate exogenous variation in uncertainty whereas
they use income uncertainty as an instrument for consumption uncertainty).4 Ben-David et al.
(2018) regress an extensive margin for consumer spending ("will your everyday spending
increase/decrease/stay the same?") on another measure of household uncertainty (they construct a
measure of uncertainty that is a mix of micro- and macro-level uncertainty) in the Survey of
Consumer Expectations. They find that a one percentage point increase in their measure of


3
  P-values for over-identifying restrictions tests are comfortably above 10 percent.
4
  In contrast, Crump et al. (2015) find that consumption uncertainty proxied with uncertainty about earnings growth
does not predict consumption growth, when using the New York Federal Reserve's Survey of Consumer Expectations
to estimate consumption Euler equations.

                                                                                                                16
uncertainty is associated with 0.7 to 2.4 percentage point decrease in the share of people reporting
that their everyday consumer spending will increase. Our results similarly point to a negative
relationship between uncertainty and household spending but along the intensive margin of
household spending, over different horizons, controlling for the first moment of expectations and
using plausibly exogenous variation in uncertainty.
        In short, our results imply that higher uncertainty leads households to reduce their spending
by both statistically and economically significant amounts. This finding can rationalize why during
the COVID-19 crisis when macroeconomic uncertainty was particularly high, households were
reluctant to spend income support sent by the government (e.g., Coibion, Gorodnichenko and
Weber 2020b). At the same time, we find little evidence that a higher expectation of economic
growth in the euro area (the first moment of the macroeconomic forecast, coefficients reported in
the first row of the table) by itself leads to significant changes in spending on non-durable goods
and services. This finding is notable because a major stumbling block in the uncertainty literature
emphasized by Bloom (2014) has been separating first and second moment effects: big changes in
macroeconomic uncertainty tend to also be accompanied by large changes in first moment
expectations. Our approach allows us to distinguish between first and second moment effects
because our instruments generate exogenous but differential variation in the two. Strikingly, only
uncertainty seems to play an important role in changing household spending.
        The other estimated coefficients are largely as expected. For example, we find that
household spending increases with income, age and education. Larger households also tend to
spend more per month. Similarly, households with sufficient liquid resources to meet an
unexpected payment of one month of household income have higher spending.5
        To shed light on a possible channel underlying the persistence of the macroeconomic
uncertainty effects, we study how the treatments affect households' uncertainty about their
personal income growth in survey waves fielded in subsequent months. Unlike euro area GDP
growth rate expectations which were collected only in the September 2020 wave of the survey,
personal income growth expectations are a part of the standard module of the CES so that this


5
  The liquidity indicator variable is based on the following question: "Please think about your available financial
resources, including access to credit, savings, loans from relatives or friends, etc. Suppose that you had to make an
unexpected payment equal to one month of your household income. Would you have sufficient financial resources to
pay for the entire amount?" The indicator variable takes value one if the answer to the question is "yes" and zero
otherwise.

                                                                                                                  17
information is elicited at the monthly frequency. While micro- and macro-level expectations (and
specifically uncertainty) are not perfect substitutes, one might expect that elevated macro-level
uncertainty should likely translate into elevated micro-level uncertainty. We therefore estimate the
following specification:
  = 1  + 1  + 0  + 0                                                                           (4)
                            + +  + 
where  is the post-treatment uncertainty of household  about their personal
income growth and  is the corresponding pre-treatment uncertainty. We apply
the same instrumenting strategy as before. Consistent with our conjecture, a ten-percentage-point
increase in macro-level uncertainty raises micro-level uncertainty by approximately one
percentage point for about two months after the treatment (columns 1 and 2 in Table 5) but the
effect dissipates after three months (although we cannot reject the null of equality across all
months). This persistence of information treatments is broadly in line with the persistence reported
in earlier studies examining the persistence of information treatment effects on households'
inflation expectations (e.g., Cavallo, Cruces and Perez-Truglia, 2017, Coibion, Gorodnichenko
and Weber 2019, Coibion et al. 2019). Hence, one explanation for the persistent effect of
uncertainty on household spending is that the change in uncertainty is itself somewhat persistent.
       Along what dimensions do households reduce their spending when their uncertainty
increases? Table 6 presents results in which we regress the share of household spending that goes
to a specific category on household beliefs, in the same way as done before with total spending:
                      ( )               ( )
  = 1  + 1 
                                                                                               (5)
                        ()                    ()                            ()
                       +0                +    0              +  +            ,
where  is the share (measured on 0 to 100 scale) of household  budget spent on
non-durable category . The results point toward two primary margins along which households
reduce their spending. The first is health care and personal care products. The share of spending
going to this category falls by about 0.7% for each extra unit of uncertainty. As described earlier,
this category of spending includes a wide range of products of services, covering health insurance,
medical exams and prescriptions but also more discretionary goods and services like personal care
products (e.g. make-up, cologne) and services (e.g. haircuts). Note that, unlike the U.S., countries
covered in the CES provide substantial government-run healthcare schemes with modest out-of-
pocket spending for households. As a result, consumer spending in this category is heavily tilted
                                                                                                 18
to more discretionary spending. The second category of spending which bears the brunt from
higher uncertainty is recreation, which here includes theater/movie tickets, gym memberships, etc.
The share of spending going to recreation falls by about 0.8% with each extra unit of uncertainty.
This category of spending is one that has experienced a particularly large decline over the course
of the COVID-19 crisis (e.g., Dunn, Hood and Driessen 2020, Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber
2020a, Christelis et al. 2020a). While some of this decline is likely due to self-imposed isolation
as well as lockdown policies, our results suggest that rising macroeconomic uncertainty may have
also contributed to the decline in spending on these categories of goods.


4.2    Purchases of Larger Durables and Services
In addition to regular purchases done every month, households occasionally engage in much larger
purchases of durable goods (e.g., cars, houses, refrigerators, luxury goods like jewelry) and
services (vacations). The follow-up survey in October 2020 asked households whether they had
engaged in any such purchases over the previous month. We can therefore assess whether changes
in uncertainty made households more or less likely to buy these types of goods and services.
       We estimate the effect of uncertainty on purchases of larger goods and services by
regressing indicator variables for specific purchases on ex-ante expectations and household
controls:
                         ( )               ( )
  × 100 = 1  + 1                                                                               (6)
                           ()                 ()
                       +0  + 0 
                                                                     ()
                       +( × 100) +  +                                     ,
where  is an indicator variable if household i purchased a large durable good/service
of type  in the previous month. This specification is therefore directly comparable to the one used
for total spending, except that we now focus on an extensive margin for purchasing large durable
goods/services. Another difference is that we include an additional indicator variable ( )
which represents households that reported in the previous wave (prior to the information
treatments) that they plan to purchase large durable goods/services of type  in the next 12 months.
Our approach is therefore effectively focusing on either surprise purchases or surprise
postponement of purchases. Given that large purchases are relatively infrequent, conditioning on
whether any purchases are planned or not helps yield more precise estimates, although the time


                                                                                                 19
horizon for the question about planned purchases is longer than one month. As before, we
instrument for posterior beliefs about the level of future euro area growth and the uncertainty
around those beliefs using the information treatments and their interactions with household priors.
        Our results (Table 7) again point to a negative causal link between uncertainty and
household spending, but this time in terms of purchases of larger/durable goods and services. In
particular, we find that higher uncertainty of one percentage point reduces the probability of a
household having purchased a holiday package by nearly three percentage points and reduces the
probability that they purchased a large luxury product (like expensive jewelry) by one percentage
point. The coefficients for other categories of durable goods are also negative but are not
statistically significant. This likely reflects, in part, the fact that there are fewer purchases of these
goods (especially cars and houses) observed in the data which makes the estimation less precise.
Note that controlling for a plan to buy a durable/luxury good/service summarizes a lot of
information thus making other controls (education, income, etc.) less powerful predictors for
purchases of durable/luxury goods/services. The magnitudes of the responses are generally
consistent with the estimates reported in Ben-David et al. (2018). When we estimate specification
(6) using information on purchases of durable/luxury goods and services three months after the
treatment, we cannot reject the null of no effect of macroeconomic uncertainty on these purchases.
        In short, we interpret these results as providing further evidence that uncertainty about the
macroeconomic outlook reduces household expenditures, not just on typical monthly spending but
also on larger and less frequently purchased durable goods and services.


4.3     Investment Decisions
Spending is not the only margin through which households may respond to uncertainty. Another
potentially important margin is in terms of their investment decisions. To quantify this margin of
adjustment one should take into account that the majority of households exhibit significant inertia
in portfolio rebalancing and that multiple survey waves would be necessary in order to trace actual
asset transitions. In view of this, we implement a hypothetical portfolio allocation question.
Specifically, as described in section 2, respondents were asked how they would assign 10,000
among different types of possible investments after having been exposed to information
treatments.



                                                                                                       20
        Given their responses to this question, we then run the following regression for each type
of investment :
                     ( )
                                          ( )                  ( )                   ( )
     = 1  + 1  + 0  + 0                                                                                    (7)
                                                                 ()
                  + +  +                                              ,
where  is the post-treatment share of the total investment that household i assigns to
investment type . This specification is again directly comparable to the one used for total
spending, except that we now focus on the allocation of hypothetical investments. We also include
an additional control variable ( ) which is the actual share of investment type  in
household i's investment portfolio. Conditioning on this actual share helps with the interpretation
of our findings as we effectively focus on how a household would change its current portfolio
given new information. Actual investment portfolios are collected in the August wave (i.e., in the
month prior to the RCT implementation). There are missing values for a subset of respondents as
only those who provide complete information on their invested amounts for each of the asset
categories they own are considered for calculating (pre-treatment) portfolio shares. As a result, the
sample size is smaller than the one used for spending behavior. As before, we instrument for
posterior beliefs about the level of future euro area growth and the uncertainty around those beliefs
using the information treatments and their interactions with household priors.
        We present results from these regressions in Table 8. We document a number of findings
regarding the effects of uncertainty and outlook for growth on portfolio allocations. In the face of
elevated macroeconomic uncertainty, households appear to reduce their risky holdings.
Specifically, a one percentage point increase in uncertainty lowers the share allocated to mutual
funds and crypto-currencies by 2.1 and 0.5 percentage points, respectively. This pattern is
consistent with the findings in Ben-David et al. (2018) reporting that the share of assets allocated
to risky instruments is negatively correlated with uncertainty of households participating in the
SCE. On the other hand, the effect of uncertainty on the allocation of hypothetical 10,000 into
savings/current accounts is negative, weakly estimated (significant at 10%), and relatively small
economically.6 The implied effects for other relatively safe investments such as retirement assets
and bonds are positive but statistically insignificant.



6
  Our estimate implies a 3.16 percentage point reduction in the share of a widely held asset (the median share of
savings/current accounts in the financial portfolios is more than 70%).

                                                                                                              21
        Our results also speak to the effect of first moment expectations on portfolio allocations.
In particular, we find that higher expected economic growth leads households to place more weight
on directly held stocks. Another finding is that expectations of higher economic growth could lead
households to reduce their exposure to cryptocurrencies. This suggests that these digital currencies
are perceived as somewhat countercyclical, perhaps because negative economic outcomes are
more likely to support growth in alternative currencies. We do not find clear evidence that first
moment expectations affect the perceived desirability of other asset classes, but standard errors are
quite large in some cases. Nonetheless, as with household spending, we observe that household
portfolio allocations seem to be more sensitive to perceived macroeconomic uncertainty than to
expectations of future growth rates.
        Finally, we examine whether perceived macroeconomic uncertainty affects household
views on investing in real estate. To this end we estimate the following equation:
                                                                                                (8)
                     ()                ()                 ()                     ()
                   = 1  + 1  + 0  + 0 
                                                                        ()
                   + +  +                                                    ,
where post- and pre-treatment attitudes towards investment in real estate are measured in October
and September (prior to fielding our RCT) waves, respectively. Results (Appendix Table 4),
suggest that, unlike the case for financial assets, elevated macroeconomic uncertainty does not
influence household attitudes towards investing in real estate. This also holds true when one
considers homeowners and renters separately.


4.4     Heterogeneity
Our analysis so far has largely focused on studying the effects of macroeconomic uncertainty on
the general population. This focus is motivated by our desire to maximize the precision of the
estimated effects. However, exposure to macroeconomic uncertainty is unevenly distributed across
households due to differences in probability of losing a job in a recession, exposure to portfolio
risk, and region of residence. To explore potential differences in sensitivity to macroeconomic
uncertainty, we estimate specification (2) for subsets of the population that differ in some key
characteristics.
        First, we split the sample into three groups based on how susceptible their employment is
to COVID-19 concerns either directly (e.g., the hospitality sector may be constrained by orders of

                                                                                                  22
public health officials) or indirectly (e.g., demand for cyclically-sensitive sectors such as
manufacturing can decline when the economy is pushed into a recession). Specifically, we define
a respondent as working in a high-risk sector if their job is in agriculture, manufacturing,
construction, trade, transport, hotels, bars, restaurants, arts or entertainment. The low-risk sector
includes information/communication services, administrative services, public administration,
education and health sectors. We also consider separately the retired because this group has the
highest mortality risk due to COVID-19 but likely has the lowest income risk. We find (Table 9)
that spending on nondurable goods is much more sensitive to macroeconomic uncertainty for
respondents working in the high-risk sector (a one-percentage point increase in uncertainty lowers
spending by almost 9 percentage points; column 1 in Table 9) than for respondents in the low-risk
sector (we cannot reject the null of zero response; column 2). This behavior is consistent with the
greater need of high-risk respondents to engage in precautionary savings in the face of uncertainty.
Interestingly, the retired have a similar estimate for the sensitivity to macroeconomic uncertainty
but the estimate is not precisely estimated due to the small size of the sample (column 3).
       Second, we split the sample based on how households allocate their financial wealth
between risky and safe assets. Specifically, we consider a household as having a risky portfolio if
it owns stocks or shares in mutual funds. Because stock prices tend to be more volatile than other
asset classes and most sensitive to macroeconomic uncertainty, a rise in uncertainty should signal
to households owning stocks a greater loss of wealth and potentially income. In agreement with
this conjecture, we observe that households owning risky portfolios exhibit strong sensitivity of
spending on nondurable goods and services to macroeconomic uncertainty: increasing their
uncertainty by one percentage point lowers their subsequent spending by 14 percentage points. In
contrast, the respondents with relatively safe portfolios demonstrate effectively zero sensitivity to
macroeconomic uncertainty. This result corroborates the findings in Mankiw and Zeldes (1991)
from repeated waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, namely that the consumption of
stockholders is more volatile and displays a higher correlation with stock market returns than the
consumption of non-stockholders.
       Finally, we distinguish between households in Southern vs. Northern countries as country-
wide factors (such as quality of institutions or COVID-19 repercussions on local economic
activity) may interact with household macroeconomic uncertainty. Table 10 shows results for non-
durable spending after one and three months by geographic region. The point estimates suggest


                                                                                                  23
that households in Spain and Italy may be more sensitive to uncertainty than those in Northern
countries. With reduced sample, the standard errors are much larger in these specifications. After
three months, our estimates suggest that uncertainty has a strong negative effect on households in
Southern countries but not necessarily in Northern countries even though after one month, one can
reject neither the null of equality across regions nor that the effects of uncertainty on spending are
zero. This sample split illustrates that, due to the degree of noise in self-reported spending data
and expectations, fairly large samples are needed to establish statistical significance and subsample
estimates may be plagued by imprecision. The sample split also highlights again the persistence
of the estimated effect of uncertainty on spending, with the largest effects being found after three
months in Southern countries.
       While subsamples tend to have less precise estimates, our results suggest that the effects
of macroeconomic uncertainty on household spending are not uniform and imply some potential
distributional effects. Households working in cyclically or COVID-19 affected industries,
households that are more exposed to fluctuations in asset prices and households living in Southern
euro area countries appear to be particularly vulnerable.


5.     Conclusion
When describing his approach to fighting the Great Depression, former U.S. President Franklin D.
Roosevelt famously said, "The only thing we have to fear is fear itself." Indeed, macroeconomic
uncertainty can instill fear into anybody who has lived through a catastrophe in which many lost
livelihoods or even lives. Yet, measuring the effects of macroeconomic uncertainty on households'
choices has proven remarkably difficult because this uncertainty is often accompanied by other
calamities (pandemics, revolutions, natural disasters, and economic crises) that potentially
confound the estimated effects of macroeconomic uncertainty.
       Using a randomized controlled trial, we address this identification challenge and provide
unambiguous evidence that elevated macroeconomic uncertainty strongly inhibits consumer
spending on nondurable goods and services as well as on larger items such as holiday packages or
luxury goods. Our results point to the relevance of both real and financial channels in the
propagation of macroeconomic uncertainty. Regarding the former, we find a clear role for job
security with the impact of aggregate uncertainty on spending being largely driven by households
that are employed in more cyclically sensitive sectors. Regarding financial channels of

                                                                                                   24
transmission, macroeconomic uncertainty also directly influences risk taking behavior by reducing
exposure to more risky assets such as mutual funds. These estimated causal effects can thus shed
new light on the mechanisms behind business cycles and specifically the role of macroeconomic
uncertainty in amplifying fluctuations in asset prices and consumer spending.
       Our work points to a number of directions for future research. For example, our findings
point to important heterogeneous effects by sector of employment, portfolio composition and
geographic region. One can use larger sample sizes to estimate further heterogeneous effects of
macroeconomic uncertainty on particular groups of the population. These estimates will allow
developing more targeted policy responses. Furthermore, one can combine our RCT design with
other treatments based on actual or hypothetical policy responses (e.g., provide information about
potential government transfers to households) to build more effective tools to combat economic
downturns. Our results can also contribute directly to developing better countercyclical policies.
For example, recessions are characterized by increased macroeconomic uncertainty and so an
economic recovery may require management of expectations and assurances by policymakers
(e.g., as was done by President Franklin D. Roosevelt; see Pedemonte (2020)). In addition, it may
require policies that provide a stronger safety net for the more vulnerable groups (e.g., in affected
sectors) and will support aggregate demand. More generally, our estimates suggest that
macroeconomic uncertainty can play a key role in the dynamics of aggregate variables and thus
theoretical work should incorporate uncertainty as an important mechanism for amplification and
propagation of business cycles.




                                                                                                  25
References

Altig, David, Jose Barrero, Nick Bloom, Steven Davis, Brent Meyer, and Nicholas Parker, 2020.
       "Surveying Business Uncertainty." forthcoming in Journal of Econometrics.
Armantier, Olivier, Scott Nelson, Giorgio Topa, Wilbert van der Klaauw, and Basit Zafar. 2016.
       "The Price Is Right: Updating Inflation Expectations in a Randomized Price Information
       Experiment." Review of Economics and Statistics 98(3): 503­523.
Bachmann, Rüdiger, Steffen Elstner, and Eric R. Sims. 2013. "Uncertainty and Economic Activity:
       Evidence from Business Survey Data." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
       5(2): 217-249.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Stephen J. Terry. 2020. "Using Disasters to Estimate the
       Impact of Uncertainty," NBER Working Papers 27167.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2016 "Measuring Economic Policy
       Uncertainty," Quarterly Journal of Economics 131: 1593­1636.
Berger, David, Ian Dew-Becker, and Stefano Giglio. 2020 "Uncertainty Shocks as Second-
       Moment News Shocks," Review of Economic Studies 87: 40-76.Basu, Susanto, and Brent
       Bundick, 2017. "Uncertainty Shocks in a Model of Effective Demand: Reply,"
       Econometrica 85: 1527-1531.
Ben-David, Itzhak, Elyas Fermand, Camelia M. Kuhnen, and Geng Li. 2018. "Expectations
       Uncertainty and Household Economic Behavior," NBER Working Paper 25336.
Binder, Carola. 2020. "Coronavirus Fears and Macroeconomic Expectations." The Review of
       Economics and Statistics 102(4): 721­730.
Bloom, Nicholas, Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and Stephen J. Terry. 2018.
       "Really Uncertain Business Cycles," Econometrica 86(3): 1031-1065.
Bloom, Nicholas. 2014. "Fluctuations in Uncertainty." Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(2):
       153-176.
Bloom, Nick, Bond, Stephen, and Van Reenen, John. 2007. "Uncertainty and investment
       dynamics," Review of Economic Studies 74: 391­415.
Caldara, Dario, Cristina Fuentes-Albero, Simon Gilchrist, and Egon Zakrajsek. 2016. "The
       macroeconomic impact of financial and uncertainty shocks," European Economic Review
       88(C): 185-207.


                                                                                            26
Cavallo, Alberto, Guillermo Cruces, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. 2017. "Inflation Expectations,
       Learning, and Supermarket Prices: Evidence from Survey Experiments." American
       Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9(3): 1­35.
Christelis Dimitris, Dimitris Georgarakos, Tullio Jappelli, and Geoff Kenny. 2020a. "The COVID-
       19 Crisis and Consumption: Survey Evidence from Six EU Countries." ECB Working
       Paper 20202507.
Christelis Dimitris, Dimitris Georgarakos, Tullio Jappelli, and Maarten van Rooij. 2020b.
       "Consumption Uncertainty and Precautionary Saving." Review of Economics and Statistics
       102(1), 148-161.
Coibion, Olivier, Dimitris Georgarakos, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Maarten van Rooij, 2019.
       "How Does Consumption Respond to News About Inflation? Field Evidence from a
       Randomized Control Trial," NBER Working Paper 26106.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber. 2019. "Monetary Policy
       Communications and Their Effects on Household Inflation Expectations." NBER Working
       Paper 25482.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber. 2020a. "The Cost of the Covid-19
       Crisis: Lockdowns, Macroeconomic Expectations, and Consumer Spending," NBER
       Working Paper 27141.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber. 2020b. "How Did U.S. Consumers
       Use Their Stimulus Payments?" NBER Working Paper 27693.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Saten Kumar. 2018. "How Do Firms Form Their
       Expectations? New Survey Evidence." American Economic Review,108 (9): 2671-2713.
Crump, Richard K., Stefano Eusepi, Andrea Tambalotti, and Giorgio Topa, 2015. "Subjective
       Intertemporal Substitution," Staff Reports 734, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Dietrich, Alexander, Keith Kuester, Gernot J. Müller, and Raphael S. Schoenle. 2020. "News and
       Uncertainty about COVID-19: Survey Evidence and Short-Run Economic Impact."
       Working Paper 20­12. Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
Dunn, Abe C., Kyle K. Hood, and Alexander Driessen. 2020. "Measuring the Effects of the
       COVID-19 Pandemic on Consumer Spending Using Card Transaction Data." Bureau of
       Economic Analysis Working Paper WP2020-5.



                                                                                            27
ECB (2021), The ECB's Consumer Expectations Survey: A First Evaluation, forthcoming, ECB
       Occasional Paper Series.
Georgarakos, Dimitris and Geoff Kenny. 2020. "Euro Area Household Sector Adjustment during the
       Global Pandemic: Insights from a New Consumer Survey," mimeo, European Central Bank.
Guiso, Luigi and Giuseppe Parigi. 1999. "Investment and demand uncertainty," Quarterly Journal
       of Economics 114(1): 185­227.
Guiso, Luigi, Tullio Jappelli, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2002. "An Empirical Analysis of Earnings and
       Employment Risk," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 20: 241­253.
Gulen, Huseyin, and Mihai Ion. 2016. "Policy Uncertainty and Corporate Investment," Review of
       Financial Studies, 29, 523­564.
Jurado, Kyle, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Serena Ng. 2015. "Measuring Uncertainty." American
       Economic Review 105 (3): 1177-1216.
Khan, Shujaat, and Edward S. Knotek. 2011. "How do households respond to uncertainty shocks?"
       Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, vol. 96(Q II).
Leduc, Sylvain, and Zheng Liu, 2016. "Uncertainty shocks are aggregate demand shocks," Journal
       of Monetary Economics 82(C): 20-35.
Mankiw, Gregory, and Stephen Zeldes, 1991. "The consumption of stockholders and
       nonstockholders," Journal of Financial Economics 29, 97-111.
Pedemonte, Mathieu, 2020. "Fireside Chats: Communication and Consumers' Expectations in the
       Great Depression," Working Paper 2020-30, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
Roth, Christopher, and Johannes Wohlfart, 2020. "How Do Expectations about the Macroeconomy
       Affect Personal Expectations and Behavior?" Review of Economics and Statistics 102(4):
       731-748.




                                                                                              28
                                                     Table 1. Descriptive statistics by treatment status.
                                                                                  Treatment group
                                                                                   Treat #2: EA       Treat #3: EA       Treat #4:         Full sample
                                                                 Treat #1: EA
                                                Control                               second            1st and 2nd     Country 2nd
 Variable                                                        first moment
                                                                                      moment            moments          moment
                                             Mean       sd       mean     sd       mean      sd       mean       sd    mean     sd       mean       sd
                                              (1)       (2)       (3)     (4)       (5)     (6)        (7)      (8)     (9)    (10)      (11)      (12)
 Age                                         49.19    16.73      49.12   16.15      48.98   16.81     48.54    17.03   48.35   16.52      48.82    16.65
 Male                                         0.47     0.50       0.49    0.50       0.48    0.50      0.49     0.50    0.48    0.50       0.48     0.50
 Household size                               2.58     1.34       2.60    1.27       2.57    1.28      2.65     1.26    2.64    1.27       2.61     1.29
 Annual household income (`000)              34.14    23.15      33.97   22.05      35.22   24.11     34.70    23.62   34.16   23.22      34.43    23.25
 Monthly spending on nondur. goods (`000)     1.63      1.1       1.63    1.07       1.69    1.15      1.64     1.11    1.66     1.2       1.65     1.13
 Employment status
  Working full-time                           0.45     0.50       0.47    0.50       0.47    0.50       0.45    0.50    0.47    0.50       0.46     0.50
  Working part-time                           0.12     0.33       0.12    0.33       0.14    0.34       0.14    0.34    0.13    0.34       0.13     0.34
  Temporarily laid-off                        0.02     0.13       0.01    0.12       0.01    0.12       0.01    0.11    0.01    0.11       0.01     0.12
  On extended leave                           0.05     0.22       0.05    0.22       0.05    0.23       0.04    0.20    0.04    0.20       0.05     0.21
  Have no job but would like to have a job    0.11     0.32       0.11    0.31       0.10    0.30       0.11    0.31    0.12    0.32       0.11     0.31
  Have no job and don't want a job            0.24     0.43       0.24    0.42       0.23    0.42       0.25    0.43    0.23    0.42       0.24     0.43
 Education
  Primary                                     0.16     0.37       0.15    0.35       0.15    0.35       0.16    0.37    0.15    0.36       0.15     0.36
  Secondary                                   0.32     0.47       0.32    0.47       0.32    0.47       0.31    0.46    0.33    0.47       0.32     0.47
  Tertiary                                    0.51     0.50       0.53    0.50       0.53    0.50       0.53    0.50    0.52    0.50       0.53     0.50
 Housing arrangement
  Owner-occupied property with mortgage       0.26     0.44       0.27    0.45       0.25    0.43       0.26    0.44    0.23    0.42       0.25     0.44
  Owner-occupied property w/o mortgage        0.36     0.48       0.35    0.48       0.37    0.48       0.38    0.48    0.39    0.49       0.37     0.48
  Rented house/flat                           0.33     0.47       0.34    0.48       0.33    0.47       0.33    0.47    0.34    0.47       0.33     0.47
  Accommodation provided free of rent         0.05     0.21       0.03    0.17       0.05    0.21       0.03    0.18    0.04    0.19       0.04     0.19
 Country
  Belgium                                      0.05   0.23      0.05    0.22      0.05    0.21      0.05    0.21       0.00     0.00        0.04    0.19
  Germany                                      0.28   0.45      0.31    0.46      0.29    0.45      0.30    0.46       0.32     0.47        0.30    0.46
  Spain                                        0.17   0.37      0.15    0.36      0.14    0.35      0.17    0.37       0.19     0.39        0.17    0.37
  France                                       0.22   0.41      0.21    0.41      0.22    0.41      0.20    0.40       0.25     0.43        0.22    0.41
  Italy                                        0.21   0.41      0.21    0.41      0.22    0.41      0.21    0.41       0.24     0.43        0.22    0.41
  Netherlands                                  0.07   0.26      0.07    0.26      0.09    0.28      0.08    0.26       0.00     0.00        0.06    0.24
Notes: all moments are computed using sampling weights. Household income and spending on nondurable goods are winsorized at bottom and top 1%.
                                                                                                                                                          29
                            Table 2. Expected growth rate of GDP in the euro area.

                                               Implied mean           Implied uncertainty
                  Country                    Raw        Robust         Raw       Robust
                                              (1)        (2)            (3)         (4)
                  Belgium          mean     -2.02      -0.15           2.20       1.38
                                    sd      14.68       6.85           2.72       1.27

                  Germany          mean     -0.01        0.64          2.15          1.82
                                    sd      10.08        5.88          1.94          1.39

                  Spain            mean      0.66        2.18          1.83          1.44
                                    sd      12.70        6.84          2.05          1.17

                  France           mean     -0.58        1.02          1.89          1.45
                                    sd      11.57        5.94          2.18          1.19

                  Italy            mean      2.08        3.54          1.88          1.33
                                    sd      14.53        6.77          2.36          1.15

                  Netherlands      mean     -3.31       -1.51          1.69          1.35
                                    sd      12.64        6.33          1.90          1.19

                  All            mean       0.16       1.42            1.96          1.52
                                  sd       12.33       6.45            2.14          1.26
Notes: robust moments are computed using the Huber robust method.




                                                                                            30
                          Table 3. Treatment effects one first and second moments of expected GDP growth in the euro area (EA).

                                                                        Mean expectations                                        Expected uncertainty
                                                                  Full       North                  South                  Full         North          South
                                                                   (1)         (2)                    (3)                   (4)           (5)            (6)
         Prior                                                   0.754***    0.746***               0.767***              0.604***      0.612***       0.592***
                                                                (0.011)     (0.014)                (0.017)               (0.021)       (0.025)        (0.037)
         I{Treatment 1} × Prior                                 -0.564***   -0.515***              -0.620***             -0.415***     -0.399***      -0.449***
                                                                (0.016)     (0.022)                (0.023)               (0.029)       (0.038)        (0.046)
         I{Treatment 2} × Prior                                 -0.104***   -0.078***              -0.150***             -0.291***     -0.299***      -0.274***
                                                                (0.016)     (0.020)                (0.028)               (0.029)       (0.034)        (0.053)
         I{Treatment 3} × Prior                                 -0.620***   -0.598***              -0.647***             -0.467***     -0.482***      -0.444***
                                                                (0.015)     (0.020)                (0.022)               (0.029)       (0.035)        (0.049)
         I{Treatment 4} × Prior                                 -0.105***   -0.075***              -0.134***             -0.196***     -0.195***      -0.190***
                                                                (0.016)     (0.022)                (0.023)               (0.029)       (0.038)        (0.046)
         Indicator variables, I{}
           Treatment 1 (EA GDP - 1st m)                          2.244***          2.133***         2.503***              0.386***         0.455***          0.276***
                                                                (0.091)           (0.113)          (0.153)               (0.050)          (0.065)           (0.079)
           Treatment 2 (EA GDP - 2nd m)                          0.450***          0.385***         0.676***              0.269***         0.289***          0.237***
                                                                (0.095)           (0.113)          (0.172)               (0.049)          (0.060)           (0.086)
           Treatment 3 (EA GDP - 1st & 2nd m)                    2.560***          2.507***         2.712***              0.279***         0.334***          0.190**
                                                                (0.091)           (0.111)          (0.157)               (0.050)          (0.062)           (0.085)
           Treatment 4 (C GDP - 2nd m)                           0.467***          0.464***         0.526***              0.309***         0.288***          0.318***
                                                                (0.096)           (0.120)          (0.163)               (0.050)          (0.066)           (0.078)
         Observations                                            7,325             4,531            2,794                 7,516            4,588             2,928
         R-squared                                               0.712             0.698            0.727                 0.260            0.265             0.258
Notes: the table report estimates of specification (1). All estimates are based on Huber-robust estimator. North covers Belgium, France, Germany and the Netherlands. South covers
Italy and Spain. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                                                                                                               31
Table 4. Effects of 1st and 2nd moments for expected growth rate of EA GDP on nondurable consumption.

                                            One month after treatment                 Four months after treatment
                                                       (1)                                       (2)
     Posterior: mean                                  -0.82                                    -0.26
                                                      (0.52)                                   (0.49)
     Posterior: uncertainty                           -4.61**                                  -4.51**
                                                      (2.23)                                   (2.25)
     Prior: mean                                      -0.04                                     0.02
                                                      (0.24)                                   (0.22)
     Prior: uncertainty                                 3.03***                                 2.81***
                                                      (0.94)                                   (0.90)
     Education: secondary                             -0.08                                     6.54*
                                                      (3.24)                                   (3.41)
     Education: tertiary                              10.71***                                 18.28***
                                                      (2.97)                                   (3.07)
     Age                                                0.53***                                 0.55***
                                                      (0.07)                                   (0.07)
     Household size                                   10.85***                                 12.21***
                                                      (0.77)                                   (0.88)
     Log(household income)                            11.38***                                 10.53***
                                                      (1.28)                                   (1.31)
     Liquidity status                                 14.63***                                 10.72***
                                                      (2.43)                                   (2.41)
    Observations                                      4,572                                     4,113
    R-squared                                          0.19                                      0.17
    1st-stage F stat (mean)                          131.00                                     129.3
    1st-stage F stat (uncertainty)                    28.68                                     25.60
Notes: the table reports estimates of specification (2). The dependent variable is log(nondurable consumption)×100. The first
stage is given by specification (3). Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote
statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.



                                                                                                                                32
        Table 5. Effects of expected growth rate of EA GDP on uncertainty about personal income growth.

                                                                      Uncertainty about personal income growth
                                                                    One month       Two months       Three months
                                                                  after treatment after treatment after treatment
                                                                         (1)              (2)              (3)
       Posterior: mean                                                   0.00           -0.01            -0.01
                                                                       (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)
       Posterior: uncertainty                                            0.07**          0.11***          0.04
                                                                       (0.04)           (0.04)           (0.04)
       Prior: mean                                                     -0.00            -0.00            -0.00
                                                                       (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)
       Prior: uncertainty                                              -0.01            -0.03*            0.00
                                                                       (0.01)           (0.02)           (0.02)
       Prior: uncertainty (personal income growth)                       0.67***         0.66***          0.63***
                                                                       (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)
       Education: secondary                                              0.07           -0.12*           -0.04
                                                                       (0.05)           (0.07)           (0.06)
       Education: tertiary                                               0.11**         -0.04             0.03
                                                                       (0.05)           (0.06)           (0.06)
       Age                                                             -0.00**          -0.00            -0.00***
                                                                       (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)
       Household size                                                    0.04**          0.04**           0.03*
                                                                       (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)
       Log(household income)                                             0.00           -0.03             0.01
                                                                       (0.01)           (0.02)           (0.02)
       Liquidity status                                                -0.09*           -0.03            -0.10*
                                                                       (0.05)           (0.05)           (0.05)
       Observations                                                    3,924            3,752            3,708
       R-squared                                                        0.53             0.50             0.49
       1st-stage F stat (mean)                                         136.8            130.5            124.2
       1st-stage F stat (uncertainty)                                  29.55            24.15            24.78
Notes: the table reports estimates of specification (4). The dependent variable is uncertainty about personal income growth over the next
12 months. Uncertainty is computed as the standard deviation implied by the reported probability distribution for personal income
growth. The first stage is given by specification (3). Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, *
denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                                                                      33
               Table 6. Effects of 1st and 2nd moments for expected growth rate of EA GDP on budget shares for nondurable consumption.

                                                            Housing, utilities,
                                                                                                                                                                      Education
                                            Food             furniture, home            Clothing          Healthcare           Transport          Recreation
                                                                                                                                                                      and other
                                                                equipment
                                              (1)                    (2)                    (3)                 (4)                (5)                 (6)                 (7)
 Posterior: mean                             0.02                 -0.28*                   0.09*               0.08               0.06                0.07                0.08
                                            (0.14)                (0.17)                  (0.05)              (0.07)             (0.06)              (0.07)              (0.09)
 Posterior: uncertainty                      0.38                 -0.42                    0.18               -0.71**             0.32               -0.83**              0.07
                                            (0.60)                (0.80)                  (0.23)              (0.31)             (0.30)              (0.32)              (0.35)
 Prior: mean                                -0.05                  0.09                   -0.01               -0.02              -0.00               -0.01               -0.04
                                            (0.07)                (0.08)                  (0.02)              (0.03)             (0.03)              (0.03)              (0.04)
 Prior: uncertainty                         -0.35                  0.33                   -0.07                0.20              -0.31***             0.28*              -0.04
                                            (0.25)                (0.34)                  (0.10)              (0.13)             (0.12)              (0.15)              (0.16)
 Education: secondary                        1.55*                -0.55                   -0.48               -0.10              -0.32               -0.49               -0.46
                                            (0.88)                (1.17)                  (0.32)              (0.48)             (0.42)              (0.49)              (0.53)
 Education: tertiary                        -0.62                 -0.21                   -0.01                0.33              -0.49               -0.26                0.30
                                            (0.80)                (1.06)                  (0.31)              (0.43)             (0.40)              (0.43)              (0.52)
 Age                                         0.05**               -0.04                   -0.01*               0.10***           -0.04***            -0.03***            -0.03***
                                            (0.02)                (0.03)                  (0.01)              (0.01)             (0.01)              (0.01)              (0.01)
 Household size                              1.12***              -1.89***                 0.46***            -0.02               0.24**             -0.58***             0.83***
                                            (0.22)                (0.28)                  (0.08)              (0.12)             (0.10)              (0.11)              (0.15)
 Log(household income)                      -0.54*                -1.56***                 0.27***             0.23               0.08                0.78***             0.70***
                                            (0.29)                (0.40)                  (0.10)              (0.15)             (0.14)              (0.18)              (0.18)
 Liquidity status                            0.21                 -4.17***                 0.99***             0.71**            -0.23                2.43***             0.73*
                                            (0.65)                (0.87)                  (0.23)              (0.32)             (0.35)              (0.29)              (0.38)
 Observations                               4,577                  4,577                  4,578               4,570              4,573               4,574               4,574
 R-squared                                   0.10                   0.05                   0.03                0.08               0.05                0.05                0.03
 1st-stage F stat (mean)                     127                    127                   128.6               125.7              126.7               126.8               126.7
 1st-stage F stat (uncertainty)             26.57                  25.69                  26.56               26.73              26.97               27.36               26.74
Notes: the table reports estimates of specification (5). The dependent variable is the budget share of spending category , measured on the 0-100 scale. The first stage is given by
specification (3). Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.

                                                                                                                                                                                34
         Table 7. Effects of 1st and 2nd moments for expected growth rate of EA GDP on actual purchases of durable/luxury goods and services.

                                                                Home                 Durable                  Car                Holiday                Luxury
                                                                  (1)                   (2)                    (3)                  (4)                    (5)
                    Posterior: mean                             -0.01                  0.07                   0.08                -0.02                  -0.06
                                                                (0.05)                (0.34)                 (0.09)               (0.23)                 (0.11)
                    Posterior: uncertainty                      -0.18                 -1.81                  -0.13                -2.74***               -1.02*
                                                                (0.18)                (1.54)                 (0.38)               (1.04)                 (0.57)
                    Prior: mean                                  0.00                 -0.12                  -0.01                 0.07                   0.08
                                                                (0.02)                (0.16)                 (0.04)               (0.11)                 (0.05)
                    Prior: uncertainty                           0.04                  0.28                  -0.29                 1.01**                 0.37
                                                                (0.09)                (0.65)                 (0.18)               (0.48)                 (0.27)
                    Plan to buy a given durable                  0.03**                0.23***                0.05***              0.15***                0.14***
                                                                (0.01)                (0.02)                 (0.01)               (0.01)                 (0.03)
                    Education: secondary                        -0.04                  2.16                  -0.94                 0.04                   0.20
                                                                (0.54)                (2.48)                 (0.74)               (1.46)                 (0.86)
                    Education: tertiary                          0.08                  4.31*                 -0.39                 2.01                   0.14
                                                                (0.57)                (2.21)                 (0.78)               (1.36)                 (0.80)
                    Age                                         -0.00                  0.07                  -0.02                -0.03                  -0.03*
                                                                (0.01)                (0.05)                 (0.02)               (0.03)                 (0.02)
                    Household size                               0.09                  2.07***                0.09                -0.50                   0.14
                                                                (0.10)                (0.58)                 (0.28)               (0.36)                 (0.24)
                    Log(household income)                        0.05                  0.52                   0.18                 1.68***                0.11
                                                                (0.11)                (0.69)                 (0.16)               (0.52)                 (0.29)
                    Liquidity status                            -0.00                  3.18**                 0.90                 2.87***                0.69
                                                                (0.38)                (1.60)                 (0.58)               (0.96)                 (0.59)
                    Observations                                4,605                 4,621                  4,606                4,616                  4,610
                    R-squared                                    0.01                  0.08                   0.01                 0.07                   0.03
                    1st-stage F stat (mean)                      130                  131.4                  132.2                127.7                  129.2
                    1st-stage F stat (uncertainty)              28.10                 27.42                  28.19                28.14                  27.38
Notes: the table reports estimates of specification (6). The dependent variable is an indicator variable (×100) equal to one if a household purchased a given type of durable/luxury
good/service in the previous 12 months. The first stage is given by specification (3). Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical
significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.
                                                                                                                                                                                        35
    Table 8. Effect of 1st and 2nd moments for expected growth rate of EA GDP for allocation of hypothetical
                                          10,000 across asset classes.

                                                                                          Investment
                                           Saving                           Mutual                                          Crypto-
                                                            Stocks                         retirement        Bonds
                                           account                          funds                                          currencies
                                                                                            account
                                              (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)            (5)              (6)
 Posterior: mean                           -0.05            0.37**         -0.01             -0.25          -0.09            -0.10*
                                           (0.40)          (0.19)          (0.20)            (0.21)         (0.21)           (0.06)
 Posterior: uncertainty                    -3.16*           0.70           -2.05**            0.40           0.18            -0.48**
                                           (1.86)          (0.78)          (0.98)            (0.92)         (0.90)           (0.23)
 Prior: mean                               -0.20           -0.07           -0.02              0.17*          0.13             0.07***
                                           (0.18)          (0.08)          (0.08)            (0.09)         (0.10)           (0.02)
 Prior: uncertainty                         1.34*          -1.12***         1.13***          -0.24          -0.63*            0.17*
                                           (0.78)          (0.34)          (0.42)            (0.37)         (0.35)           (0.10)
 Actual share of investment                 0.29***         0.39***         0.50***           0.15***        0.33***          0.01*
                                           (0.03)          (0.05)          (0.05)            (0.02)         (0.10)           (0.01)
 Education: secondary                      -0.15           -0.90           -0.21              1.80           0.38             0.07
                                           (3.53)          (1.79)          (1.73)            (1.63)         (1.52)           (0.36)
 Education: tertiary                       -3.64           -0.31            2.76              0.75           1.32             0.33
                                           (3.22)          (1.69)          (1.73)            (1.54)         (1.41)           (0.37)
 Age                                        0.06           -0.02            0.04             -0.07**         0.00            -0.04***
                                           (0.07)          (0.04)          (0.04)            (0.03)         (0.04)           (0.01)
 Household size                             0.80            0.53           -0.53              0.01          -0.12             0.02
                                           (0.72)          (0.40)          (0.39)            (0.35)         (0.36)           (0.11)
 Log(household income)                     -1.09            0.14            0.68              0.15           0.12            -0.30**
                                           (0.95)          (0.53)          (0.57)            (0.42)         (0.46)           (0.12)
 Liquidity status                          -5.88***         2.19**          3.89***          -1.39           1.16            -0.61*
                                           (2.19)          (1.03)          (0.99)            (1.14)         (1.20)           (0.34)
 Observations                               2,657           2,646           2,653             2,649          2,650            2,646
 R-squared                                   0.17            0.13            0.20              0.06           0.08             0.03
 1st-stage F stat (mean)                    87.97           81.91           86.51             85.98          86.03            83.64
 1st-stage F stat (uncertainty)             19.36           19.58           18.30             19.08          18.75            19.76
Notes: the table reports estimates of specification (7). The dependent variable is the share of hypothetical 10,000 allocated to a given
asset class. Shares are measured on the 0-100 scale. The first stage is given by specification (3). Heteroskedasticity robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                                                                     36
      Table 9. Effect of 1st and 2nd moments for expected growth rate of EA GDP on nondurable consumption, by
                                       income risk group and portfolio riskiness.

                                      `High Risk'           `Low Risk'                               Portfolio incl.       Portfolio only
                                                                                    Retired
                                         Sector               Sector                                  risky assets         in safe assets
                                           (1)                  (2)                    (3)                 (4)                   (5)
Posterior: mean                           -0.58                -0.95                 -0.52                -1.30                -0.53
                                          (1.02)               (0.73)                (1.47)               (1.07)               (0.68)
Posterior: uncertainty                    -8.85**               2.48                 -8.15              -14.15***              -1.06
                                          (3.71)               (3.13)                (7.69)               (5.11)               (2.79)
Prior: mean                                0.24                 0.16                 -0.53                 0.30                -0.19
                                          (0.44)               (0.33)                (0.74)               (0.58)               (0.26)
Prior: uncertainty                         5.47***              2.26*                -1.04                 5.20***              2.28**
                                          (1.63)               (1.25)                (2.79)               (1.92)               (1.10)
Education: secondary                    -10.36*                 4.17                 -0.77               14.86*                -7.38*
                                          (6.13)               (4.97)                (7.07)               (7.88)               (3.85)
Education: tertiary                       -2.46               15.13***               16.61**             30.34***               2.86
                                          (5.82)               (4.69)                (6.54)               (7.11)               (3.64)
Age                                        0.52***              0.81***               0.14                 0.85***              0.36***
                                          (0.15)               (0.12)                (0.32)               (0.14)               (0.09)
Household size                             9.98***            10.74***               16.79***            10.77***              10.89***
                                          (1.39)               (1.11)                (3.47)               (1.46)               (1.04)
Log(household income)                    14.45***               9.07***               9.72***            12.97***               9.35***
                                          (3.20)               (1.81)                (2.46)               (2.74)               (1.32)
Liquidity status                         13.39***             11.15***               18.42**             14.66**                9.28***
                                          (4.21)               (3.45)                (7.46)               (6.27)               (2.89)
Observations                             1,282                1,816                   675                1,327                 2,432
R-squared                                 0.17                 0.21                   0.19                0.11                  0.18
1st-stage F stat (mean)                  43.72                53.14                  22.11               39.94                 81.68
1st-stage F stat (uncertainty)           10.11                13.59                   5.82                9.04                 18.29
  Notes: the table reports estimates of specification (2) for various subsamples of respondents. The dependent variable is log(nondurable
  consumption)×100. The first stage is given by specification (3). The `High Risk' (affected) sector includes: Agriculture; Industry;
  Construction; Trade; Transport; Hotels, bars and restaurants; Arts and entertainment. The `Low Risk' (less affected) sector includes:
  Information and communication services; Administrative and support services; Public admin incl. military; Education; Health sector;
  Other. `Retired' includes respondents who are retired at the time of the survey. `Portfolio incl. risky assets' includes respondents who
  owns stocks or shares in mutual funds. `Portfolio only in safe assets' includes respondents who own neither stocks nor shares in mutual
  funds. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10
  percent levels.




                                                                                                                                       37
 Table 10. Effects of 1st and 2nd moments for expected growth rate of EA GDP on nondurable consumption by
                                               geographic region.

                                                  One month after treatment                     Four months after treatment
                                                   South            North                          South             North
                                                   IT/ES      FR/DE/BE/NL                          IT/ES       FR/DE/BE/NL
                                                     (1)              (2)                            (3)               (4)
     Posterior: mean                              -0.12            -1.10*                         -0.14              0.15
                                                  (0.87)           (0.67)                         (0.90)            (0.62)
     Posterior: uncertainty                       -6.00            -3.28                          -8.51**           -1.60
                                                  (3.72)           (2.82)                         (4.09)            (2.79)
     Prior: mean                                  -0.05            -0.13                           0.21             -0.24
                                                  (0.34)           (0.31)                         (0.32)            (0.30)
     Prior: uncertainty                            3.18**           2.65**                         4.39***           1.75
                                                  (1.62)           (1.14)                         (1.43)            (1.15)
     Education: secondary                          8.71            -5.70                           9.53              4.71
                                                  (5.47)           (3.91)                         (5.85)            (4.09)
     Education: tertiary                          19.03***          5.26                         21.41***           15.66***
                                                  (4.89)           (3.62)                         (4.99)            (3.75)
     Age                                           0.48***          0.54***                        0.57***           0.56***
                                                  (0.14)           (0.08)                         (0.14)            (0.08)
     Household size                                9.98***         11.29***                      11.69***           12.59***
                                                  (1.44)           (0.91)                         (1.63)            (1.04)
     Log(household income)                        10.46***         11.65***                      10.09***           10.89***
                                                  (1.88)           (1.70)                         (1.99)            (1.63)
     Liquidity status                             15.97***         13.69***                      11.83***            9.95***
                                                  (3.88)           (3.03)                         (4.03)            (2.95)
     Observations                                  1,691            2,881                          1,588             2,525
     R-squared                                      0.12             0.21                           0.11              0.20
     1st-stage F stat (mean)                       55.16            72.74                          55.11             71.12
     1st-stage F stat (uncertainty)                17.86            15.98                          15.38             14.44
Notes: the table reports estimates of specification (2). The dependent variable is log(nondurable consumption)×100. The first stage is
given by specification (3). Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance
at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                                                                          38
                                   Figure 1. Distribution of forecasts for GDP growth in the euro area.
                                                                     Panel A. Implied mean


                         .08
                         .06
               density
                 .04     .02
                         0




                               -30    -25       -20       -15   -10     -5     0    5    10     15        20        25    30
                                                                         implied mean
                                                                Panel B. Implied uncertainty
                         .5




                                                                                                           Belgium
                                                                                                           Germany
                                                                                                           Spain
                         .4




                                                                                                           France
                                                                                                           Italy
                                                                                                           Netherlands
                         .3




                                                                                                           All
               density
                         .2
                         .1
                         0




                               0      1     2         3     4    5      6    7    8     9 10   11    12        13    14   15
                                                                       implied uncertainty

Notes: the figure shows kernel density of 1st and 2nd moments for households' predictions for the growth rate of GDP in the euro area
implied by the distributions of forecasts reported by households.
                                                                                                                                    39
                                    Figure 2. Treatment effects on household beliefs about growth rate of EA GDP.

                                                                 Panel A: Implied mean
                                                 Control
                      20
                                                 Treatment 1 (EA GDP - 1st m)
                                                 Treatment 2 (EA GDP - 2nd m)
                                                 Treatment 3 (EA GDP - 1st & 2nd m)
                                                 Treatment 4 (C GDP - 2nd m)
          posterior expectations
            0         -10  10




                                         -20            -10              0              10            20                 30
                                                                     prior expectations
                                                              Panel B: Implied uncertainty
                      5         4
          posterior uncertainty
          2          31




                                    0                  2                 4                   6                    8
                                                                     prior uncertainty

Notes: the figure shows binscatter plots for the 1st and 2nd moments for households' predictions for the growth rate of GDP in the euro
area implied by the distributions of forecasts reported by households.
                                                                                                                                     40
                                                          Appendix A. Additional tables and figures




                                       Appendix Figure 1. Joint distribution of implied mean and uncertainty for EA GDP growth rate.
                         3
   implied uncertainty (standard deviation)
           1.5           2
                         1          2.5




                                              -20   -15       -10        -5        0       5          10        15        20           25
                                                                                 implied mean


Notes: the figure is a binscatter plot where each triangle represents approximately one percent of the sample. The implied mean and
uncertainty are computed using pre-treatment beliefs.




                                                                                                                                            41
   Appendix Table 1. Effects of 1st and 2nd moments for expected growth rate of EA GDP on actual purchases of
                       durable/luxury goods and services four months after the treatment.

                                           Home                Durable                  Car                Holiday               Luxury
                                             (1)                  (2)                    (3)                  (4)                   (5)
Posterior: mean                            -0.02                -0.78**                 0.12**               0.08                 -0.06
                                           (0.06)               (0.35)                 (0.05)               (0.07)                (0.11)
Posterior: uncertainty                      0.06                -0.73                   0.04                 0.12                 -0.69
                                           (0.23)               (1.78)                 (0.31)               (0.28)                (0.53)
Prior: mean                                 0.01                 0.26                  -0.03                -0.01                  0.07
                                           (0.02)               (0.16)                 (0.02)               (0.03)                (0.05)
Prior: uncertainty                         -0.21**               1.11                  -0.26*               -0.41***               0.02
                                           (0.11)               (0.72)                 (0.15)               (0.12)                (0.25)
Plan to buy a given durable                 0.04***              0.15***                0.03***              0.02**                0.14***
                                           (0.01)               (0.02)                 (0.01)               (0.01)                (0.03)
Education: secondary                        0.26                 0.69                   0.30                 1.01*                -0.69
                                           (0.51)               (2.80)                 (0.61)               (0.59)                (1.07)
Education: tertiary                        -0.11                 1.76                   0.13                 1.46***              -0.62
                                           (0.45)               (2.57)                 (0.56)               (0.56)                (1.05)
Age                                         0.00                 0.02                   0.00                -0.02                 -0.04**
                                           (0.01)               (0.05)                 (0.01)               (0.02)                (0.02)
Household size                              0.15                 0.85                   0.09                 0.06                  0.65**
                                           (0.13)               (0.64)                 (0.14)               (0.21)                (0.32)
Log(household income)                       0.04                 0.17                   0.36***              0.18                  1.10***
                                           (0.17)               (0.93)                 (0.13)               (0.24)                (0.24)
Liquidity status                           -0.34                 7.16***                0.34                -0.37                  1.25*
                                           (0.45)               (1.73)                 (0.35)               (0.74)                (0.65)
Observations                               4,146                4,154                  4,148                4,139                 4,142
R-squared                                   0.02                 0.04                   0.01                 0.01                  0.04
1st-stage F stat (mean)                     127                 129.6                  24.75                128.2                 24.58
1st-stage F stat (uncertainty)             24.78                25.28                  129.9                25.79                 124.8
  Notes: the table reports estimates of specification (5). The dependent variable is an indicator variable (×100) equal to one if a household
  purchased a given type of durable/luxury good/service in the previous 12 months. The first stage is given by specification (3).
  Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent
  levels.




                                                                                                                                          42
           Appendix Table 2. Effects of 1st and 2nd moments for expected growth rate of EA GDP on categories of nondurable consumption.
                                                    Housing, utilities,
                                                                                                                                      Education
                                      Food           furniture, home      Clothing       Healthcare    Transport       Recreation
                                                                                                                                        and other
                                                        equipment
                                       (1)                  (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)
 Posterior: mean                     -0.82                 -1.39*          -1.84**         -0.01           0.31            0.22           -1.42
                                     (0.55)                (0.72)          (0.88)          (1.05)         (0.78)          (1.44)          (1.38)
 Posterior: uncertainty              -2.51                 -3.08           -4.23           -5.56           4.13         -12.09*           -9.37
                                     (2.42)                (3.15)          (3.74)          (4.83)         (3.54)          (6.73)          (5.81)
 Prior: mean                         -0.11                  0.15            1.09***        -0.46          -0.18            0.73            0.09
                                     (0.25)                (0.33)          (0.42)          (0.49)         (0.35)          (0.70)          (0.74)
 Prior: uncertainty                   1.32                  3.05**          0.94            3.35          -1.77            5.34*           4.19*
                                     (1.02)                (1.31)          (1.78)          (2.09)         (1.41)          (2.82)          (2.50)
 Education: secondary                 2.56                 -2.55            1.22            8.54          -3.54         -14.63            -7.93
                                     (3.49)                (4.98)          (6.03)          (6.71)         (5.11)          (9.53)          (8.21)
 Education: tertiary                  8.98***               8.04*          11.03**        23.25***        -0.56         -15.58*            7.47
                                     (3.09)                (4.57)          (5.47)          (5.99)         (4.69)          (8.12)          (7.53)
 Age                                  0.65***               0.30***         0.33***         1.51***       -0.06           -0.35**          0.10
                                     (0.08)                (0.11)          (0.12)          (0.15)         (0.10)          (0.18)          (0.18)
 Household size                      15.32***               4.89***        12.35***         9.63***      12.19***          0.54            9.83***
                                     (0.90)                (1.17)          (1.40)          (1.68)         (1.14)          (2.09)          (2.06)
 Log(household income)                9.81***               6.15***        12.53***         9.36***      10.48***        18.64***        23.12***
                                     (1.33)                (1.61)          (2.40)          (2.37)         (1.77)          (4.09)          (4.27)
 Liquidity status                    14.81***              -0.58           17.05***       16.38***         9.53***       34.31***          9.40
                                     (2.74)                (3.72)          (4.32)          (4.77)         (3.69)          (6.74)          (6.02)
 Observations                        4,564                4,522            2,772           3,449          4,153           2,419           2,038
 R-squared                            0.16                 0.08             0.10            0.15           0.15            0.08            0.09
  st
 1 -stage F stat (mean)              122.9                125.6            72.53           97.28          118.1           69.21           47.11
 1st-stage F stat (uncertainty)      27.29                27.63            19.00           22.91          24.66           10.92           11.23
Notes: the table reports estimates of specification (5) with the dependent variable being 100×log(spending category ). The first stage is given by specification (3). Heteroskedasticity
robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                                                                                                                     43
 Appendix Table 3. Effects of 1st and 2nd moments for expected growth rate of EA GDP on nondurable consumption, flexible triangular distribution.

                                                       One month after treatment                                         Four months after treatment
                                                                South             North                                            South              North
                                            All countries                                                      All countries
                                                                IT/ES        FR/DE/BE/NL                                           IT/ES         FR/DE/BE/NL
                                                  (1)             (2)               (3)                             (4)              (5)                (6)
     Posterior: mean                           -0.75            0.05             -1.10                            -0.23           -0.48               0.54
                                               (0.55)          (0.91)            (0.74)                           (0.54)          (0.96)             (0.68)
     Posterior: uncertainty                    -4.88**         -6.60*            -3.56                            -4.55**         -7.23*             -1.82
                                               (2.18)          (3.80)            (2.66)                           (2.07)          (3.73)             (2.58)
     Prior: mean                               -0.08           -0.11             -0.17                            -0.09            0.27              -0.59
                                               (0.27)          (0.37)            (0.37)                           (0.27)          (0.39)             (0.37)
     Prior: uncertainty                         2.78***         3.05*             2.34**                           2.16**          4.13***            0.59
                                               (0.95)          (1.69)            (1.14)                           (0.90)          (1.42)             (1.16)
     Education: secondary                      -0.89            8.51             -7.33*                            7.64**          8.87               7.10
                                               (3.43)          (5.61)            (4.23)                           (3.59)          (5.97)             (4.38)
     Education: tertiary                      10.54***        18.49***            4.80                           19.11***        21.56***            17.39***
                                               (3.10)          (5.04)            (3.78)                           (3.21)          (5.10)             (3.99)
     Age                                        0.52***         0.43***           0.55***                          0.55***         0.52***            0.58***
                                               (0.07)          (0.14)            (0.08)                           (0.07)          (0.14)             (0.08)
     Household size                           10.63***          9.43***          11.24***                        11.62***        11.00***            12.09***
                                               (0.81)          (1.48)            (0.96)                           (0.91)          (1.66)             (1.07)
     Log(household income)                    11.57***        10.48***           11.95***                        11.17***        10.01***            12.29***
                                               (1.33)          (1.95)            (1.76)                           (1.39)          (2.06)             (1.72)
     Liquidity status                         14.58***        15.45***           13.98***                        10.26***        10.96***             9.10***
                                               (2.59)          (4.04)            (3.31)                           (2.50)          (4.16)             (3.02)
     Observations                               4,265           1,600             2,665                            3,836           1,501              2,335
     R-squared                                   0.19            0.11              0.21                            0.18             0.11               0.21
     1st-stage F stat (mean)                    123.7           57.22             65.73                            117.9           54.96              62.67
     1st-stage F stat (uncertainty)             29.81           19.33             16.57                            27.82           17.03              15.38
Notes: the table reports estimates of specification (2). The dependent variable is log(nondurable consumption)×100. The first stage is given by specification (3). Pre-treatment
expectations are compute using the generalized triangular distribution (i.e., the assumption of symmetric triangular distribution is relaxed); see Appendix B for more details.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                                                                                                             44
Appendix Table 4. Effects of 1st and 2nd moments for expected growth rate of EA GDP on investment attitudes
                                            towards real estate.

                                                        Worth investing in real estate

                                            Total sample      Home owners       Non-home owners

                                                  (1)               (2)                  (3)
Posterior: mean                                  0.01              0.01                 0.01
                                               (0.01)             (0.01)              (0.01)
Posterior: uncertainty                          -0.01              -0.03                0.01
                                               (0.03)             (0.04)              (0.05)
Prior: mean                                      0.00              0.00                -0.00
                                               (0.00)             (0.00)              (0.01)
Prior: uncertainty                               0.00              0.01                 0.01
                                               (0.01)             (0.01)              (0.02)
Prior beliefs on investing in real estate     0.47***            0.49***             0.42***
                                               (0.02)             (0.02)              (0.03)
Education: secondary                             0.07              0.08                 0.05
                                               (0.05)             (0.06)              (0.08)
Education: tertiary                           0.12***             0.10*               0.15**
                                               (0.05)             (0.06)              (0.07)
Age                                              0.00              0.00                -0.00
                                               (0.00)             (0.00)              (0.00)
Household size                                   0.00              0.00                -0.00
                                               (0.01)             (0.01)              (0.02)
Log(household income)                            0.01              -0.02                0.03
                                               (0.01)             (0.02)              (0.02)
Liquidity status                                 0.04              0.00                 0.04
                                               (0.03)             (0.05)              (0.05)
Observations                                   4,619              2,990                1,629
R-squared                                        0.24              0.26                 0.21
1st-stage F stat (mean)                        129.5              97.51                37.71
1st-stage F stat (uncertainty)                 28.19              18.30                11.98




                                                                                                         45
                                                     Appendix B.
1. Mean prediction and uncertainty implied by distributions reported in the pre-treatment stage.

Let  () denote the distribution of variable  for person  . The survey provides information on the support of the
distribution [, , , ] and on the probability mass to the right of the mid-point of the support  =  ( >
, + , /2). We assume that the distribution  () is triangula over each of the two intervals
, , , + , /2 and , + , /2, ,  as shown in the figure below. If  = 0.5, the distribution
collapses to a simple triangular distribution over the interval [, , , ].




Knowing the support of the distribution, the expected value and variance of  can be expressed as
                                                          ,
                                                () =           () ,
                                                          ,
                                                      ,
                                         () =             [ -  ()]2  () .
                                                     ,


Note that  () and  () depend only on three known parameters , , , ,  . We measure uncertainty as
the standard deviation ( ()) of the reported distribution. For  = 0.5 (our baseline),  () =
                                                 2
, + , /2 and  () = , - ,  /24.

2. Mean prediction and uncertainty implied by distributions reported in the post-treatment stage.

At the post-treatment stage, respondents are asked to assign realizations for variable  in three scenarios: lowest
  ()                ()                   ( )
( ), medium (            ), and highest ( ). Then they are asked to assign probabilities for each scenario:
 ()    ()     ( )
 ,          ,  . We compute the mean d variance of the implied distribution as follows:

                                                                   () ()
                                                () =               ,
                                                    {,,}
                                                       () ()                   2
                                       () =                           -  () .
                                                  {,,}

                                                                                                                46
                                     Appendix C. Survey Questionnaire
Q1. What is the highest level of school you have completed, or the highest degree you have received? [asked in
background survey]
 Primary or no education
 Lower secondary education
 Upper secondary education
 Post-secondary non-tertiary education
 Short-cycle tertiary education
 Bachelor or equivalent
 Master or equivalent
 Doctoral or equivalent


Q2. How many people ­ including children and yourself ­ normally live with you as members of this household? By
household we mean everyone who usually lives at your main place of residence (including yourself) and, that shares a
common budget (that is, excluding flatmates and lodgers). [asked in background survey]

Q3. What was your household's total net income (that is, after tax and compulsory deductions) over the past 12 months
from all sources?
If you don't know the exact figure, please give an estimate.
Please consider the income of all household members, and from all sources: wages or salaries; income from self-
employment or farming; pensions; unemployment/redundancy benefit; any other social benefits or grants; income from
investment, savings, insurance or property; income from other sources. [asked in background survey]
 ____________ [RANGE: 0-999999]
 Prefer not to answer
 Don't know
 Skipped


Q4. Perhaps you can provide the approximate range instead. What category best matches your household's total net
income (that is, after tax and compulsory deductions) over the past 12 months?
We greatly appreciate your response and assure you that everything you say will be treated in the strictest confidence.
[asked in background survey]
  Less than 10,000
  10,000-14,999
  15,000-19,999
  20,000-24,999
  25,000-29,999
  30,000-39,999
  40,000-49,999
  50,000-59,999
  60,000-74,999
  75,000 or more
  Prefer not to answer
  Don't know
  Skipped

                                                                                                                       47
Q5. Please think about your available financial resources, including access to credit, savings, loans from relatives or friends,
etc. Suppose that you had to make an unexpected payment equal to one month of your household income. Would you
have sufficient financial resources to pay for the entire amount? [asked in August, September (pre-RCT), October,
November and December waves]

 Yes
 No

Q6.What best describes your current employment situation?
[asked in August, September (pre-RCT), October, November and December waves]
 Working full-time (self-employed or working for someone else)
 Working part-time (self-employed or working for someone else)
 Temporarily laid-off (you expect to return to your previous workplace)
 On extended leave (disability, sick, maternity or other leave)
 Unemployed and actively looking for a job
 Unemployed, interested in having a job but not actively looking for a job
 Unable to work because of disability or other medical reasons
 In retirement or early retirement
 Studying, at school, or in training
 Looking after children or other persons, doing housework
 Other

if Q6="Full time", "Part time", "Temporarily laid off" or "On extended leave":
Q7a. In which sector/industry do you currently work? If you have more than one job, please consider the job in which
you work the most hours per week.
[asked in August wave]

if Q6 "Unemployed", "Unable to work", "Retired", "Studying", "Housework" or "Other":
Q7b. In which sector/industry did you work in your last paid job?
[asked in August wave]
  Agriculture
  Industry
  Construction
  Trade
  Transport
  Hotels, bars and restaurants
  Information and communication services
  Administrative and support services
  Public administration, including military
  Education
  Health sector
  Arts and entertainment
  Other

Q8. Do you or anyone in your household own financial assets in each of the following categories? [asked in August wave]
[Multiple responses possible]
 Savings and current accounts
 Stocks and shares
 Mutual funds and collective investments
 Retirement and pension products (other than a state pension), and whole life insurances
                                                                                                                             48
 Bonds (including short-term and long-term bonds)
 Other financial assets not included above

Additional info on financial instruments displayed:
 Stocks and shares                                  an ownership share in a public or private company
 Mutual funds and collective investments            a portfolio of stocks, bonds or other securities
                                                    a voluntary plan for setting aside money to be spent after
 Retirement and pension products (other than a
                                                    retirement; an insurance policy which is guaranteed to remain
 state pension), and whole life insurances
                                                    in force for the insured's entire lifetime or to the maturity date.
 Bonds (including short-term and long-term          a fixed income investment that pays back the principal amount
 bonds)                                             at a future date

if in Q8 at least one category of financial products was selected:
Q9. Please provide an estimate of the total value of the financial assets that you and your household own in the
following categories. [asked in August wave]
[Brackets] For each item [see below list of brackets]
  Savings and current accounts                                                                         <drop-down menu>
  Stocks and shares                                                                                    <drop-down menu>
  Mutual funds and collective investments                                                              <drop-down menu>
  Retirement and pension products (other than a state pension), and whole life insurances (the <drop-down menu>
  amount of money that has been accumulated so far, excluding the current face value of the policy)
  Bonds (including short-term and long-term bonds)                                                     <drop-down menu>
  Other financial assets not included above                                                            <drop-down menu>

 <drop-down menu>
 1-999
 1,000-4,999
 5,000-9,999
 10,000-14,999
 15,000-19,999
 20,000-29,999
 30,000-39,999
 40,000-49,999
 50,000-69,999
 70,000-99,999
 100,000-149,999
 150,000-199,999
 More than 200,000
 Prefer not to answer
 Don't know
 Skipped

Q10. Below you see 8 possible ways in which your household's total net income could change over the next 12 months.
Please distribute 100 points among them, to indicate how likely you think it is that each income change will happen. The
sum of the points you allocate should total to 100. [asked in August, September (pre-RCT), October, November and
December waves]
Instruction: You can allocate points by typing a percentage in each box. (Note that your answers should sum to 100 ­ if
your sum exceeds 100, you should first decrease the points again in one option before you can add points in another).
                                                                Percent chance points
  Increase by 8% or more

                                                                                                                          49
 Increase by 4% or more, but less than 8%
 Increase by 2% or more, but less than 4%
 Increase by less than 2%
 Decrease by less than 2%
 Decrease by 2% or more, but less than 4%
 Decrease 4% or more, but less than 8%
 Decrease by 8% or more
 Total (the points should sum to 100)                                100
 Skipped

Q11. Which of the following have you purchased in the past 30 days? Please select all that apply. [asked in August,
September (pre-RCT), October, November and December waves]
[Multiple responses possible]
 A house/apartment
 A car or other vehicle
 A home appliance, furniture or electronic items (incl. gadgets)
 A holiday
 Luxury items, including jewellery and watches
 Other major item, not listed above
 None of the above

Q12. Which of the following do you plan to purchase in the next 12 months? Please select all that apply. [asked in August,
September (pre-RCT), October, November and December waves]
[Multiple responses possible]
 A house/apartment
 A car or other vehicle
 A home appliance, furniture or electronic items (incl. gadgets)
 A holiday
 Luxury items, including jewellery and watches
 Other major item, not listed above
 None of the above


Introduction (separate screen):
(intro). In the next questions, we ask you to give your best guess about the rate at which the euro area economy
will grow or shrink. The growth rate of an economy is the percentage by which the total value of all goods and
services produced in a specific period changes. A positive growth rate indicates that the economy will grow,
while a negative growth rate (with a `-` sign in front of it) indicates that the economy will shrink.

Q13. Please give your best guess about the lowest growth rate (your prediction for the most pessimistic scenario for the
euro area growth rate over the next 12 months) and the highest growth rate (your most optimistic prediction). [asked in
September (pre-RCT) wave]
Instruction: Please use the sliders below to indicate the growth rates. If you think that the economy will shrink rather than
grow you can provide a negative percentage.

Q13a. What do you think the lowest growth rate of the euro area economy will be over the next 12 months?
Q13b. What do you think the highest growth rate of the euro area economy will be over the next 12 months?
Slider with range from -50% to 50%



                                                                                                                          50
Q14. What do you think is the percentage chance that the growth rate of the euro area economy over the next 12
months will be greater than (Q1a + Q1b)/2 %? [asked in September (pre-RCT) wave]
Instruction: Please use the slider below to select the percentage chance.

Slider with range from 0% to 100%


Randomization/Treatment

 Group A
 Group B
 Group C
 Group D
 Group E

Info screens for each experimental group. Subsequently, all questions identical among groups.
[asked in September wave]

  Group      Statement for screen:
  A          No additional screen
  B          Growth rate forecast for 2021 month in the euro area ­ first moment
             Screen 1: On the next screen, we describe some predictions that have been made about economic
             growth in the euro area. We would like to ask you to review this information carefully. Please note that
             this information will be shown only once and you will not be able to go back to it.

             Screen 2: The average prediction among professional forecasters is that the euro area economy will grow at
             a rate of 5.6% in 2021. By historical standards, this is a strong growth.
  C          Growth rate forecast for 2021 in the euro area - second moment
             Screen 1: On the next screen, we describe some predictions that have been made about economic
             growth in the euro area. We would like to ask you to review this information carefully. Please note that
             this information will be shown only once and you will not be able to go back to it.

             Screen 2: Professional forecasters are uncertain about economic growth in the euro area in 2021, with the
             difference between the most optimistic and the most pessimistic predictions being 4.8 percentage points.
             By historical standards, this is a big difference.
  D          Growth rate forecast for 2021 in the euro area - first & second moment
             Screen 1: On the next screen, we describe some predictions that have been made about economic growth
             in the euro area. We would like to ask you to review this information carefully. Please note that this
             information will be shown only once and you will not be able to go back to it.

             Screen 2: The average prediction among professional forecasters is that the euro area economy will grow at
             a rate of 5.6% in 2021. By historical standards, this is a strong growth. At the same time, professional
             forecasters are uncertain about economic growth in the euro area in 2021, with the difference between the
             most optimistic and the most pessimistic predictions being 4.8 percentage points. By historical standards,
             this is a big difference.
  E          Growth rate forecast for 2021 in own country - second moment
             Screen 1: On the next screen, we describe some predictions that have been made about economic
             growth in the country you currently live in. We would like to ask you to review this information carefully.
             Please note that this information will be shown only once and you will not be able to go back to it.


                                                                                                                        51
             Screen 2: Professional forecasters are uncertain about economic growth in the country you are living in in
             2021, with the difference between the most optimistic and the most pessimistic predictions being <X%>
             percentage points. By historical standards, this is a big difference.

Replaced "in the country you are living in" by the actual country name (France for FR, Germany for DE, Italy for
IT, Spain for ES) and <X%> by the corresponding value for the respective country.


Q15. We would now like to ask you again about possible growth rates in the euro area. What do you think will be the
approximate growth rate in the euro area over the next 12 months for each of the scenarios below?
We start with your prediction for the most pessimistic scenario for the euro area growth rate over the next 12 months
(LOWEST growth rate) and end with your most optimistic prediction (HIGHEST growth rate). [asked in September (post-
RCT) wave]

Instruction: If you think that the euro area economy will shrink rather than grow in one or more scenarios, please provide
a negative number.
Info button after growth rates (first sentence): The growth rate of an economy is the percentage by which the total
value of all goods and services produced in a specific period changes.
  Sentence                                                                      Value field
  The LOWEST growth rate in the euro area economy would be about:               __% [RANGE: -50 to 50]
  A MEDIUM growth rate in the euro area economy would be about:                 __% [RANGE: -50 to 50]
  The HIGHEST growth rate in the euro area economy would be about:              __% [RANGE: -50 to 50]


Q16. Now we ask you to think about the chance of the growth rates you entered in the previous screen actually
happening in the euro area economy over the next 12 months.
Please assign a percentage chance to each growth rate to indicate how likely you think it is that this growth rate will
actually happen in the euro area economy over the next 12 months. Your answers can range from 0 to 100, where 0 means
there is absolutely no chance that this growth rate will happen, and 100 means that it is absolutely certain that this growth
rate will happen. The sum of the points you allocate should total to 100. [asked in September (post-RCT) wave]
Instruction: You can allocate the points by typing a number in each box. (Your answers should sum to 100 ­ if your sum
exceeds 100, you should first decrease the points again in one option before you can add points in another).

 Sentence                                                                                Value field
 LOWEST: The chance of a <a>% growth rate in the euro area economy would be:             __% [RANGE: 0-100]
 MEDIUM: The chance of a <b>% growth rate in the euro area economy would be:             __% [RANGE: 0-100]
 HIGHEST: The chance of a <c>% growth rate in the euro area economy would be:            __% [RANGE: 0-100]
 Total                                                                                   [sum of values above]

Q17. Imagine that you receive 10,000 to save or invest in financial assets. Please indicate in which of the following
asset categories you will save/invest this amount. [asked in September (post-RCT) wave]
Instruction: You can allocate 10,000 by typing an amount in each box. (Note that your answers should sum to 10,000 ­
if your sum exceeds 10,000, you should first decrease the amount in one option before you increase the amount in
another).
         Euro
  Savings or current accounts
  Stocks and shares
  Mutual funds and collective investments
  Retirement or pension products
  Short-term bonds
  Long-term bonds
                                                                                                                          52
 Bitcoin and/or other crypto assets
 Total (the values should sum to 10,000)                                   10,000
 Skipped

Show info buttons of definitions for financial instruments:
 Stocks and shares                                    an ownership share in a public or private company
 Mutual fund and collective investments               a portfolio of stocks, bonds, or other securities (incl. ETFs)
 Retirement or pension products                    a plan for setting aside money to be spent after retirement
                                                   a fixed income investment that pays back the principal amount in
 Short-term bonds
                                                   three years or less
                                                   a fixed income investment that pays back the principal amount in
 Long-term bonds
                                                   ten years or more
                                                   virtual or digital means of payment that takes the form of tokens
 Bitcoin and other crypto assets
                                                   and secured by cryptography
Q18. Is buying real estate in your neighbourhood today a good or a bad investment?
[asked in September (pre-RCT) and October waves]
 Very bad
 Bad
 Neither good nor bad
 Good
 Very good

Q19a. During September 2020, how much did your household spend on the goods and services listed below? [asked in
October and January waves]
Instruction: If your household has not spent any money on a specific item or service in the last month, then tick the "No
money spent last month" box.

Screen I
                                                                              Amount spent             No money spent
                                                                              last month               last month
 1     Food, beverages, groceries, tobacco                                      __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999] [tick box]
 2     Restaurants (including take-out food, delivery), cafes/ canteens         __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999] [tick box]

Screen II
                                                                                         Amount spent             No money spent
                                                                                         last month               last month
 3     Housing (including rent, maintenance/repair costs, home owner/renter                __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999] [tick box]
       insurance, but excluding mortgage payments)
 4     Utilities (including water, sewer, electricity, gas, heating oil, phone, cable,    __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]       [tick box]
       internet)
 5     Furnishings (furniture, carpets), household equipment (textiles,                    __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]      [tick box]
       appliances, garden tools), small appliances and routine maintenance of
       the house (cleaning, gardening)
 6     Debt repayments (instalments in mortgage, consumer loans, auto loans,               __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]      [tick box]
       credit cards, student loans, other loans)

Screen III
                                                                                         Amount spent            No money spent
                                                                                         last month              last month
 7     Clothing, footwear                                                                 __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999] [tick box]
                                                                                                                             53
 8     Health (health insurance, medical products and appliances, dental and        __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]    [tick box]
       paramedical services, hospital services, prescription and non-prescription
       medication, personal care products and services)
 9     Transport (fuel, car maintenance, public transportation fares)               __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]    [tick box]
 10    Travel, recreation, entertainment and culture (holidays, theatre/ movie      __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]    [tick box]
       tickets, club/ gym membership, newspapers, books, hobbies equipment)

Screen IV
 11 Childcare and education (including tuition fees for child and adult     __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]     [tick box]
       education, costs of after school activities, care of children/
       babysitting, but excluding instalments on student loans)
 12 Other expenditures not mentioned above                                  __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]     [tick box]


Checking Screen (dynamic):
Q19b. According to your entries, your household's spending on the described items and services over the last month
was:  ___ [sum from all values in Q19a]. Below is a summary of your entries. If you would like to make any changes to
your entries, you can change the amounts in the table below. Once you are satisfied with your entries, please click
`Continue'. [asked in October wave]

                                                                                           Amount spent last month
 21     Food, beverages, groceries, tobacco                                                 __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]
 22     Restaurants (including take-out food, delivery), cafes/ canteens                    __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]
 23     Housing (including rent, maintenance/repair costs, home owner/renter                __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]
        insurance, housekeeping and cleaning service, but excluding mortgage payments)
 24     Utilities (including water, sewer, electricity, gas, heating oil, phone, cable,     __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]
        internet)
 25     Furnishings (furniture, carpets), household equipment (textiles, appliances,        __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]
        garden tools), small appliances and routine maintenance of the house (cleaning,
        gardening)
 26     Debt repayments (instalments in mortgage, consumer loans, auto loans, credit        __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]
        cards, student loans, other loans)
 27     Clothing, footwear                                                                  __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]
 28     Health (health insurance, medical products and appliances, dental and               __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]
        paramedical services, hospital services, prescription and non-prescription
        medication, personal care products and services)
 29     Transport (fuel, car maintenance, public transportation fares)                      __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]
 30     Travel, recreation, entertainment and culture (holidays, theatre/ movie tickets,    __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]
        club/ gym membership, newspapers, books, hobbies equipment)
 31     Childcare and education (including tuition fees for child and adult education,      __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]
        costs of after school activities, care of children/ babysitting, but excluding
        instalments on student loans)
 32     Other expenditures not mentioned above                                              __ [RANGE: 0 to 99999]
        Total:                                                                              __ [sum of values above]




                                                                                                                        54
