                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHEN DID GROWTH BEGIN? NEW ESTIMATES OF PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH
                    IN ENGLAND FROM 1250 TO 1870

                                       Paul Bouscasse
                                       Emi Nakamura
                                        Jón Steinsson

                                     Working Paper 28623
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28623


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2021, Revised June 2021




We thank Caleb Wroblewski for excellent research assistance. We thank Gregory Clark, Brad
DeLong, Edward Nelson, Jan De Vries, David Weinstein, Jacob Weisdorf and seminar
participants at UC Berkeley and UC Davis for valuable comments and discussions. We thank the
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Smith Richardson Foundation, and the Program for Economic
Research at Columbia University for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Paul Bouscasse, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Did Growth Begin? New Estimates of Productivity Growth in England from 1250 to
1870
Paul Bouscasse, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson
NBER Working Paper No. 28623
March 2021, Revised June 2021
JEL No. N13,O11,O47

                                         ABSTRACT

We provide new estimates of the evolution of productivity in England from 1250 to 1870. Real
wages over this period were heavily influenced by plague-induced swings in the population. We
develop and implement a new methodology for estimating productivity that accounts for these
Malthusian dynamics. In the early part of our sample, we find that productivity growth was zero.
Productivity growth began in 1600--almost a century before the Glorious Revolution. Post-1600
productivity growth had two phases: an initial phase of modest growth of 4% per decade between
1600 and 1810, followed by a rapid acceleration at the time of the Industrial Revolution to 18%
per decade. Our evidence helps distinguish between theories of why growth began. In particular,
our findings support the idea that broad-based economic change preceded the bourgeois
institutional reforms of 17th century England and may have contributed to causing them. We also
estimate the strength of Malthusian population forces on real wages. We find that these forces
were sufficiently weak to be easily overwhelmed by post-1800 productivity growth.


Paul Bouscasse                                 Jón Steinsson
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
Columbia University                            University of California, Berkeley
1022 International Affairs Building            671 Evans Hall
420 West 118th Street                          Berkeley, CA 94720
New York, NY 10027                             and NBER
paul.bouscasse@columbia.edu                    jsteinsson@berkeley.edu

Emi Nakamura
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
685 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
enakamura@berkeley.edu
1   Introduction

When did economic growth begin? A traditional view holds that economic growth began with
the Industrial Revolution around 1800. Recent work has challenged this view pushing the date
of the onset of growth back. Crafts (1983, 1985) and Harley (1982) revised downward previous
estimates of growth in Britain during the Industrial Revolution. These new estimates indicate that
British output per capita was larger by mid-18th century than was previously thought implying
that substantial growth must have occurred at an earlier date (see also Crafts and Harley, 1992).
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005) argue that a First Great Divergence occurred starting
around 1500 with Western Europe growing apart from other areas of the world following the
discovery of the Americas and the sea route to India. They support this view with data on ur-
banization rates. Broadberry et al. (2015) argue that growth began even earlier than this. They
present new estimates of GDP per person for Britain back to 1270. These data show slow but
steady growth in GDP per person from the beginning of their sample.
    An important facet of the debate about when growth began is when productivity growth began.
We contribute to this debate by constructing a new series for productivity growth in England
back to 1250. Figure 1 plots our new productivity series (solid black line). Our main finding
is that productivity growth in England began in 1600. Before that time our estimates indicate
that productivity growth was zero. Between 1600 and 1810, productivity growth was modest at
about 4% per decade. Productivity growth then dramatically increased after 1810 to about 18%
per decade. These results indicate that there was a two hundred year transition period--1600
to 1810--between the era of near total stagnation and the era of rapid modern growth that was
ushered in by the Industrial Revolution.
    Our results help distinguish between different theories of why growth began. They suggest
that researchers should focus on developments proximate to the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries.
An important debate regarding the onset of growth is whether economic change drove political
and institutional change as Marx famously argued or whether political and institutional change
kick-started economic growth (e.g., North and Thomas, 1973). Reality is likely more complex than
either polar view. However, our result that productivity growth began almost a century before the
Glorious Revolution and well before the English Civil War supports the Marxist view--articulated
for example by Hill (1940, 1961)--that economic change contributed importantly to 17th century
institutional change in England.
    Our estimates also contradict the notion that the transition from stagnation to growth was
                                                1
                                 Figure 1: Estimates of Productivity in England
   Note: Each series is the natural logarithm of productivity. Clark's (2010) series estimates TFP for the entire
   economy based on a dual approach. Allen's (2005) estimates are for TFP in the agricultural sector using a
   primal approach. Our baseline productivity series is normalized to zero in 1250. The other two periods are
   normalized to match our baseline series in 1300.


merely a steady process of very gradually increased growth (Kremer, 1993, Galor and Weil, 2000).
In sharp contrast to this view, our estimates indicate that a very substantial increase in productivity
growth occurred over a relatively brief period of time. Our results therefore support the notion
that the Industrial Revolution was revolutionary. In this, our results are closer to the traditional
view of Deane and Cole (1962) and Feinstein (1988) than the `revisionist' view of Crafts and Harley
(1992).
   The most comprehensive existing productivity series for England was constructed by Clark
(2010). He estimated changes in TFP for the entire English economy from 1209 onward using the
"dual approach"--i.e., as a weighted average of changes in real factor prices (e.g., Hsieh, 2002).
Figure 1 plots Clark's series over our sample period (broken black line). A striking feature of this
series is that it implies that productivity in England was no higher in the mid-19th century than
in the 15th century. This result does not line up well with other existing (less comprehensive)
measures of productivity in England or with less formal assessments of the English economy. For
example, Allen (2005) estimates that TFP in agriculture was 162% higher in 1850 than in 1500 (grey
diamonds in Figure 1).1 Clark himself commented that if the fluctuations in his series are not mea-
   1
       Allen (2005) employs the familiar "primal approach," i.e., subtracts a weighted average of growth in factor inputs

                                                            2
surement error "they imply quite inexplicable fluctuations in the performance of the preindustrial
economy."
   Our conclusions about productivity in England are clearly dramatically different from those
of Clark (2010). According to our estimates, productivity in England was roughly 440% higher
in 1850 than in 1500 rather than being essentially unchanged. These large differences arise from
differences in the data and methodology we use. We take the labor demand curve as our start-
ing point and estimate changes in productivity as shifts in the labor demand curve. This means
that the key data series that inform our estimates are real wages and measures of labor supply
(population and days worked per year). Real wages and population are arguably among the best
measured series of all economic time series over our long sample period. In contrast, an impor-
tant input into Clark's productivity series is a series for land rents that is essentially flat between
1250 and 1600 despite enormous fluctuations in the land-labor ratio in England over this period
associated with plagues. We conjecture that mismeasurement in Clark's rent series contributes
importantly to the differences in our results.
   To get a better sense for how our approach works, consider the following simple labor demand
curve for a pre-modern society
                                                              
                                                         Z
                                      Wt = (1 - )At              ,
                                                         Lt

where Wt denotes real wages, At denotes productivity, Z denotes land (which is fixed), and Lt
denotes labor. The model we consider later in the paper is more general. But the basic idea can be
grasped using this simple model. If we take logarithms, this equation becomes


                                          wt =  - lt + at ,


where lower case letters denote logarithms of upper case letters. Given this equation, a simple-
minded empirical approach would be to regress wages on labor and equate the residual from
that regression with productivity. In our context, however, this simple-minded approach is not
likely to work well because of Malthusian population forces. In a Malthusian world, increases in
productivity induce increases in the population and therefore the labor force. This means that in
a Malthusian world lt and at are likely to be correlated and an OLS estimate of  is likely to yield
non-sense.
   To illustrate this, Figure 2 presents a scatter plot of real wages in England against labor supply


from output growth.

                                                  3
                                  Figure 2: Real Wages and Labor Supply
   Note: The figure presents a scatter plot of the logarithm of real wages in England against the logarithm of labor
   supply in England over the period 1250-1860. The data on real wages are from Clark (2010). Estimates of labor
   supply are based on our calculations. Labor supply varies mainly due to variation in the population, but also
   due to changes in days worked per person.


in England. Variation in labor supply in England is mostly driven by variation in the population,
but also affected by variation in days worked per worker. The period from 1300 to 1450 was a
period of frequent plagues--the most famous being the Black Death of 1348. Over this period,
the population of England fell by a factor of two resulting in a sharp drop in labor supply. Over
this same period, real wages rose substantially. Then from 1450 to 1600, the population (and
labor supply) recovered and real wages fell. In 1630, the English economy was back to almost
exactly the same point it was at in 1300. One way to explain these dynamics between 1300 and
1630 is as movements along a stable labor demand curve with no change in productivity. Then
in the 17th century, something important seems to change. The points start moving off this labor
demand curve. Specifically, they start moving up and to the right relative to the earlier curve. This
suggests that productivity started growing in the 17th century in England.
   This is the basic idea behind our approach to estimating productivity. We seek to estimate
a labor demand curve for England and then back out productivity growth as shifts in this labor
demand curve. Clearly, estimating the labor demand curve by an ordinary least squares regression
will not work in this setting since the shifts in productivity induce increases in the population (see
the points after 1630 in Figure 2). For this reason, we take a more structural approach. We write
                                                          4
down a Malthusian model of the economy which includes both a labor demand curve and a model
for the evolution of the population over time as a function of real incomes. We then estimate this
full model. In other words, we model the endogeneity of population dynamics. This allows us
to produce an estimate of the labor demand curve and an estimate of productivity growth that
accounts for the endogeneity implied by Malthusian population dynamics.
   Our estimates also shed light on the lack of real wage growth during the latter part of the 18th
century, sometimes referred to as "Engel's Pause" (Engels, 1845, Allen, 2009b). Our Malthusian
model suggests that during this period real wages were held back by very rapid increases in the
population, which in a Malthusian world put downward pressure on the marginal product of
labor. This explanation contrasts with the common idea that the absence of real wage growth
during this period resulted from the lion's share of the fruits of technical change going to capital
as opposed to labor.
   In addition to estimates of productivity, our methodology yields estimates of the speed of
Malthusian population dynamics in pre-modern England. Our estimates imply that Malthusian
population dynamics were very slow: a doubling of real incomes led to a 6 percentage point per
decade increase in population growth. Together with our estimate of the slope of the labor demand
curve, this implies that the half-life of a plague-induced drop in the population was roughly 150
years. Earlier estimates of the speed of Malthusian population dynamics in England also indicate
that they were slow. For example, Lee and Anderson (2002) find a half-life of 107 years, while
Crafts and Mills (2009) find a half-life of 431 years. Chaney and Hornbeck (2016) document very
slow population dynamics in Valencia after the expulsion of the Moriscos in 1609.
   Finally, we can use our estimates to ask to what extent the speed of productivity growth after
1800 overwhelmed the Malthusian population force. In a Malthusian world, the steady state level
of real income is increasing in the steady state level of productivity growth. Our estimates imply
that the steady state level of real income associated with the post-1800 growth in productivity of
18% per decade was 28 times higher than the steady state level of real income associated with
zero growth in productivity. This implies that even if the Demographic Transition--i.e., the rapid
fall in birth and death rates and decoupling of these rates from real income--had not happened,
the level of productivity growth post-1800 would have resulted in substantial growth in living
standards before being choked off by population growth.
   Our work builds on ideas in Clark (2005, 2007a). These works discuss informally how shifts
in the labor demand curve of a Malthusian model can be informative about the timing of the


                                                 5
onset of economic growth. The existing papers most closely related to ours from a methodological
point of view are Lee and Anderson (2002) and Crafts and Mills (2009). These papers structurally
estimate a Malthusian model of the English economy, as we do. However, their sample period is
considerably shorter than ours (theirs starts in 1540 while ours start in 1250). This means that they
cannot address the question of when growth began. Using a Malthusian model and estimates of
the world population, Kremer (1993) argues that extremely small but positive productivity growth
extends back hundreds of thousands of years.
    Our paper is also related to the literature in macroeconomics on the transition from pre-
industrial stagnation to modern growth--often referred to as the transition "from Malthus to
Solow." Important papers in this literature include Galor and Weil (2000), Jones (2001), and
Hansen and Prescott (2002). Relative to these papers, our work is more empirical. We contribute
detailed estimates of the evolution of productivity, while these papers propose theories of how
productivity growth rose. Our work is also related to recent work by Hansen, Ohanian, and Oz-
turk (2020).
    Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents our Malthusian model of the economy.
Section 3 discusses the data we use and our estimation strategy. Section 4 presents our results on
productivity. Section 5 presents our results on the strength of the Malthusian population force.
Section 6 presents our estimates of the population. Section 7 concludes.



2   A Malthusian Model of the Economy

We now present a simple model meant to describe the pre-industrial English economy. The model
is Malthusian in that diminishing returns to labor (the only variable factor of production) give
rise to a downward-sloping labor demand curve and the rate of population growth is increasing
in people's real income. We model time as discrete and denote it by a subscript t. Since we use
decadal data later in the paper, each time period in the model is meant to represent a decade.
    Output is produced with land and labor according to the following production function:

                                                         -
                                          Yt = At Z  L 1
                                                       t   ,


where Yt denotes output, At denotes productivity, Z denotes land (which is fixed), and Lt denotes
labor (in units of worker days). We assume that owners of land hire workers in a competitive
labor market taking wages as given. Optimal behavior by land owners gives rise to the following

                                                  6
labor demand curve:
                                                              
                                                        Z
                                      Wt = (1 - )At              ,
                                                        Lt

where Wt denotes the real daily wage. Taking logarithms of this equation yields


                                         wt = ~ - lt + at ,                                      (1)


where lower case letters denote logarithms of upper case letters and ~ = log(1 - ) +  log Z . Our

assumption above of a Cobb-Douglas production function is for expositional simplicity. Equation
(1) holds as a log-linear approximation of labor demand for a generic production function. For
instance, if the production function displays a constant elasticity of substitution between land and
labor,  is not equal to the land share of output. Rather, its value depends both on the land share
and the elasticity of substitution between labor and land. We present this more general derivation
in appendix A.
   As in all models, productivity is a catch-all variable capturing the influence of all variables
that are not explicitly modeled in the production function. The simple form of our assumed pro-
duction function--with only a single variable factor of production--implies that our measure of
productivity is rather broad. For example, it captures improvements in land and capital over our
sample period. In section 4.2, we extend our model to include capital. This allows us to estimate
a productivity series that accounts for capital accumulation.
   We assume that the labor force in the economy is proportional to the population and that each
worker works Dt days per year. This implies that


                                            Lt = Dt Nt ,


where Nt denotes the population. Taking logs of this equation and using the resulting equation to
eliminate lt in equation (1) yields


                                      wt =  - (dt + nt ) + at ,                                  (2)


where  = log(1 - ) +  log Z - .
   A central aspect of our model is the law of motion for the population. Following Malthus




                                                 7
(1798), we assume that population growth is increasing in real income:

                                          Nt
                                              = (Wt-1 Dt-1 ) t ,
                                         Nt-1

where  is a constant,  is the elasticity of population growth with respect to real income, and t
denotes other (exogenous) factors affecting population growth. Taking logarithms of this equation
yields
                                    nt - nt-1 =  +  (wt-1 + dt-1 ) + t .                                   (3)

     Malthus argued that both the birth rate and the death rate varied with real income. He de-
scribed "preventive checks" on population growth that lowered birth rates. These included con-
traception, delayed marriage, and regulation of sexual activity during marriage. Malthus also
described "positive checks" on population growth that raised death rates. These include disease,
war, severe labor, and extreme poverty. In our model, the parameter  captured the elasticity of
both birth rates and death rates with respect to income. This parameter therefore captures any
tendency of either preventive or positive checks to lower population growth when income falls.
     We assume that the logarithm of productivity is made up of a permanent and transitory com-
ponent:
                                               at = a
                                                    ~t +       2t ,                                        (4)

where
                                            a
                                            ~t = µ + a
                                                     ~t-1 +           1t ,                                 (5)

1t    N (0,  21 ), and    2t    N (0,  22 ). Both   1t   and   2t     are independently distributed over time.
Here, a
      ~t is the permanent component of productivity, which follows a random walk with drift,
while    2t   is the transitory component of productivity. The average growth rate of productivity is
given by the parameter µ. This is a key parameter in our model. As we describe in more detail
below, we allow for structural breaks in µ, i.e., changes in the average growth rate of productivity.
     We allow for two types of exogenous population shocks:


                                               t = 1t + 2t .                                               (6)




                                                         8
First, we allow for "plague" shocks:
                                             
                                               (1 , 2 ), with probability 
                                             
                               exp(1t )                                                                                   (7)
                                              1,                  with probability 1 - 
                                             


These plague shocks occur infrequently (with probability  ) but when they occur they kill a (po-
tentially sizable) fraction of the population. The fraction of the population that survives follows a
beta distribution  (1 , 2 ). The historical record indicates that plagues ravaged Europe frequently
in the 14th and 15th centuries and continued to strike until the 17th century (Gottfried, 1983,
Shrewsbury, 1970). Europe had no significant plague outbreak from the late 8th to the mid-14th
century. This changed with the Black Death, which probably originated on the steppes of Mon-
golia, reached China in the 1330s, travelled west through trade routes, and landed in England in
the summer of 1348. For three centuries after the Black Death, the plague would reappear ev-
ery few decades, and wipe out a significant share of the population each time.2 In England, the
last major outbreak was the Great Plague of London in 1665-66. There is no shortage of poten-
tial explanations for the relatively sudden disappearance of plague--collective immunity, better
nutrition, changes in the dominant rat species, improved quarantine methods, among others (Ap-
pleby, 1980). In addition to the "plague," smallpox, measles, typhus, and dysentery were frequent
mass killers. While they were certainly catastrophic to those afflicted, these outbreaks are ideal
from an identification standpoint: they are frequent, sizeable and plausibly unrelated to the state
of the economy.
    In addition to the plague shocks, we allow for a second type of population shocks: 2t 
N (0, 2 ). Both of the population shocks are independently distributed over time. Together these
       2

population shocks are meant to capture a host of potential influences on population growth such
as weather and wars, in addition to plagues.
    It is useful to consider the dynamics of the model after a plague shock and a productivity
shock. Figure 3 depicts the evolution of real wages and the population after a plague. The down-
ward sloping curve in the figure represents the labor demand curve in the economy. Suppose the
economy is initially in a steady state at point A, but then a plague strikes that kills a fraction of
the population. The economy will then jump from point A to point B . At point B the population
     2
       Plague is caused by a bacillus, Yersinia pestis, which naturally lives in the digestive tract of rodent fleas (although
some epidemiologists contend that human fleas were the main carriers (Appleby, 1980, Dean et al., 2018)). Rat popula-
tions thus constitute a reservoir for plague. Periodically, the bacilli would multiply in the fleas' stomachs, causing them
to regurgitate in the rat's bloodstream. This would kill the rats. Once the rats died, the fleas would turn to other hosts,
including humans. This mechanism explains the recurring character of the disease.

                                                              9
                    Wt




                                    B
                Wplague




                                                             A
                     ¯
                     W



                                Nplague                      ¯
                                                             N                Nt
                                   Figure 3: Effects of a Plague


is lower reflecting the death caused by the plague and real wages are higher reflecting the higher
marginal product of labor of the surviving workers. After the plague, the economy will then grad-
ually move down the labor demand curve until it reaches point A again. This movement occurs
because higher real wages lead to positive population growth. As the population grows the econ-
omy moves along the labor demand curve and real wages fall. Once the economy is back at point
A, real wages are again sufficiently low that population growth is zero.
   Figure 4 depicts the evolution of real wages and the population after a productivity shock.
Suppose again that the economy is initially in a steady state at point A. This time, however,
suppose a permanent increase in productivity shock occurs. This shifts the labor demand curve
out. In the short run, the population is fixed. The economy therefore jumps from point A to point
B . Over time after the shock, the economy will then gradually move along the new labor demand
curve until it gets to a new steady state at point C . These dynamics are again due to high wages
causing positive population growth and a larger and larger population reducing wages until they
are back at a point where population growth is zero.
   Notice that the dynamics of the economy after these two shocks are quite different. In the case
of a plague shock, the population moves sharply on impact but returns to its original level in the
long run. In the case of a permanent change in productivity, however, real wages move on impact
but not the population, while the population changes over time and ends up at different point
than the economy started at. The main empirical challenge we face is distinguishing between
labor demand (productivity) shocks and labor supply (plague) shocks. It is these differences in


                                                10
                        Wt




                                                    B
                        W0


                                                    A                     C
                         ¯
                         W




                                               N¯                ¯
                                                                 N                 Nt
                          Figure 4: Effects of a Permanent Increase in Productivity


dynamics that help us to distinguish these two empirically.



3       Data and Estimation

We reproduce the equations and distributional assumptions of our full model here for conve-
nience:
                                                    ~t - (nt + dt ) +
                                            wt =  + a                         2t

                                      nt - nt-1 =  +  (wt-1 + dt-1 ) + 1t + 2t

                                            a
                                            ~t = µ + a
                                                     ~t-1 +      1t
                                             
                                               (1 , 2 ), with probability 
                                             
                               exp(1t ) 
                                              1,              with probability 1 - 
                                             


                               1t    N (0,  21 ),   2t    N (0,  22 ),   2t  N (0, 2
                                                                                    2
                                                                                      )

    We estimate the model using data on wages wt , the population nt , and days worked dt . We
do this using Bayesian methods. In particular, we use a Hamiltonian Monte Carlo sampling pro-
cedure (Gelman et al., 2013, Betancourt, 2018).3 The unobservables that we make inference about
are the permanent component of productivity a
                                            ~t , the shocks to this component             1t ,   the transitory
shocks to productivity         2t ,   the plague shocks 1t , the symmetric population shocks 2t , and the
parameters , ,  ,  , µ,  , 1 , 2 ,  21 ,  22 , and 2 . Below, we first describe the data we use in
                                                    2


    3
        We implement this procedure using Stan (Stan Development Team, 2017).

                                                            11
                                 Figure 5: Real Wages in England, 1250-1860
    Note: The figure presents estimates of the real wages of unskilled building workers in England from Clark
    (2010).


more detail and then discuss the priors we assume for the parameters and structural breaks we
allow for.
    All the data we use are decadal averages. In our figures, a data point listed as 1640 refers to
the decadal average from 1640 to 1649. We sometimes refer to a variable at a point in time (say
1640) when we mean the decadal average for that decade. In other words, we use 1640 and "the
1640s" interchangably.
    Figure 5 plots the data series we use for real wages in England. This is the series for unskilled
building workers from Clark (2010). The main features of this series are a large and sustained rise
between 1300 and 1450, a large and sustained fall between 1450 and 1600, some recovery over the
17th century, stagnation during the 18th century, and finally a sharp increase after 1800. Figure A.1
compares this series with several other series for real wages in England. This comparison shows
that the real wage series we use is quite similar to Clark's real wage series for farmers. It also
largely shares the same dynamics as Clark's series for craftsman. We have redone our analysis
with the farmers and craftsmen series and discuss this analysis in section 4.4
    4
      Much controversy has centered on the behavior of real wages in England between 1770 and 1850. This debate
revolves around the extent to which laborers shared in the benefits of early industrialization (see, e.g. Feinstein, 1998,
Clark, 2005, Allen, 2007, 2009b). In Figure A.1, we also plot Allen's (2007) wage series (which starts in 1770). The
figure shows that the differences discussed in the prior literature are modest from our perspective and therefore do not
materially affect our analysis.

                                                           12
                              Figure 6: Population Data for England, 1250-1860
   Note: The figure presents population estimates for England for the period 1540-1860 from Wrigley et al. (1997)
   (grey line) and the population trend estimates by Clark (2007b) for the period 1250-1520 (black line). In this
   figure, the black line is normalized for visual convenience such that its last point is equal to the first point of
   the grey line.


   Figure 6 presents the population data that we use. For the period from 1540 onward, we
use population estimates from Wrigley et al. (1997), which in turn build on the seminal work
of Wrigley and Schofield (1981). Sources for population data prior to 1540 are less extensive.
Clark (2007b) uses unbalanced panel data on the population of villages and manors from mano-
rial records and penny tithing payments to construct estimates of the population prior to 1540. We
build on Clark's work to construct an estimate of the population before 1540. We cannot directly
use Clark's pre-1540 population series since Clark's method for constructing his series involves
making assumptions about the evolution of productivity.5 Since we aim to use the population se-
ries to make inference about the evolution of productivity in England, we cannot use a population
series that already embeds assumptions about productivity growth. However, as an intermediate
input into constructing his pre-1540 population series, Clark estimates a regression of his village
and manor level population data on time and village/manor fixed effects. Clark refers to the
time effects from this regression as a population trend. We plot this population trend in Figure 6
(normalized for visual convenience). We base our estimates of the population of England prior to
1540 on this population trend series. In section 5, we discuss how this series compares to (lower
   5
       Appendix B discusses Clark's method in more detail.

                                                           13
frequency) population data reported in Broadberry et al. (2015).
    The population data plotted in Figure 6 are missing information about the population in 1530
and are also missing a normalization for the population prior to 1540. We assume that the true
population is unobserved and estimate it using the following equation


                                                         ^ t + n
                                                 nt =  + n     t,



where nt denotes the true unobserved population, n
                                                 ^ t denotes our observed population series
(Clark's population trend series prior to 1530 and the population series from Wrigley et al. (1997)
after 1530), n         2
             t  tn (0, n ) denotes measurement error, and  denotes a normalization constant.

We normalize  to zero after 1530 and estimate its value for the pre-1530 Clark series. The nor-
malization  , the missing value of the population in the 1530s, and measurement error in the
population at other times are inferred from the combination of the population series we use and
the other data we use (real wages and days worked) through the lens of our full model.
    The final variable to discuss is days worked dt . We treat this variable as exogenous and present
results for two assumptions about its evolution. Our baseline estimation is based on the series for
days worked from Humphries and Weisdorf (2019). Figure 7 plots this series which indicates
that days worked dropped sharply after the Black Death and then started a long upward march.
Humphries and Weisdorf's series, thus, indicates that England experienced a large Industrious
Revolution (de Vries, 1994, 2008). Since the extent of the Industrious Revolution is quite con-
troversial, we also present results assuming that days worked remain constant throughout our
sample period.6 These two sets of results turn out to be quite similar (see section 4.3). In other
words, it doesn't matter for our conclusions whether England experienced the type of Industrious
Revolution indicated by the Humphries and Weisdorf series.
    In our baseline analysis, we assume that Humphries and Weisdorf's series is measured with
error
                                                         ~t + d ,
                                                    dt = d    t


                                                                                 ~t denotes
where dt denotes the true number of days worked per worker, which is unobserved, d
Humphries and Weisdorf's estimates of days worked, and d
                                                       t  td (0, 
                                                                  2 ) denotes the measure-
                                                                 ~d

    6
      Comparisons of direct estimates by Blanchard (1978) for 1400-1600 and Voth (2000, 2001) for 1760-1830 also support
the idea of an Industrious Revolution. Earlier indirect estimates by Clark and Van Der Werf (1998), however, suggest
modest changes in days worked over our sample. Humphries and Weisdorf (2019) argue that their new series on the
income of workers on annual contracts represents an important improvement relative to the series used by Clark and
Van Der Werf (1998).

                                                          14
                           Figure 7: Days Worked per Worker in England, 1260-1840
    Note: The figure presents an estimate of the evolution of days worked per worker in England from Humphries
    and Weisdorf (2019).


ment error. Humphries and Weisdorf do not provide estimates for 1250, 1850, and 1860. We
                                                                               2 ).
extrapolate from the series we have assuming that dt = dt-1 + t where t  N (0, d
   Table 1 lists the priors we assume for the model parameters. In all cases, we choose highly
dispersed priors. Most of the priors are self-explanatory. But some comments are in order. The
prior for  is set such that the peak population before the Black Death is between 4.5 and 6 million
with 95% probability. This range encompasses the estimates of Clark (2007b) and Broadberry et al.
(2015). Rather than specifying priors for 1 and 2 , we specify priors for the mean of 1 which
we denote µ1 = 1 /(1 + 2 ) and the pseudo sample size of 1 which we denote 1 = 1 + 2 .
The priors we choose for these parameters follow the recommendations of Gelman et al. (2013, p.
110) for a flat prior for a beta distribution. Figure A.2 plots the prior densities for the standard
deviations of    1,   2,   and 2 . In section 4.3, we discuss how varying our priors affects our main
results.
   We allow for a structural break in the scale and degrees-of-freedom parameters of the measure-
                                   2 and  , respectively--in 1540. This date coincides with the
ment error in our population data--n     n

change in the source of the population data. The post-1540 population data we use is higher qual-
ity than the earlier data. The structural break allows us to capture this change. We also allow for
a structural break in the probability of a plague  in 1680. The timing of this break is chosen to

                                                       15
                                    Table 1: Priors for Model Parameters
                         Parameter          Prior         Parameter             Prior
                                           U (0, 2)                           U (-2, 2)
                                         N (0, 1002 )                     N (10.86, 0.072 )
                                           N (0, 1)             µ              N (0, 1)
                             µ 1         U (0.5, 0.9)          1             PI (0.1, 1.5)
                                          U (0, 0.5)
                             2  1
                                        I(3, 0.001)             22           I(3, 0.005)
                             2
                                        I(3, 0.005)             2
                                                                n            I(3, 0.005)
                              2

                             d2         I(3, 0.005)             2
                                                               ~d            I(3, 0.005)
                             -1                                -1
                             n             U (0, 1)            d                U (0, 1)


immediately follow the Great London Plague of 1665.7 This break is meant to capture the fact that
plagues are less frequent in the latter part of our sample. The exact timing of this break does not
affect our main results in a material ways.
    To be able to capture potential changes in average growth of productivity, we allow for two
structural breaks in µ. Visual inspection of the data suggests that there is a large structural break
around 1800 (see Figure 2). By allowing for two breaks, we allow for the possibility that there may
be a second structural break earlier in the sample. We choose the timing of these structural breaks
to maximize the marginal likelihood (Bayes factor) of the model. This is a widely used model
selection method for Bayesian models (see, e.g. Sims and Zha, 2006). Consider two models Mt
and Mt . In our case, these are two different versions of our model from section 2 with different
break dates for µ. Bayes rule implies that

                                      p(Mt | y )   p(y | Mt )   p(Mt )
                                                 =            ×
                                      p(Mt | y )   p(y | Mt )   p(Mt )
                                     posterior odds     Bayes factor   prior odds


where y denotes the observed data and p(·) denotes a probability density. Using the Bayes factor
as one's model selection criterion then implies that one is choosing the model with the largest
posterior odds conditional on assuming that neither model is favored a priori (i.e., that the prior
odds are one). To calculate the marginal likelihood of our models, we employ the bridge sampling
method of Gronau, Singmann, and Wagenmakers (2020).


    7
    Notice that the change in the population between the 1660s and the 1670s is affected by the Great London Plague.
So, 1t for t = 1670 will be affected by the Great London Plague. This is why we assume that 1t for t  1680 is
governed by a different  than earlier values of 1t .

                                                          16
                Figure 8: Bayes Factor for Different Productivity Growth Break Dates
    Note: The figure plots the Bayes factor for models with different break dates for average productivity growth µ
    when compared to the model with breaks occurring in 1600 and 1810. In all cases, the models being considered
    also have a break in µ in 1810. The grey bands around our estimates represent computational uncertainty.
    They capture the range between the 5th and 95th quantile of the Bayes factor from 1000 draws of our bridge
    sampling procedure.


4       When Did Productivity Growth Begin in England?

Our primary object of interest is the evolution of productivity in England over our sample period.
We therefore start the discussion of our empirical results by describing our results about produc-
tivity. As we discuss above, we allow for two structural breaks in average productivity growth µ
over our sample. The pair of break dates that yields the highest marginal likelihood is 1600 and
1810. Figure 8 illustrates the statistical evidence favoring a break in 1600 by reporting the Bayes
factors for models where the 1600 break date is shifted to other dates. We estimate a sharp rise in
the Bayes factor from 1580 to 1600 and a somewhat more gradual fall from 1600 to 1650. Break
dates before 1590 and after 1640 are clearly rejected.8
    Table 2 presents our estimates of the average growth rate of productivity µ as well as the
productivity shocks        1   and  2 . (Our estimates of the other parameters are presented in Table 4
and will be discussed in more detail in section 5.) We estimate that average productivity growth



    8
     A common rule of thumb for Bayes factor analysis is to view a factor of 101/2  3.2 as substantial evidence and a
factor of 10 as strong evidence favoring one model relative to another.

                                                          17
                                       Table 2: Productivity Parameters
                                                 Mean      St Dev       2.5%    97.5%
                                   µa,t<1600      -0.00        0.01     -0.02      0.01
                              µa,1600t<1810        0.04        0.01      0.02      0.06
                                   µa,t1810        0.18        0.03      0.12      0.23
                                             1     0.04        0.01      0.02      0.07
                                             2     0.05        0.01      0.03      0.07

             Note: The table presents the mean, standard deviation, 2.5% quantile, and 97.5% quantile
             of the posterior distribution we estimate for average productivity growth µ in the three
             regimes and also for the standard deviation of the permanent and transitory productivity
             shocks 1t and 2t .



prior to 1600 was zero.9 Sustained productivity growth began in 1600 (or around that time). At
first, average productivity growth was modest. Our estimate of µ for the period from 1600 to 1810
is 4% per decade. In the early 19th century, productivity growth accelerated sharply to 18% per
decade. The timing of this second break in average productivity growth is estimated quite sharply
to be in 1810. The only other date that is not clearly rejected is 1800 (see Table A.1). We conclude
from these estimates that the period from 1600 to 1810 was a period of transition in England from
an era of total stagnation to an era of modern economic growth.
    Figure 9 presents our baseline estimates of the time series evolution of the permanent compo-
nent of productivity. These estimates indicate that the level of productivity in England was very
similar in 1600 to what it had been in the late 13th century. In the intervening period, productiv-
ity fluctuated a slight bit. It reached its lowest point right before the Black Death in 1340, then
increased and peaked a century later before receding slightly. After 1600, productivity began a
sustained increase, which accelerated sharply in 1810.
    Figure 10 compares our estimate of productivity with the data we use on real wages. This
figure illustrates well the importance of accounting for Malthusian population forces when esti-
mating productivity in the pre-industrial era. Through the lens of our Malthusian model, the large
changes in real wages prior to 1600 are explained almost entirely by changes in labor supply--the

    9
      Estimates of the world population presented in Kremer (1993) indicate that world population growth from 1200
to 1500 was 0.6% per decade. In our Malthusian model (as well as Kremer's model) steady state productivity growth
is  times steady state population growth ­  being the slope of the labor demand curve. Our baseline estimate of  is
0.53 (Table 4). This suggests that world productivity growth was 0.3% per decade over the period 1200 to 1500. This is
well within the credible set of our pre-1600 estimate of µ.

                                                          18
                              Figure 9: Permanent Component of Productivity
    Note: The figure plots our estimates of the evolution of the permanent component of productivity a ~t over our
    sample period. The black line is the mean of the posterior for each period and the gray shaded area is the 90%
    central posterior interval.


economy was moving up and down a stable labor demand curve as suggested by Figure 2. As
a result, changes in productivity were very substantially muted relative to changes in real wages
over this period. In sharp contrast, after 1600 productivity increased much more rapidly than real
wages. Over this period, the population in England grew rapidly as did days worked per worker.
Our Malthusian model implies that this expansion of labor supply held back real wages relative
to the change in productivity.
    The period between 1730 and 1800 is particularly interesting in this context. Over this pe-
riod, real wages in England fell slightly despite substantial productivity growth. One potential
explanation of this is "Engels' Pause," i.e., the idea that the lion's share of the gains from early
industrialization went to capitalists as opposed to laborers (Engels, 1845, Allen, 2009b). However,
our Malthusian model provides an alternative explanation of this divergence between wages and
productivity: Over this period, the population of England grew rapidly. In our Malthusian model,
the growth in the population reduced the growth in wages relative to productivity.10


   10
     The literature on Engels' Pause has typically focused on the first half of the 19th century as opposed to the second
half of the 18th century. The real wage series we use--constructed by Clark (2010)--indicates that real wages actually
started growing robustly around 1810. This contrasts with the real wage series of Feinstein (1998) and Allen (2007),
which date the onset of rapid real wage growth a few decades later.

                                                           19
                                  Figure 10: Comparison with Real Wages
      Note: The figure plots our estimates of the evolution of the permanent component of productivity a
                                                                                                       ~t along
      with the real wage series we use.


4.1     From When to Why

By dating the onset of productivity growth, our results help discriminate between competing ex-
planations for why growth began. First, the fact that we estimate sharp and sizable shifts in average
growth supports the notion that "something changed." i.e., that the transition from stagnation to
growth was more than a steady process of very gradually increased growth. Kremer (1993) and
Galor and Weil (2000) show how the marriage of endogenous growth models and Malthusian
models yields the conclusion that growth will gradually increase as a growing world population
produces more and more knowledge workers. In this view, the Industrial Revolution is an illusion
since the increase in growth is smooth. Our results do not support this view of history.
      Second, we estimate that sustained productivity growth began in England substantially before
the Glorious Revolution of 1688. According to our estimates, productivity in England rose by 48%
from 1600 to 1680. North and Weingast (1989) argue that the political regime that emerged in
England after the Glorious Revolution--characterized by a power sharing arrangement between
Parliament, the Crown, and the common law courts--resulted in secure property rights and rule
of law and thereby laid the foundation for economic growth. While the institutional changes
associated with the Glorious Revolution may well have been important for growth, our results


                                                         20
contradict the view that these events preceded the onset of growth in England.
   Our results support explanations of the onset of growth that focus attention on developments
that occurred in the period surrounding 1600. The Reformation is an obvious candidate. In par-
ticular, Henry VIII's confiscation of monastic lands was a big shock to land ownership patterns
and the land market in England. Also, London experienced an explosion of its population around
this time--from 55,000 in 1520 to 475,000 in 1670 (Wrigley, 2010)--likely due to a rapid increase
in international trade. English woolen exports expanded rapidly over this period (new draperies)
as did intercontinental trade, colonization, and privateering. The British East India Company
was founded in 1600 and the Virginia Company founded its first permanent settlement in North
America in 1607.
   Our finding that the onset of growth preceded both the Glorious Revolution and the English
Civil War (1642-1651) lend support to the Marxist view that economic change propelled history
forward and drove political and ideological change. Marx (1867) stressed the transition from
feudalism to capitalism. He argued that after the disappearance of serfdom in the 14th century,
English peasants were expelled from their land through the enclosure movement. That spoliation
inaugurated a new mode of production: one where workers did not own the means of production,
and could only subsist on wage labor. This proletariat was ripe for exploitation by a new class of
capitalist farmers and industrialists. In that process, political revolutions were a decisive step
in securing the rise of the bourgeoisie. To triumph, capitalism needed to break the remaining
shackles of feudalism. As the Communist Manifesto puts it, "they had to be burst asunder; they
were burst asunder" (Marx and Engels, 1848, pp. 40-41). Hill (1940, 1961) offers more recent
treatments of the political revolutions in England in the 17th century that stress class conflict and
their economic origins.
   Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005) synthesize the Marxist and institutionalist views.
They argue that Atlantic trade enriched a merchant class that then demanded secure property
rights and secured these rights through the Civil War and Glorious Revolution. This last narrative
lines up well with our result that steady growth--perhaps driven by the Atlantic trade--began
about half a century before the Civil War. However, we do not detect a radical increase of growth
in the immediate aftermath of either the Civil War or Glorious Revolution: 4.4% (1600-1640), 5.7%
(1640-1680) and 5.2% (1680-1810).
   Allen (1992) argues that a long and gradual process of institutional change in England over
the 600-year period from the Norman Conquest to the Glorious Revolution resulted in a situation


                                                 21
in the 16th century where the yeoman class had acquired a substantial proprietary interest in
the land, and thus an incentive to innovate. The timing of Allen's `rise of the yeoman' lines up
reasonably well with our estimate of the onset of growth. According to Allen, property rights, rule
of law, and personal freedom gradually expanded and the social order was gradually transformed
from a feudal to a capitalist order. From the 12th century, royal courts helped freeholders gain
full ownership over their land. After the Black Death, serfdom collapsed as landlord competed
for scarce labor. Early enclosures (15th and early 16th centuries) involved brutal evictions and
depopulation of manors. The Crown reacted to this by increasing protection of tenant farmers.
   The spread of movable-type printing across Europe after 1450 led to a large increase in literacy
in England in in the 16th and 17th centuries (Cressy, 1980, Houston, 1982), and a huge drop in the
price of books (Clark and Levin, 2011). This likely had wide ranging effects on culture. Mokyr
(2009, 2016) and McCloskey (2006, 2010, 2016) have argued that the crucial change that caused
growth to begin was the emergence of a culture of progress based on the idea that mankind can
improve its condition through science and rational thought. Others have stressed a Potestant ethic
(Weber, 1905) and Puritanism (Tawney, 1926). The timing of these changes lines up reasonably
well with our estimates although it is not straightforward to pinpoint precisely what these theories
imply about the timing of the onset of growth.
   Bogart and Richardson (2011) stress the importance of the post-Glorious Revolution regime's
push to reorganize and rationalize property rights through enclosures, statutory authority acts,
and estate acts. While our results contradict the notion that growth began with the Glorious Revo-
lution, the fact that England underwent massive institutional change in the 17th and 18th century
may have played an important role in laying the groundwork for the huge speedup of growth that
we estimate occurred around 1810.
   Allen (2009a) argues that the Industrial Revolution occurred in Britain around 1800 because
innovation was uniquely profitable then and there. His theory relies on growth in the 17th century
leading to high real wages in England in the 18th century as well as the development of a large
coal industry. High wages and cheap coal made it profitable to invent labor saving technologies
in textiles such as the spinning jenny, water frame, and mule, as well as coal burning technologies
such as the steam engine and coke smelting furnace. Allen's theory lines up well with our results
in that it provides an explanation for the second break in productivity growth that we estimate--
the Industrial Revolution--and links it causally to the earlier break.



                                                 22
4.2     Incorporating Capital

Our baseline model abstracts from variation in physical capital. Since productivity is a catch-all
residual, the fact that our baseline model does not incorporate capital implies that our baseline
productivity estimates encompass capital accumulation. We can extend our model to explicitly
allow for capital accumulation. Doing this allows us to estimate a measure of productivity that
does not encompass capital accumulation.
      The primary challenge associated with incorporating capital into our analysis is that--as far
as we are aware--a time series measure of capital accumulation does not exist for England for the
period prior to 1760. To overcome this challenge, we rely on data on rates of return on physical
assets to infer the evolution of the stock of capital over time. Figure 11 plots data on rates of return
on agricultural land and "rent charges" compiled by Clark (2002, 2010).11 The rate of return on
agricultural land is measured as R/P , where R is the rent and P is the price of a piece of land.
As Clark (2010) explains, "rent charges" were perpetual nominal obligations secured by land or
houses. Again, these are measured as R/P , where R is the annual payment and P is the price of
the obligation. See Clark (2010) for more detail. We view each of these series as a noisy measure
of the rate of return on capital in England over our sample period and use both in our analysis as
described below.
      We make capital accumulation explicit in our model by considering an economy in which
output is produced using the production function:

                                                             1--
                                                Yt = At Z  Kt Lt ,                                                       (8)


where Kt denotes physical capital. As in our baseline analysis, our results for productivity ac-
counting for capital accumulation are robust to assuming any production function with decreasing
marginal returns to capital and labor (appendix A).
      As before, we assume that factor markets are competitive. This implies that producers accu-
mulate capital to the point where the marginal product of capital is equal to its user cost:

                                                           -1 1--
                                           rt +  = At Z  Kt  Lt   ,                                                      (9)


where rt is the rental rate for capital and  is the rate of depreciation of capital. Similarly, producers
   11
     Clark's series on "rent charges" should not be confused with his series on rents. These are different series. "Rent
charges" is a rate of return on an asset (i.e., measured in percent), while rents are a nominal series (i.e., pounds sterling
per year).

                                                             23
                         Figure 11: Rates of Return on Land and Rent Charges
   Note: The figure plots the data we use on rates of return on land and rent charges. These data are from Clark
   (2002, 2010).


hire workers until the marginal product of labor is equal to the wage:

                                                            --
                                     Wt = (1 -  -  )At Z  Kt Lt .                                              (10)


Combining these two optimality conditions so as to eliminate Kt and taking logs of the resulting
equation yields
                                         1               
                           wt =  +         at -    lt -    log (rt +  ) .                                      (11)
                                        1-      1-      1-

We can now replace the labor demand curve in our baseline model--equation (1)--with this labor
demand curve and proceed as before. As we mention above, we assume that each of Clark's series
on rates of return represent a noisy measure of the true rate of return on capital in England. In
other words, we assume that
                                                      ~it + r
                                                 rt = r     it ,


where rt denotes the true rate of return on capital at time t, r
                                                               ~it denotes noisy measure i (either
land or rent charges), and r
                           it  tir (0, 
                                        2 ) denotes the measurement error. In periods when nei-
                                       ~ir
ther measure is available, we assume that the interest rate follows a random walk with truncated
                                                                -1
normal innovations: rt  N(0,.2) (rt-1 , 0.012 ). We assume that ir  U (0, 1),  2  I (3, 0.005),
                                                                              ~ir

                                                        24
                Figure 12: Estimate of Total Factor Productivity Incorporating Capital
    Note: The figure plots our estimates of the evolution of the permanent component of productivity a
                                                                                                     ~t for our
    model with capital and our baseline model.


and   N(0,0.2) (0.1, 0.052 ).
   The main results from this analysis are presented in Figure 12 and Table 3. Overall, we reach
very similar conclusions to those in our baseline analysis. The main difference is that the average
growth rate in productivity µ is estimated to be somewhat smaller. During the transition period
from 1600 to 1810, we estimate average growth in productivity of 3% per decade, as opposed to
4% in our baseline model. After 1810, we estimate average growth in productivity of 14% per
decade, as opposed to 18% in our baseline model. This is consistent with the notion that part
of the growth in labor productivity after 1600 was due to the accumulation of physical capital.
The modest difference between these two sets of results, however, suggests that the vast majority
of growth from 1600 to 1870 was due to other developments than capital accumulation. It may
seem surprising that accounting for capital accumulation does not make a bigger difference for
productivity. One reason for this is that the role of capital in pre-industrial England was rather
small. Our estimate of  --the exponent on capital in the production function--is only 0.18.
   Our methods allow us to back out not only an estimate of the evolution of productivity but
also an estimate of the evolution of the capital stock in England over our entire sample period.
Figure 13 plots our estimate of the capital stock. We find that the level of the capital stock was
similar in 1600 to what is had been in the late 13th century. But as productivity began increasing,

                                                        25
                                Table 3: Parameter Estimates with Capital
                                              Mean      St Dev      2.5%     97.5%
                                   µt<1600     -0.00        0.01    -0.02      0.01
                             µ1600t<1800        0.03        0.01     0.01      0.06
                                  µt1800        0.14        0.03     0.08      0.20
                                                0.42        0.10     0.22      0.62
                                                0.17        0.11     0.01      0.42
                                /(1 -  )        0.50        0.09     0.32      0.67


the capital stock also began increasing. From 1600 to 1860, the capital stock in England grew by a
factor of five, or 8% per decade. Figure 13 also plots estimates of the gross and net capital stock
from Feinstein (1998) from 1760 onward. Our estimates imply a somewhat more rapid rate of
growth of capital than Feinstein's estimates over the period 1760-1860 (22% per decade versus
16% per decade).12


4.3     Further Robustness

Days Worked: Our baseline analysis uses Humpries and Weisdorf's (2019) estimates of the evo-
lution of days worked per worker. These estimates imply a substantial Industrious Revolution.
Since this conclusion is controversial, Figure A.3 presents an alternative set of estimates for pro-
ductivity where we instead assume that days worked per worker were constant throughout our
sample period. This yields a very similar time series pattern for productivity both qualitatively
and quantitatively. Perhaps surprisingly, therefore, our conclusions about productivity are in-
sensitive to whether England experienced an Industrious Revolution. Rather than changing our
conclusions about productivity, assuming constant days worked changes the estimated slope of
the labor demand curve. With constant days worked, the labor demand curve is estimated to be
steeper than when days work follow the path estimated by Humphries and Weisdorf (2019).
      Real Wage Data: Our baseline analysis uses real wage data for unskilled builders from Clark
(2010). Figure A.4 presents five alternative estimated productivity series where we instead use
other wage series. First, we present estimates of productivity using the following day wage series:
1) Clark's (2010) real wages series for farm laborers, 2) Clark's (2010) real wages series for building
craftsmen, 3) Allen's (2007) real wage series for the period 1770 onward (with our baseline wage
series before that time). We also present estimates of productivity based on the assumption that
   12
    Unlike our results on productivity, our results on the evolution of the capital stock rely on the Cobb-Douglas
assumption. See appendix A.2.

                                                       26
                           Figure 13: Estimate of the Capital Stock in England
   Note: The figure plots our estimates of the evolution of the logarithm of the capital stock in England. The
   series is normalized to zero in 1250. We also plot Feldstein's (1998) estimates of the gross and net capital stock
   from 1760 onward. These series are normalized to be equal to our series in 1800.


the builders, farmers, and craftsmen series from Clark (2010) are all noisy signals of the underlying
true wage. Finally, we use Humphries and Weisdorf's (2019) annual wage series along with the
assumption that days worked are constant. All five of these alternative productivity series are
quite similar to our baseline productivity series, although they differ somewhat for the earliest
part of the sample.
   Population Data: Our baseline analysis uses population data prior to 1540 from Clark (2010).
Figure A.5 presents estimates of productivity using population data from Broadberry et al. (2015)
for the period prior to 1540. Broadberry et al.'s (2015) estimates of the population are infrequent
and irregular in their frequency. There are quite a few decades for which Broadberry et al. (2015)
have no estimate, e.g., they present no estimate between 1450 and 1522. In this robustness anal-
ysis, we view the population as an unobserved variable in decades for which we do not have an
estimate from Broadberry et al. (2015). Our results on the evolution of productivity for this case
are very similar to our baseline case.
   Priors: Figure A.6 presents estimates of productivity using different prior distributions than
we use in our baseline analysis. First, we present results for a case where we change the prior on
 1 --the variance of permanent productivity shocks--to be I(3, 0.005), i.e., the same as the prior

                                                          27
on the other productivity and population shocks. Second, we present results for a case where we
change the prior on  --the level of the population prior to 1540--to be N (10.86, 102 ), i.e., much
wider than in our baseline analysis. In both cases, the resulting productivity series are very similar
to our baseline results. Other priors are quite dispersed. We find it unlikely that our results are
sensitive to making any of these priors even more dispersed.



5   The Strength of the Malthusian Population Force

In a Malthusian world, real wages return to steady state after a shock has led them to either rise
or fall. Consider, for example, a plague. Wages initially rise after a plague. But the higher wages
lead the population to grow. As the population grows, wages fall back to steady state. We refer to
these population dynamics and their effects on real wages as the Malthusian population force. In
this terminology, it is the Malthusian population force that brings real wages back to steady state
in a Malthusian world.
    The strength or speed of the Malthusian population force is governed by two parameters in
our model: 1) the elasticity of population growth with respect to per capita income--which we
denote  --and 2) the slope of the labor demand curve--which we denote . To see this, we can
use equation (2) to substitute for the real wage in equation (3). This yields the following equation
for the dynamics of the population in our Malthusian model as a function of exogenous variables:


                    nt+1 = (1 -  )nt +  +  ( + (1 - )dt + a
                                                          ~ t ) + t +         2t .                (12)


This equation implies that the speed of population recovery after a plague-induced decrease is
governed by 1 -  . In particular, the half-life of the population dynamics, i.e., the time it takes
the population to recover half of the way back to steady state after a plague-induced drop, is
log 0.5/ log(1 -  ). The half-life of real wage dynamics is the same as that of the population.
    Table 4 presents our estimates of  and  (as well as all other parameters not presented in Table
2). Our estimate of  is 0.53. If we assume a Cobb-Douglas production function, 1 -  is the labor
share of output. As we discuss in appendix A.1, the interpretation of  is more complicated if the
true production function is a CES function with an elasticity of substitution between labor and
land that differs from one. In that case,  is equal to one minus the labor share divided by the
elasticity of substitution between labor and land.
    Our estimate of  is 0.09. This relatively small estimate for  implies that the strength of the

                                                 28
                                      Table 4: Parameter Estimates
                                          Mean       St Dev      2.5%     97.5%
                             Main Parameters
                                         0.53           0.09      0.34      0.69
                                         0.09           0.02      0.05      0.14
                                        -0.03           0.02     -0.08      0.01
                             Population Parameters
                              t<1680      0.14          0.11      0.01      0.42
                              t1680       0.11          0.10      0.00      0.38
                                  µ 1     0.80          0.10      0.55      0.90
                                  1       3.38         12.94      1.02     14.05
                                   2      0.06          0.01      0.04      0.07
                             Population Measurement Error Parameters
                             n,t<1540     0.04     0.01     0.03     0.06
                             n,t1540      0.03     0.00     0.02     0.04
                             n,t<1540    16.27   592.24     1.10    36.39
                             n,t1540 123.97 7825.18         2.17 284.51
                             Days Worked Parameters
                                  h      0.08      0.01           0.06      0.10
                                  ~h     0.04      0.01           0.03      0.07
                                  h      6.08   271.63            1.21     14.63

   Note: The table presents the mean, standard deviation, 2.5% quantile, and 97.5% quantile of the posterior
   distribution we estimate for the slope of labor demand , the elasticity of population growth to income  ,
   the subsistence wage parameter  , the probability of a plague shock  , the mean of the plague shock µ1 ,
   the pseudo sample size of the plague shocks 1 , the standard deviation of the normal population shock
   2 , the scale and degrees of freedom parameters of the population measurement error shocks, n and n ,
   respectively, the standard deviation of inferred changes in days worked h , and the scale and degrees of
   freedom parameters of the days worked measurement error shocks,   ~h and h , respectively.


Malthusian population force was rather weak in England over our sample period. Using this
estimate of  and our estimate of , we get that the half-life of population and real wage dynamics
after a shock was roughly 150 years.
   Another way to gauge the quantitative magnitude of our estimate of  is to calculate how much
the changes in real per capita income in England over our sample prior to the 17th century affected
population growth. Between 1270 and 1440, real per capita income in England rose by 70%. Our
estimate of  implies that this increase in per capita income stimulated population growth by a
mere 5 percentage points per decade. A doubling of real per capita income would have stimulated
population growth by only slightly more, 6 percentage points per decade.



                                                      29
                     Figure 14: Actual and Predicted Population Dynamics after 1750
      Note: The dashed line is the evolution of the population in England. The solid line is the predicted evolution
      of the population in England from our Malthusian model. In calculating this line, we take the evolution of
      real wages and days worked in England as given and simulate the evolution of the population using equation
      (3) starting from its actual value in 1740. The gray shaded area is the 90% central predictive interval given our
      estimates of  and  .


5.1     Post-1750 Population Explosion

The modest strength of the Malthusian population force in our model begs the question whether
our model can explain, with these parameter values, the large increase in the population of Eng-
land that occurred after 1750 (see Figure 6). In 1740, the population of England was 6 million. By
1860, it had risen to almost 20 million. The population therefore grew at a compound rate of 10.4%
per decade over this 120-year period.
      Figure 14 compares the evolution of the population in England from 1750 to 1860 with the
predicted evolution of the population from our model. We construct the predicted evolution by
taking the evolution of real wages and days worked in England as given and simulating the evo-
lution of the population using equation (3) starting from its actual value in 1740 and assuming
no population shocks. This analysis shows that in fact our model can explain the vast majority
of the rapid increase in the population between 1740 and 1860. This may seem surprising given
the weak Malthusian population force and the somewhat modest increase in real wages over this
period. However, per capita income in England over this period rose much more than real wages
did because days worked increased quite substantially (see Figure 7).


                                                             30
5.2     Overwhelming the Malthusian Population Force

A simplistic view of Malthusian economics holds that wages are always stuck at subsistence in a
Malthusian world. This is not the case. One reason for this is that steady productivity growth can
result in a persistent force driving wages higher. As wages rise, the Malthusian population force
put greater and greater downward pressure on wages and eventually chokes off further increases
in wages. This means that for each level of average productivity growth there is a steady state real
wage. But the steady state real wage is not necessarily at subsistence. Rather the steady state real
wage is increasing in average productivity growth.
      As we saw above, we estimate that the Malthusian population force was quite weak in England
over our sample period. The average productivity growth we estimate for the latter part of our
sample period may therefore have been large enough to raise per capita income quite substantially
even in the presence of the Malthusian population force. We can use our estimated model to
quantify the extent to which this is true. In appendix C, we show that the steady state level of
wages in our Malthusian model is given by

                                            µ         ¯
                                       w
                                       ¯=      ¯ -  - 1 ,
                                              -d
                                                      

where ¯1 is the average level of our plague shock 1t . Notice that steady state wages are increasing

in the speed of productivity growth µ. Faster productivity growth results in a stronger force
pushing wages up and therefore a higher level of wages at which this force is exactly counteracted
by the negative Malthusian population force.
      Figures 15 and 16 present impulse responses to a change in productivity growth that show
quantitatively how much changes in productivity growth increase wages over time according
to our model. For each impulse response, we start the economy off in a steady state with zero
productivity growth (µ = 0). At time zero in the figures, productivity growth increases. In Figure
15, we show the evolution of the growth rate of wages (log change) over the subsequent 500 years.
In Figure 16, we show the evolution of the level of wages relative to its earlier steady state level
over the subsequent 1000 years. In both figures, we assume that all other shocks are constant at
their mean values.
      In Figure 15, we see that the growth rate of wages is initially equal to the change in produc-
tivity. As wages rise and the Malthusian population force kicks in, the growth rate of wages falls.
This process takes a very long time due to the weakness of the Malthusian population force. The


                                                  31
           Figure 15: Real Wage Growth After an Increase in Productivity Growth
Note: Each line plots the growth rate of real wages over time after an increase in productivity growth from
µ = 0 to a higher value. These impulse responses are calculated assuming that all model parameters are at
their posterior mean values.




        Figure 16: Evolution of Real Wages After an Increase in Productivity Growth
Note: Each line plots the evolution of real wages over time after an increase in productivity growth from µ = 0
to a higher value. These impulse responses are calculated assuming that all model parameters are at their
posterior mean values.




                                                      32
                     Figure 17: Comparison of Population Estimates for England
    Note: The figure plots our estimates of the evolution of the population of England along with estimates from
    Clark (2007a), Clark (2010), and Broadberry et al. (2015)


half-life of wage growth is roughly 150 years.
    The fact that wage growth continues for hundreds of years after a change in productivity im-
plies that the cumulative increase in wages is substantial. In Figure 16, we can read off the long-run
effect of higher productivity growth on wages. For a productivity growth rate of µ = 0.18, which
is what we estimate for the period after 1810, we find that the long-run effect on the level of wages
is an increase of a factor of 28. In other words, the growth in productivity that we estimate for
the period after 1810 would have eventually led to a 28-fold increase in real wages even if the
Demographic Transition had not occurred and the Malthusian population force had continued.



6   Plagues and the Population

Figure 17 plots our estimate of the evolution of the population of England from 1250 to 1550 along
with prior estimates from Clark (2007a), Clark (2010), and Broadberry et al. (2015). Our estimates
are very similar to Clark's. This implies that our estimation procedure largely validates the as-
sumptions Clark makes regarding the evolution of productivity in constructing his population
estimates. The estimates of Broadberry et al. (2015) are substantially lower early in the sample
period, but then gradually converge.

                                                        33
                                         Figure 18: Population Shocks
    Note: The figure plots our estimates of the population shocks hitting the English economy over our sample
    period, i.e., 1t + 2t . The black line is the mean of the posterior for each period and the gray shaded area is
    the 90% central posterior interval.


    The evolution of the population in England over our sample period is heavily affected by
plagues. Our model captures plagues (and other influences on the population other than changes
in real income) through the shocks 1t and 2t . Figure 18 plots the evolution of the sum of these
population shocks over our sample period. The largest population shock by far is the Black Death
of 1348. We estimate that the population shocks associated with the Black Death lead the pop-
ulation of England to shrink by 25%. But Figure 18 also makes clear that England faced steady
population headwinds--i.e., persistent negative population shocks--from the early 14th century
until about 1500.



7   Conclusion

In this paper, we use a Malthusian model to estimate the evolution of productivity in England
from 1250 to 1870. Our principal finding is that productivity growth began in 1600. Before 1600,
productivity growth was zero. We estimate a growth rate of productivity of 4% per decade be-
tween 1600 and 1810. In 1810, the growth rate of productivity increases sharply to 18% per decade.
These results indicate that sustained growth in productivity began well before the Glorious Revo-


                                                          34
lution. They point in particular to the early 17th century as a crucial turning point for productivity
growth in England, a result that helps distinguish between competing lines of thought regarding
the ultimate causes of the emergence of growth.
   We also use our model to estimate the strength of the Malthusian population force on wages in
England prior to the Demographic Transition, i.e., the pressure that increases in population put on
wages whenever they rose. We find that this force was relatively weak. A doubling of real income
led to only about a 6 percentage point increase in population growth per decade. This implies that
the half-life of the response of real wages after a plague induced decrease in the population was
about 150 years and the long-run increase in wages associated with an increase in productivity
growth was quite substantial.




                                                 35
A    More General Production Function

Consider the concave production function


                                          Yt = At F (Z, Lt , Kt )                        (13)


The first-order conditions are


                                          Wt = At FL (Z, Lt , Kt )

                                     rt +  = At FK (Z, Lt , Kt )


where  is the depreciation rate of capital.
    Taking logs in the FOC


                                                        ~ + at + LFLL      KFLK
                      wt = at + log (FL (Z, Lt , Kt ))                lt +      kt       (14)
                                                                  FL        FL
              log(rt +  ) = at + log (FK (Z, Lt , Kt ))  ~ + at + LFLK lt + KFKK kt      (15)
                                                                   FK        FK

Solving for kt in equation (15)


                               ~ +    FK                        LFLK
                          kt =            (log(rt +  ) - at ) -      lt                  (16)
                                     KFKK                       KFKK

Substituting into equation (14)


         wt  ~ + 1 - FK FLK        at +
                                             L              2
                                                 FLL FKK - FLK lt +
                                                                    FK FLK
                                                                           log(rt +  )
                     FL FKK               FL FKK                    FL FKK

Which can be rewritten


                             wt  ~+ 1+~ at - ~ lt - ~ log(rt +  )                        (17)


where

                                           L              2
                                  ~=-
                                               FLL FKK - FLK
                                        FL FKK
                                  ~ = - FK FLK
                                  
                                        FL FKK



                                                    36
   Equation (17) shows that at is identified up to a first-order approximation. This result does not
require a Cobb-Douglas production function, not even constant returns to scale.


A.1     CES Case

Consider the production function

                                                                                      
                                         1     -1                     1         -1    -1
                           Yt = At  Z               + (1 -  ) (Lt )                           ,


where  denotes the elasticity of substitution between land and labor in production. Optimal
choice of labor by land owners gives rise to the following labor demand curve

                                                                                               1
                                                               -1                              -1
                                     1              1    Z                            1
                       Wt = (1 -  ) At 
                                                                          + (1 -  )                 .
                                                         Lt

   A log-linear approximation of this equation yields


                                             wt =  - lt + at ,


where
                                                              1                -1    -1
                                                 1-                   L        
                             =  1+
                                                                      Z

and L is the level of labor we linearize around. Notice that    when   1.
   It is furthermore easy to show that with the CES production function given above, the labor
share of output is
                                                                  1             -1   -1
                             ¯ =1- 1+               1-                    L     
                            LS                                                            .
                                                                          Z

Combining these last two equations, we get that

                                                             ¯
                                                        1 - LS
                                               =               .
                                                           




                                                        37
A.2     Capital Stock

With a Cobb-Douglas production function, equations (16) and (17) are true without approxima-
tion, and simplify to


                           wt =  + at + kt - ( +  )lt                                            (18)
                                      1                      1--
                           kt =  +      (at - log(rt +  )) +     lt                              (19)
                                     1-                       1-

where

                                 
                             =       log(Z ) + log  + log(1 -  -  )
                                1-
                                             
                              =  + log
                                        1--

    Substituting equation (19) into equation (18), we obtain equation (11). Having estimated the
latter, we can recover kt through equation (19).



B     Clark's Population Series

As we discuss in the main text, Clark (2007b) uses unbalanced panel data on the population of
villages and manors from manorial records and penny tithing payments to construct estimates of
the population prior to 1540. Clark starts by running a regression of this data on time fixed effects
and manor/village fixed effects. He refers to the time fixed effects from this regression as as a
population trend series.
    Clark's population trend series does not provide information on the overall level of the popu-
lation prior to 1540, only changes in the population (i.e., a normalization is needed). In addition,
Clark's microdata is sufficiently unreliable for the 1530s that Clark does not make use of his es-
timated population trend for that decade. Clark uses the following procedure to surmount these
problems. First, he regresses his population trend on real wages from 1250 to 1520, and separately
regresses the Wrigley et al. (1997) population series on wages from 1540 to 1610. He observers
that the R2 in both regressions are high and that they yield similar slope coefficients. He con-
cludes from this that (i) the English economy moved along stable labor demand curves during
both subsamples and (ii) these two labor demand curves had similar slopes.
    Clark next makes the assumption that there was no productivity growth between 1520 and

                                                   38
1540--the labor demand curve did not shift during this time. This allows him to extrapolate the
relationship that he finds in the post-1540 data to the earlier sample, and infer both the population
in 1530 and the missing normalization from the level of real wages. Clark also uses the fitted
values for the population from his labor demand curve as an alternative estimate of the population
and averages this with the trend series to get what he calls the "best" estimate of population before
1540.



C       Dynamics After Change in Productivity Growth

Our Malthusian model implies that an increase in productivity growth will result in higher steady
state wages. To see this, we first abstract for notational simplicity from all the shocks in our model.
More precisely, we set the value of all shocks equal to their mean. The mean value of       1t , 2t ,   and
2t is zero. The mean value of 1t , however, is ¯1 =  (1 ) -  (1 + 2 )), where  (·) is the digamma
                                                                  ¯.
function. We furthermore, assume that days worked are constant at d
    Given these assumptions, our model simplifies to:


                                                         ¯).
                                              ~t - (nt + d
                                      wt =  + a                                                         (20)


                                                         ¯) + 
                                 nt - nt-1 =  +  (wt-1 + d    ¯1 .                                      (21)

                                            a
                                            ~t = µ + a
                                                     ~t-1 .                                             (22)

    We can use equation (20) to eliminate wt in equation (21). This yields:


                      nt - nt-1 =  +  +  a                    ¯+ 
                                         ~t-1 - nt-1 +  (1 - )d  ¯1 .


Next, we subtract  times this last equation from equation (22) and rearrange. This yields:


                             ~t - nt = µ -  + (1 -  )(~
                             a                        at-1 - nt-1 )


                       ¯+ 
where  = ( +  +  (1 - )d  ¯1 ). This shows that a
                                                ~t - nt follows an AR(1) and therefore
settles down to a steady state in the long run as long as |1 -  | < 1. The steady state value of
~t - nt is (µ - )/( ) and (using equation (20)) the steady state real wage is
a

                                            µ         ¯
                                       w
                                       ¯=      ¯ -  - 1 .
                                              -d
                                                      
                                                  39
We see from this that the steady state real wage in our Malthusian economy is increasing in the
productivity growth rate µ and the extent to which this is the case is influenced by the strength of
the Malthusian population force as summarized by  .




                                                40
                 Table A.1: Bayes Factor for Different Productivity Break Dates
                            1590       1600         1610       1620        1630

                1790           0.04           0.07           0.07          0.07           0.05
                              (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)
                1800           0.24           0.42           0.28          0.26           0.24
                              (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.01)         (0.01)
                1810           0.15           1.00           0.42          0.29           0.31
                              (0.01)           --           (0.02)        (0.01)         (0.01)
                1820           0.02           0.06           0.06          0.06           0.03
                              (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)

Note: The table presents the Bayes factor for models with different break dates for average productivity growth
µ when compared to the model with breaks occurring in 1600 and 1810. The numbers reported in parentheses
represent computational uncertainty. They are the standard deviation of the Bayes factor from 1000 draws of
our bridge sampling procedure.




          Figure A.1: A Comparison of Real Wage Measures in England, 1250-1860
Note: The figure presents four estimates of the real wages in England. Three are from Clark (2010): builders,
farmers, and craftsmen. The remaining series is from Allen (2007). The builders series is the series we use in
our main analysis. The builders series is normalized to 100 in 1860. The levels of the farmers and craftsmen
series indicate differences in real earnings relative to builders. The Allen (2007) series is normalized to equal
the builders series in 1770.



                                                       41
                       Figure A.2: Prior Densities for Standard Deviations




                     Figure A.3: Productivity with Constant Days Worked
Note: The figure compares our baseline estimates of the evolution of the permanent component of productivity
~t with alternative estimates where we assume that days worked per workers were constant over our sample
a
period.



                                                    42
                     Figure A.4: Productivity using Alternative Wage Series
Note: The figure compares our baseline estimates of the evolution of the permanent component of productivity
~t with estimates using different wage series. The "Farmers" series is the farm worker series from Clark (2010),
a
the "Craftsmen" series is the building craftsmen series from Clark (2010), the "Allen (2007)" series uses Allen's
(2007) series from 1770 onward (but our baseline wage series before that). Finally, we present estimates of
productivity based on the assumption that the builders, farmers, and craftsmen series are all noisy signals of
the true underlying wage. These estimates are labeled "3 series".




                    Figure A.5: Productivity using Different Population Data
Note: The figure compares our baseline estimates of the evolution of the permanent component of productivity
~t with estimates using data on the population of England prior to 1540 from Broadberry et al. (2015).
a

                                                       43
                          Figure A.6: Productivity using Different Priors
Note: The figure compares our baseline estimates of the evolution of the permanent component of productivity
~t with estimates using different prior distributions. The "Productivity shocks" series changes the prior on  1
a
to be I(3, 0.005), i.e., the same as the prior on the other productivity and population shocks. The "Population
level" series changes the prior on  to be N (10.86, 10.0).




                        Figure A.7: Measurement Error in Population Data
Note: The figure plots our estimate of the measurement error in our population data n
                                                                                    t.




                                                      44
References
A CEMOGLU , D., S. J OHNSON , AND J. R OBINSON (2005): "The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade,
  Institutional Change, and Economic Growth," American Economic Review, 95, 546­579.
A LLEN , R. C. (1992): Enclosure and the Yeoman, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
------ (2005): "English and Welsh Agriculture, 1300-1850: Output, Inputs, and Income," Working
  Paper, Oxford University.
------ (2007): "Pessimism Preserved: Real Wages in the British Industrial Revolution," Oxford
  University Department of Economics Working Paper 314.
------ (2009a): The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
  University Press.
------ (2009b): "Engels' Pause: Technical Change, Capital Accumulation, and Inequality in the
  British Industrial Revolution," Explorations in Economic History, 46, 418­435.
A PPLEBY, A. B. (1980): "The Disappearance of Plague: A Continuing Puzzle," Economic History
  Review, 33, 161­173.
B ETANCOURT, M. (2018): "A Conceptual Introduction to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo," Working
   Paper, arXiv:1701.02434v2.
B LANCHARD , I. (1978): "Labor Productivity and Worker Psychology in the English Mining Indus-
   try, 1400-1600," Economic History Review, 31, 1­24.
B OGART, D. AND G. R ICHARDSON (2011): "Property Rights and Parliament in Industrializing
  Britain," Journal of Law and Economics, 54, 241­274.
B ROADBERRY, S., B. M. C AMPBELL , A. K LEIN , M. O VERTON , AND B. VAN L EEUWEN (2015):
   British Economic Growth, 1270-1870, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
C HANEY, E. AND R. H ORNBECK (2016): "Economic Dynamics in the Malthusian Era: Evidence
  from the 1609 Spanish Expulsion of the Moriscos," Economic Journal, 126, 1404­1440.
C LARK , G. (2002): "Land Rental Values and the Agrarian Economy: England and Wales, 1500-
  1914," European Review of Economic History, 6, 281­308.
------ (2005): "The Condition of the Working Class in England, 1209-2004," Journal of Political
  Economy, 113, 1307­1340.
------ (2007a): A Farewell to Alms, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
------ (2007b): "The Long March of History: Farm Wages, Population, and Economic Growth,
  England 1209-1869," Economic History Review, 60, 97­135.
------ (2010): "The Macroeconomic Aggregates for England 1209-1869," Research in Economic His-
  tory, 27, 51­140.
C LARK , G. AND P. A. L EVIN (2011): "How Different Was the Industrial Revolution? The Revolu-
  tion in Printing, 1350-1835," Unpublished Manuscript, University of California, Davis.
C LARK , G. AND Y. VAN D ER W ERF (1998): "Work in Progress? The Industrious Revolution,"
  Journal of Economic History, 58, 830­843.
C RAFTS , N. AND T. C. M ILLS (2009): "From Malthus to Solow: How Did the Malthusian Economy
  Really Evolve?" Journal of Macroeconomics, 31, 68­93.
C RAFTS , N. F. (1983): "British Economic Growth, 1700-1831: A Review of the Evidence," Economic
  History Review, 36, 177­199.

                                                45
------ (1985): British Economic Growth During the Industrial Revolution, Oxford, UK: Clarendon
  Press.
C RAFTS , N. F. AND C. K. H ARLEY (1992): "Output Growth and the British Industrial Revolution:
  A Restatement of the Crafts-Harley View," Economic History Review, 45, 703­730.
C RESSY, D. (1980): Literacy and the Social Order, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
DE V RIES , J. (1994): "The Industrial Revolution and the Industrious Revolution," Journal of Eco-
  nomic History, 54, 249­270.
------ (2008): The Industrious Revolution: Consumer Behavior and the Household Economy, 1650 to the
  Present, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
D EAN , K. R., F. K RAUER , L. WALLØE , O. C. L INGJÆRDE , B. B RAMANTI , N. C. S TENSETH , AND
  B. V. S CHMID (2018): "Human ectoparasites and the spread of plague in Europe during the
  Second Pandemic," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
  33, 1304­1309.
D EANE , P. AND W. A. C OLE (1962): British Economic Growth, 1688-1959, Cambridge, UK: Cam-
  bridge University Press.
E NGELS , F. (1845): The Condition of the Working Class in England, Oxford, UK: Oxford University
  Press, 2009, (Originally published in German by Otto Wigand in Leigzig).
F EINSTEIN , C. H. (1988): "National Statistics, 1760-1920," in Studies in Capital Formation in the
   United Kingdom, 1750-1920, ed. by C. H. Feinstein and S. Pollard, Oxford, UK: Oxford University
   Press, 259­471.
------ (1998): "Pessimism Perpetuated: Real Wages and the Standard of Living in Britain during
  and after the Industrial Revolution," Journal of Economic History, 58, 625­658.
G ALOR , O. AND D. N. W EIL (2000): "Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian
  Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond," American Economic Review, 90, 806­828.
G ELMAN , A., J. B. C ARLIN , H. S. S TERN , D. B. D UNSON , A. V EHTARI ,   AND   D. B. R UBIN (2013):
  Bayesian Data Analysis, Third Edition, CRC Press.
G OTTFRIED , R. S. (1983): The Black Death, New York, NY: The Free Press.
G RONAU , Q. F., H. S INGMANN , AND E.-J. WAGENMAKERS (2020): "bridgesampling: An
  R Package for Estimating Normalizing Constants," Journal of Statistical Software, 92, doi:
  10.18637/jss.v092.i10.
H ANSEN , G. D., L. E. O HANIAN , AND F. O ZTURK (2020): "Dynamic General Equilibrium Mod-
  elling of Long and Short-Run Historical Events," NBER Working Paper No. 28090.
H ANSEN , G. D.   AND   E. C. P RESCOTT (2002): "Malthus to Solow," American Economic Review, 92,
  1205­1217.
H ARLEY, C. K. (1982): "British Industrialization Before 1841: Evidence of Slower Growth During
  the Industrial Revolution," Journal of Economic History, 42, 267­289.
H ILL , C. (1940): The English Revolution 1640, London, UK: Lawrence and Wishart Ltd.
------ (1961): The Century of Revolution, New York, NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold (International)
  Co. Ltd.
H OUSTON , R. A. (1982): "The Development of Literacy: Northern England, 1640-1750," Economic
  History Review, 35, 199­216.
H SIEH , C.-T. (2002): "What Explains the Industrial Revolution in East Asia? Evidence From the

                                                 46
  Factor Markets," American Economic Review, 92, 502­525.
H UMPHRIES , J. AND J. W EISDORF (2019): "Unreal Wages? Real Income and Economic Growth in
  England, 1260-1850," Economic Journal, forthcoming.
J ONES , C. I. (2001): "Was an Industrial Revolution Inevitable? Economic Growth Over the Very
   Long Run," Advances in Macroeconomics, 1, 1­43.
K REMER , M. (1993): "Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 681­716.
L EE , R. AND M. A NDERSON (2002): "Malthus in State Space: Macro Economic-Demographic
   Relationships in English History, 1540-1870," Journal of Population Economics, 15, 195­220.
M ALTHUS , T. R. (1798): An Essay on the Principle of Population, London, UK: J. Johnson in St. Paul's
  Church-yard, (Originally published anonymously).
M ARX , K. (1867): Capital. A Critique of Political Economy, vol. 1, Chicago, IL: Charles H. Kerr &
  Company, 1932, English translation by Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling.
M ARX , K. AND F. E NGELS (1848): The Communist Manifesto, London, UK: Pluto Press, 2008, En-
  glish translation by Samuel Moore in cooperation with Friedrich Engels, 1888.
M C C LOSKEY, D. (2006): The Bourgeois Virtues: Ethics for an Age of Commerce, Chicago, IL: University
  of Chicago Press.
------ (2010): Bourgeois Dignity: Why Economics Can't Explain the Modern World, Chicago, IL: Uni-
  versity of Chicago Press.
------ (2016): Bourgeois Equality: How Ideas, Not Capital or Institutions, Enriched the World, Chicago,
  IL: University of Chicago Press.
M OKYR , J. (2009): The Enlightened Economy: The Economic History of Britain, 1700-1850, New Haven,
  CT: Yale University Press.
------ (2016): A Culture of Growth: The Origins of the Modern Economy, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
  University Press.
N ORTH , D. C. AND R. P. T HOMAS (1973): The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic History,
  Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
N ORTH , D. C. AND B. R. W EINGAST (1989): "Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution
  of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth Century England," Journal of Economic
  History, 49, 803­832.
S HREWSBURY, J. F. D. (1970): A History of Bubonic Plague in the British Isles, Cambridge, UK: Cam-
   bridge University Press.
S IMS , C. A. AND T. Z HA (2006): "Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary Policy?" American
   Economic Review, 96, 54­81.
S TAN D EVELOPMENT T EAM (2017): "Stan Modeling Language Users Guide and Reference Man-
   ual," Version 2.17.0, https://mc-stan.org.
TAWNEY, R. H. (1926): Religion and the Rise of Capitalism, New York, NY: Routledge, 2017.
V OTH , H.-J. (2000): Time and Work in England, 1750-1830, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
------ (2001): "The Longest Years: New Estimates of Labor Input in England, 1760-1830," Journal
  of Economic History, 61, 1065­1082.
W EBER , M. (1905): Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, New York, NY: Penguin Books, 2002,
 English translation by Peter Baehr and Gordon C. Wells.
                                                  47
W RIGLEY, E. A. (2010): Energy and the English Industrial Revolution, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
 University Press.
W RIGLEY, E. A., R. S. D AVIES , J. E. O EPPEN , AND R. S. S CHOFIELD (1997): English Population
 History from Family Reconstruction, 1580-1837, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
W RIGLEY, E. A. AND R. S. S CHOFIELD (1981): The Population History of England 1541-1871, Cam-
 bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.




                                              48
