                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         OPTIMAL PRODUCT DESIGN:
IMPLICATIONS FOR COMPETITION AND GROWTH UNDER DECLINING SEARCH FRICTIONS

                                           Guido Menzio

                                        Working Paper 28638
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28638


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2021




  I am especially grateful to Pierre-Olivier Weill for insightful comments on an earlier version of
  the paper. I also thank Jim Albrecht, Costas Arkolakis, Jess Benhabib, Jaroslav Borovicka,
  Manolis Galenianos, Boyan Jovanovic, Julian Kozlowski, Ben Lester, Sephora Mangin, Paolo
  Martellini, Ezra Oberfield, Jesse Perla, Bruno Sultanum, Ronald Wolthoff, Randy Wright and
  participants at several seminars and conferences for their feedback. Guillaume Nevo has provided
  me with excellent research assistance. A major source of inspiration for this paper is Section III
  of Nobu Kyiotaki's and Randy Wright's 1993 classic "A Search Theoretic Approach to Monetary
  Economics." The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
  views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
  peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
  official NBER publications.

  © 2021 by Guido Menzio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
  paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
  notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Product Design: Implications for Competition and Growth under Declining Search
Frictions
Guido Menzio
NBER Working Paper No. 28638
April 2021
JEL No. D43,E23,L13,O40

                                          ABSTRACT

As search frictions become smaller in the market for a consumer product, buyers are able to
locate and access more sellers per unit of time. In response, sellers choose to design varieties of
the product that are more specialized in order to exploit differences in the buyers' preferences. I
find mild conditions on the fundamentals under which the decline in search frictions and the
increase in specialization have exactly offsetting effects on the extent of competition in the
market. Under these conditions, price dispersion remains constant over time even though search
frictions are vanishing. Buyer's surplus and seller's profit, however, grow at a constant
endogenous rate, as the endogenous increase in specialization allows sellers to cater better and
better to the heterogeneous desires of buyers.


Guido Menzio
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street,
 New York, NY 10012
and NBER
gm1310@nyu.edu
1    Introduction
I study the e¤ect of declining search frictions on competition, price dispersion and surplus
in a version of the Burdett and Judd (1983) model of the consumer product market where
sellers optimally decide how much to specialize their variety of the product to the desires
of particular buyers. I ...nd that under mild conditions on the fundamentals, the increase
in competition caused by the decline in search frictions is exactly o¤set by the decrease in
competition caused by the endogenous increase in the specialization of product varieties.
Under these conditions, price dispersion remains constant over time, even though search
frictions become vanishingly small. The buyers'surplus and the sellers'pro...ts, however,
grow over time at a constant rate, as the endogenous increase in specialization allows
sellers to provide more and more value to buyers.
    Price dispersion is a well-documented phenomenon. A variety of empirical studies
have shown that the same good is sold at very di¤erent prices at the same point in
time by di¤erent retailers operating in the same geographical market (see, among many
others, Stigler 1961, Pratt, Wise and Zeckhouser 1979, Galenianos, Pacula and Persico
2012). Price dispersion is sizeable when the notion of a good is as narrow as a UPC
code and becomes larger when the notion of a good is expanded to include di¤erent
varieties of the product (see, e.g., Kaplan and Menzio 2015, Kaplan, Menzio, Rudanko
and Trachter 2019). Price dispersion cannot be explained away by unobserved di¤erences
in the amenities provided by di¤erent retailers (see, e.g., Sorensen 2000, Kaplan and
Menzio 2015).
    The textbook theory of price dispersion is developed in Butters (1977), Varian (1980)
and Burdett and Judd (1983). Because of search frictions, buyers come into contact only
with a subset of sellers. Some buyers do not contact any sellers, some buyers contact only
one seller, and some buyers contact multiple sellers. Hence, an individual seller faces both
buyers who are captive (in the sense that they are not in contact with any other seller)
and buyers who are not captive (in the sense that they are in contact with some other
seller). And when a seller faces both captive and non-captive buyers and cannot price
discriminate between the two groups, the only equilibrium features price dispersion.
    The textbook theory of price dispersion predicts that, as search frictions decline and
the fraction of buyers who are not captive increases, competition between sellers should
strengthen, markups should fall, and price dispersion should decline and eventually dis-
appear. These predictions of the theory, though, do not appear to be borne out in
the data. Indeed, online retail does not seem to feature systematically lower markups
nor systematically lower price dispersion than o- ine retail, even though search frictions
are presumably lower online (see, e.g., Brynjolfsson and Smith 2000, Baye, Morgan and
Sholten 2004, Ellison and Ellison 2014). Relatedly, the average coe¢ cient of variation
for prices of consumer products found by Pratt, Wise and Zeckhouser (1979) in the late
70's, the one found by Lach (2002) in 1993, and the one found by Kaplan and Menzio
(2015, 2016) in 2010 are quite close, even though the period between 1979 and 2010 has

                                             1
witnessed improvements in information and communication technology that presumably
have lowered search frictions (e.g. Internet access to locate stores, Smartphones with GPS
for directions to stores, etc...).
    So why did technological progress­   which ostensibly reduced search frictions in the
consumer product market­    did not visibly enhance competition between sellers, lower
markups, and drive down the extent of price dispersion? In this paper, I propose an
answer to these questions based the insight, borrowed from Kyiotaki and Wright (1993),
that the extent of product di¤erentiation responds endogenously to the extent of search
frictions. In developing the insight, I build a novel theory of industry dynamics, and a
novel theory of economic growth through market deepening and specialization.1
     I consider a dynamic version of Burdett and Judd (1983). On one side of the market
for some product, there is a continuum of in...nitely-lived ...rms. Each ...rm sells a variety of
the product that is de...ned by its breadth, i.e. the fraction of buyers that like it. Broader
(i.e. less specialized) varieties are liked by a larger fraction of buyers, but provide those
buyers with lower utility. Narrower (i.e. less specialized) varieties are liked by a smaller
fraction of buyers, but provide those buyers with higher utility. Each ...rm can pay a
lumpy cost to design a new variety of the product, such that designing more specialized
varieties requires more input than designing less specialized varieties. On the other side of
the product market, there is a constant     ow of short-lived buyers with unit demand. Each
buyer searches the market and, as a result, comes into contact with n randomly-selected
...rms, where n is Poisson with coe¢ cient t . Each buyer inspects the variety sold and the
price charged by each of the n ...rms with whom he comes into contact and decide whether
and where to purchase the good. Search frictions decline over time, in the sense that the
buyer'  s average number of contacts t grows at the constant exogenous rate g > 0.
    I focus on a Balanced Growth Path (BGP) of the product market, i.e. an initial
condition for the state of the market and an associated rational expectations equilibrium
along which endogenous variables grow at some endogenous, constant rate. The crucial
feature of a BGP is that the extent of price dispersion remains constant over time. In
fact, in a BGP, the distribution of prices grows at a constant rate, in the sense that every
quantile of the distribution grows at the same constant rate. Therefore, in a BGP, the
distribution of prices normalized by their average remains constant over time and so does
the extent of price dispersion. I focus on a BGP in the spirit of King, Plosser and Rebelo
(1998). First, the BGP described a situation where improvements in communication and
information technology that lower search frictions have no e¤ect on competition and on
price dispersion, which broadly speaking appears to be the case empirically. Second, the
su¢ cient conditions for a BGP identify the properties of the fundamentals that one needs
to relax in order for the economy to be on a non-balanced path, where competition and
price dispersion change over time.
       I derive conditions on the fundamentals that are necessary for the existence of a BGP.
   1
      Of course, it could be the case that price dispersion has nothing to do with search frictions in the
...rst place, a point made in Baye and Morgan (2004).


                                                    2
Speci...cally, I show that a BGP might exist only if: (i) the buyer'     s utility function has
a constant elasticity alpha with respect to the degree of specialization of the consumed
variety; (ii) the price of the input used by the ...rm to design a new variety grows at the
same rate as the price of the output; (iii) the quantity of input used by the ...rm to design a
new variety is a strictly increasing function of the variety's degree of specialization relative
to the average degree of specialization of varieties in the market. I then show that the
necessary conditions for the existence of a BGP are also su¢ cient, as long as a system of
three time-invariant equations in three scalar time-invariant unknowns has a solution.
     Why does a BGP exist? As search frictions decline, ...rms can reach more and more
buyers per unit of time and, for this reason, they ...nd it optimal to design varieties of
the product that are more and more specialized. When the buyer'         s utility function is
isoleastic in the degree of specialization of the consumed variety, the ...rm'  s design cost
depends on the relative degree of specialization of the designed variety, and the ...rm'    s
design cost grows at the same rate as the price of output, then ...rms ...nd it optimal to
increase the degree of specialization of their varieties at exactly the same rate at which
search frictions decline. When this is the case, the probability that a buyer contacts k
...rms with a variety that he likes is a random draw from a constant Poisson distribution.
And the ...rm meets a constant       ow of buyers who are in contact with k competitors
whose product they like. For this reason, the extent of competition in the market remains
constant over time and, hence, so does the extent of price dispersion.
    While the number of relevant contacts between buyers and ...rms remains constant, each
contact involves trade of an increasingly specialized variety. For this reason, the buyer'   s
average surplus, the ...rm'
                          s  ow pro...ts, the ...rm'
                                                   s value and the price distribution all grow
over time. The common growth rate is g , i.e. the rate g at which search frictions decline
(and the rate at which specialization increases) multiplied by the elasticity of the buyers'
utility function with respect to the degree of specialization of the consumed variety. The
mechanism behind growth is related to observations by Adam Smith. Smith argued that
the extent of the market constraints the degree of specialization. Increases in the extent
of the market allow further specialization of production based on technical advantages
or increasing returns to scale and, in turn, engender economic growth. Similarly, here,
search frictions determine the depth of the market. And declining search frictions engender
growth by allowing ...rms to design products that are better and better tailored to a
particular subset of buyers.
   Behind the aggregate behavior of the market, there lie rich industry dynamics. In a
BGP, every ...rm goes through a common cycle with constant periodicity, although the
beginning of the cycle takes place at a di¤erent calendar time for di¤erent ...rms. The
cycle begins with the ...rm designing a new variety of the product. At that moment in
time, the ...rm is the best in the market-- in the sense that the ...rm's variety is the most
specialized, the ...rm o¤ers the highest surplus to its customers, and the ...rm's pro...t and
value are highest. Over the cycle, the ...rm loses ground, as more and more competitors
design a new variety of the product and leapfrog the ...rm. Speci...cally, when the ...rm has

                                               3
gone through z % of the cycle, the ...rm' s variety is at the z -th quantile of the specialization
distribution, the ...rm o¤ers to its customers a surplus at the z -th quantile of the surplus
distribution, the ...rm's pro...t and value are at the z -th quantiles of the pro...t and value
distributions. The cycle ends with the ...rm scrapping its variety. At that moment in time,
the ...rm is the worst in the market.
     The key mechanism highlighted in this paper is that declining search frictions induce
...rms to develop more specialized varities in order to take advantage of the heterogeneity
in the preferences of di¤erent buyers. The decline in search frictions is a pro-competitive
force, as it allows buyers to compare more sellers. The increase in the degree of specializa-
tion of the varieties sold by ...rms is an anti-competitive force, as it thins out the number
of sellers that are relevant to each buyer. Under mild conditions, the decline in search
frictions and the increase in specialization exactly o¤set each other, competition remains
constant and so does price dispersion. The idea that lower search frictions tends to in-
crease competition and that higher specialization tends to decrease competition seems
pretty uncontroversial. The idea that lower search frictions triggers higher specialization
is so commonplace to be the subject of best sellers. In "The Long Tail"     , Anderson argues
that the Internet has led a proliferation of niche varieties in markets that used to be
dominated by generic varieties. In his words "When you dramatically lower the cost of
connecting supply and demand, it changes the entire nature of the market. [. . . ] Bringing
niches within reach reveals latent demand for non-commercial content " and "The mass
market is turning into a mass of niches."
Related literature The paper provides a novel explanation for the observation that
declining search frictions do not appear to have reduced price dispersion in the consumer
goods market. There are several papers on the related topic of why price dispersion in
online markets is not lower than in o- ine markets. Ellison and Ellison (2014) consider a
search model of the market for used books, in which buyers have heterogeneous valuation
for a book, sellers have a single copy of the book and they meet buyers sequentially at
some exogenous speed. Price dispersion obtains in equilibrium because di¤erent sellers
meet captive buyers at di¤erent speed. They show that, when the arrival rate of captive
buyers increases, the highest prices increase (as sellers can sample more buyers within
the same amount of time). When the fraction of non-captive buyers increases, the lowest
prices fall (as the competition for these buyers intensi...es). Overall, price dispersion
increases. Translated in the context of a Burdett-Judd model, Ellison and Ellison (2014)
model online markets as markets where the buyer'     s valuation is higher and the fraction of
non-captive buyers is higher than in o- ine markets. In my model, the only fundamental
change is the average number of sellers contacted by each individual buyer. Ellison and
Wolitsky (2012) argue that price dispersion need not disappear in online markets because
sellers ...nd it optimal to engage in obfuscation, i.e. actions that make it hard for buyers
to observe a seller'  s price. My theory relates to Ellison and Wolitsky (2012) because the
increase in specialization in varieties acts­ in a mechanical sense­   like obfuscation. Baye
and Morgan (2001) argue that price dispersion need not disappear in online markets if

                                                4
the participation to these markets is costly to the sellers. They show that, in equilibrium,
sellers randomize over participating to the online market and, conditional on participating,
they randomize over the posted price.
     The paper provides a novel theory of growth, where a deepening of the market allows
...rms to develop more specialized product and take advantage of the heterogeneity in the
preferences of di¤erent buyers. There are several related theories of Smithian growth,
where economic growth is caused by an increase in the size of the market, increase that
allows production to become more specialized and take advantage of technological di¤er-
ences across locations or of increasing returns to scale. Kelly (1997) consider an economy
with multiple locations, which are geographically separated. Each location has a tech-
nological advantage in producing a particular intermediate good. When locations are
not connected, each location ine¢ ciently produces all intermediates. As more and more
locations become connected, each location specializes in the intermediate good that they
produce most e¢ ciently. Locay (1990) considers an economy in which market produc-
tion features increasing returns to scale, but home-production avoids agency problems.
He shows that, as the size of the market increases because of e.g. population growth,
production moves from the home to the market and productivity increases. In contrast
to these theories, my theory highlights the role of market depth-- the facility with which
buyers meet sellers within a market-- in generating economic growth. Since a market can
always grow deeper but cannot expand inde...nitely (at least with a ...xed population),
my theory generates perpetual growth rather than a growth episode. My theory is also
loosely related to Romer (1990) in the sense that in both theories growth manifests itself
with an increase in the number of varieties.
    The notion that market deepening-- modelled as a decline in search frictions-- leads to
economic growth by leveraging heterogeneity can also be found in Martellini and Menzio
(2020, 2021). Martellini and Menzio (2020, 2021) consider a frictional labor market in the
spirit of Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) where ...rm-worker matches are heterogeneous
with respect to their quality. They ...nd conditions under which the unemployment, va-
cancy, and the workers' transition rates are constant over time in the face of declining
search frictions, as they appear to be in the data. Under these conditions, they show
that market deepening leads to growth by allowing workers and ...rms to sort into better
matches. In this paper, I consider a frictional product market in the spirit of Burdett and
Judd (1983). I ...nd conditions under which price dispersion and competition remain con-
stant over time in the face of declining search frictions, as they appear to be in the data.
I then show that, under these conditions, market deepening leads to economic growth
by allowing ...rms to design more specialized products. The key di¤erence between the
two theories is related to the focus on price dispersion. In a product market analogue of
Martellini and Menzio (2020, 2021), a buyer'    s valuation for the variety of a seller would
be a draw from a continuous, unbounded distribution. Given this type of heterogeneity,
the seller would always face a continuous demand, and price dispersion would not obtain
as an equilibrium outcome. In my model, a buyer'     s valuation for the variety of a seller is

                                              5
a draw from a binary random variable (i.e. like, dislike). Given this type of heterogeneity,
the ...rm faces a demand that is discontinuous wherever the price distribution has a mass
point and, hence, there must be price dispersion in equilibrium. And, since discrete het-
erogeneity in buyers'valuations is needed to generate price dispersion, sustained growth
can only be achieved by allowing ...rms to redesign their varieties.
    Lastly, the paper provides a novel theory of industry dynamics. The ...rms in the market
design more specialized products as search frictions decline. Each individual ...rm follows
an (S; s) cycle, which starts with the design of a new variety and ends with the scrapping
of the variety. The timing of the (S; s) cycle is di¤erent for di¤erent ...rms so that the cross-
sectional distribution of varieties evolves in a balanced fashion. Mechanically, the industry
dynamics resembles those in a stationary equilibrium of menu cost model (see, e.g., Caplin
and Spulber 1986, Benabou 1988, Diamond 1993). Substantially, though, the industry
dynamics in menu cost models are driven by in          ation and the (S; s) strategy is about
nominal prices, while in my model the industry dynamics are driven by market deepening
and the (S; s) strategy is about specialization of varieties. There are some papers that,
like mine, study the e¤ect of declining trading frictions on the equilibrium of an industry.
Guthmann (2020) studies the industry dynamics in a market where buyers accumulate
information about sellers over time. He shows that prices and markups fall towards the
competitive benchmark. Perla (2019) studies the industry dynamics in a market where
buyers become progressively aware of sellers. He shows that buyer awareness tends to
lower industry markups. In contrast, I show that declining frictions do not necessarily
lower markups when ...rms can choose the degree of specialization of their variety.


2     Environment and de...nition of a BGP
In this section, I describe the physical environment of the market for some consumer
product and then I formally de...ne a Balanced Growth Path (BGP).


2.1    Environment
Consider the market for a consumer product that can be produced in di¤erent varieties.
On one side of the market, there is a measure 1 of in...nitely-lived ...rms. A ...rm pays a
lumpy cost Ct (x) to design a variety of the good with breadth x 2 [0; 1], where x denotes
the probability that an individual buyer likes that particular variety of the good and Ct ( )
is a strictly positive and decreasing function. Varieties with a high x are generic: they
are liked by a large fraction of buyers and they are relatively cheap to design. Varieties
with a low x are niche: they are liked by a small fraction of buyers and they are relatively
expensive to design. I will sometimes refer to 1=x as the speci...city of a variety. After
paying the design cost Ct (x), a ...rm can produce its variety at a constant unit cost, which,
for the sake of simplicity, is assumed to be zero. A ...rm sets the price pt 0 of its variety



                                               6
at date t taking as given the joint distribution of its competitors over the breadth of their
varieties and their prices.
     The design cost function Ct (x) is equal to the price of the input in the design process,
qt , times the quantity of input c(x=Xt ), where c( ) is a decreasing function, Xt is the
average breadth of varieties in the market and        0 is a coe¢ cient capturing production
externalities. For = 0, the breadth of the varieties produced by other ...rms does not
a¤ect the design cost of an individual ...rm. For > 0, a decline in the breadth of the
varieties produced by other ...rms leads to a decline in the design cost of an individual
...rm.
     On the other side of the market, there is a   ow of short-lived buyers. Speci...cally, a
measure b dt of buyers enters the market during each interval of time of length dt. A buyer
demands one unit of the good. A buyer searches the market and contacts n 2 f0; 1; 2; :::g
...rms, where n is the realization of a Poisson distribution with coe¢ cient t . A buyer
observes the variety sold and the price charged by every ...rm that he contacts and, then,
he decides whether and where to purchase the good. If a buyer purchases a variety of the
good with breadth x at the price p and he likes that variety, he enjoys a utility of u(x) p,
where u( ) is a strictly positive and strictly decreasing function. If a buyer purchases a
variety of the good with breadth x at the price p and he does not like the variety, he
enjoys a utility of p. That is, many buyers like a generic variety, but they get little
utility from consuming it. Few buyers like a niche variety, but, if they do, they get more
utility from consuming it. A buyer exits the market whether he purchases the good or
not.
    The environment is non-stationary. The number n of ...rms contacted by a buyer
follows a Poisson distribution with coe¢ cient t , where t is equal to the average number
of ...rms contacted by a buyer. I will sometimes refer to 1= t as the extent of search
frictions. The average number of ...rms contacted by a buyer t grows at some constant,
exogenous rate g > 0. The growth in the number of ...rms contacted by a buyer is meant
to capture declining search frictions due to developments in communication technology
that make it easier for buyers to locate sellers (e.g., telephone, mobile phone, Internet,
smart phone, etc. . . ). The price qt of the input used in the design of new varieties grows
at some exogenous rate gq .
   Some comments about the environment are in order. First, let me comment on how I
model specialization and product di¤erentiation. I assume that a buyer has a probability
x of liking a variety of the good with breadth x 2 [0; 1]. If the buyer likes the variety,
he enjoys a utility of u(x) from consuming it. If the buyer does not like the variety,
he enjoys a utility of 0 from consuming it. This highly stylized approach to modelling
specialization and product di¤erentiation is borrowed from Kyiotaki and Wright (1993)
and it is reminiscent of Diamond (1982).
   Second, let me comment on how I model production and retailing. I assume that the
same agent (the ...rm) designs a variety of the product and retails it. The assumption


                                              7
makes the analysis simple. The assumption, however, is not always realistic, as product
design (choosing the breadth of the variety) and retailing (choosing the retail price) are de-
cisions that are often made by di¤erent agents (the producer and the retailer). Moreover,
I assume that every producer/retailer carries only one variety. Again, the assumption
makes the analysis simple even though, in reality, producers have a portfolio of products
and retailers an assortment of varieties.
     Third, let me comment on how I model the search process. I assume that buyers search
non-sequentially and contact a number n of ...rms that is distributed as a Poisson with
coe¢ cient t . This speci...cation of the search process guarantees that there is a positive
fraction of buyers who is in contact with a single ...rm as well as a positive fraction of
buyers who is in contact with more than one ...rm. As explained in Butters (1977), Varian
(1980) and Burdett and Judd (1983), the coexistence of buyers with one contact and
buyers with multiple contacts is necessary to generate price dispersion in equilibrium.2
When ...rms sell products that are liked by all buyers (as in Butters 1977, Varian 1980
and Burdett and Judd 1983), the extent of competition in the market is determined by
the fraction of buyers with n contacts, n = 0; 1; 2; : : :. When ...rms sell products that are
liked by a subset of buyers (as in my model), the extent of competition is determined by
the fraction of buyers who are in contact who are in contact with n-squiggle ...rms selling
a good that they like, k = 0; 1; 2:::. This is where the Poisson assumption comes into
play. Indeed, if n is distributed as a Poisson with coe¢ cient t and the average breadth
of a variety is Xt , then k is distributed as a Poisson with coe¢ cient t Xt . Therefore, if
  t Xt remains constant over time, the distribution of n-squiggle is constant and, for that
reason, the extent of competition is stable.3


2.2     De...nition of a BGP
To formally de...ne a BGP, it is useful to ...rst lay out some de...nitions and some notation.
The initial state of the market is the cumulative distribution function H0 (x) of the breadth
of the variety of the good sold by di¤erent ...rms. A path for the market is a list of: (i)
policy functions fx`;t ; Tt (x); st (x); pt (x)g, where x`;t denotes the breadth of new varieties,
Tt (x) denote the time until a variety with breadth x is scrapped, pt (x) denotes the price
charged by ...rms with a variety of breadth x, and st (x) u(x) pt (x) is the surplus o¤ered
by ...rms with a variety of breadth x to buyers who like that variety; (ii) value functions
fRt (x); Vt (x)g, where Rt (x) denotes the        ow pro...t for a ...rm selling a variety of breadth
x and Vt (x) denotes the value of a ...rm selling a variety of breadth x; (iii) distributions
fFt (s); Gt (p); Ht (x)g, where Ft (s) is the fraction of ...rms o¤ering a surplus non-greater
   2
     Menzio and Trachter (2015) show that price dispersion may emerge when all buyers are captive, but
only if some sellers are large.
   3
     The Poisson distribution may not be the only one with the property that the number of relevant
contacts for a buyer is a distribution that depends on t and Xt only through their product t Xt . Lester,
Visschers and Woltho¤ (2015) list other distributions with the same property. I conjecture that a BGP
would also exist for any of those distribution.



                                                   8
than s, and Gt (p) is the fraction of ...rms charging a price less than p. The path for the
market is an equilibrium if the value and policy functions maximize the agents'problems
and the distributions are consistent with the agents' policy and the initial state of the
market. A BGP is an initial state of the market and an equilibrium path associated with
that initial state such that endogenous variables grow at some endogenous, constant rate.
     Consider a buyer visiting the market at date t. The buyer comes into contacts with n
...rms with probability
                                   ne
                                        t

                                   t      , for n = 0; 1; 2; :::.                       (2.1)
                                     n!
The buyer obtains a negative surplus from purchasing any variety of the product that
he does not like, as the utility from consuming such variety is 0 and the disutility from
paying the price p is positive. Hence, the buyer restricts attention to the n ...rms that sell
a variety of the good that he likes. The probability that buyer contacts k ...rms that sell
a variety that he likes is given by
                   X
                   1
                         ne        n!
                              t

                         t              X k (1               Xt )n k , for k = 0; 1; 2; :::,   (2.2)
                   n=k
                           n! k !(n k )! t

where Xt denotes the average breadth of varieties
                                                R
                                            Xt = xdHt (x).                                     (2.3)

The expression in (2.2) is easy to understand. The buyer comes into contact with n k
...rms with probability given in (2.1). Conditional on contacting n ...rms, the buyer likes
the varieties of k of them with probability Xtk (1 Xt )n k n!/ k !(n k )!. Among these
...rms, the buyer purchases the good from the ...rm that o¤ers him the highest surplus
u(x) p, as long as this surplus is non-negative.
    Next, consider a ...rm selling a variety of the product with breadth x. During an
interval of time of length dt, the ...rm meets an average of b0 dt buyers who do not have
any contact with any other ...rm whose product they like, where b0 is given by
                                            X
                                            1          n
                                                       te
                                                              t
                                  b0   =b         n               (1     Xt )n     1

                                            n=1
                                                        n!
                                                      X
                                                      1
                                                        (1             Xt )n   n
                                       = b te     t                            t               (2.4)
                                                      n=0
                                                                       n!
                                         1            t Xt
                                       =b e                  t Xt .
                                         Xt
The ...rm meets an average of bn n   t exp(   t )=n! buyers with n contacts, with n = 1; 2; : : :.
One of the buyer'    s contacts is the ...rm. The probability that none of the other n 1
contacts sells a product that is liked by the buyer is (1 Xt )n 1 , where Xt is the average
of x in the population of ...rms. The second line is obtained by collecting t exp( t ) in
the ...rst line. The third line is obtained by recognizing that the summation in the second

                                                       9
line is equal to exp(    t (1     Xt )).
   Similarly, during an interval of time of length dt, the ...rm meets an average of bk dt
buyers who are in contact with exactly k = 1; 2; : : :. other ...rms whose product they like,
where bk is given by
                                X
                                1               n
                                                te           (n 1)!
                                                     t
                   bk   =b              n                           X k (1           Xt ) n   k 1

                                n=k+1
                                                n!       k !(n k 1)! t

                                                Xtk X (1
                                                     1                          n
                                k+1                                     Xt )n   t                   (2.5)
                        =b      t   e       t
                                                k ! n=0                 n!
                                                  k+1 k+1
                              1         t Xt      t  Xt
                        =b       e                                  .
                              Xt                     k!
The ...rm meets an average of bn n     t exp(   t )=n! buyers with n contacts, with n = k +
1; k + 2; :::. One of the buyer'   s contacts is the ...rm. The probability that exactly k of
the other n 1 contacts of the buyer has a product that he likes is (n 1)!=[k !(n k
1)!]Xtk (1 Xt )n k 1 . The second line is obtained by collecting k  t
                                                                      +1 k
                                                                        Xt exp( t )=k ! in the
...rst line. The third line is obtained by recognizing that the summation in the second line
is equal to exp( t (1 Xt )).
    The ...rm chooses its price, p, so as to maximize its    ow pro...t, taking as given the
number of buyers that it meets and the distribution of its competitors over the breadth
of their varieties and the price that they charge. Since buyers make their purchasing
decision based on the surplus that they are o¤ered by ...rms whose variety they like, it is
easier to formulate the ...rm'
                             s pricing problem as choosing the surplus s = u(x) p o¤ered
to buyers who like the ...rm'  s variety so as to maximize the    ow pro...t, taking as given
the number of buyers that the ...rm meets, the distribution of competitors over varieties
Ht (x), and the surplus st (x) o¤ered by ...rms with a variety x.
   Formally, the pricing problem of the ...rm is
                                    (1                 )
                                      X
                       Rt (x) = max         bk xFt (s)k (u(x)                        s),            (2.6)
                                            s 0
                                                     k=0

where Ft (s) is de...ned as                              R
                                                             x:st (x) s
                                                                          xdHt (x)
                                        Ft (s) =                R                                   (2.7)
                                                                    xdHt (x)
First, let me explain (2.7). The function Ft (s) denotes the probability that a ...rm o¤ers a
surplus smaller than s to a buyer, conditional on the buyer liking its variety. Next, let me
explain (2.6). The ...rm meets a   ow bk of buyers who are in contact with k other ...rms
whose product they like. The probability that one of these buyers chooses to purchase
from the ...rm rather than from one of the other n competitors is xFt (s)k , where x is the
                                          s variety, and Ft (s)k is the probability that all of
probability that the buyer likes the ...rm'
the other k sellers o¤er a surplus smaller than s to the buyer. The pro...t that the ...rm


                                                               10
enjoys for every unit sold is p, which is equal to u(x)                       s.
       Expanding the objective function of the ...rm in (2.6), I obtain
                              (1                                       )
                                X x                      k k
                                                          X   F  (s )k
                                                  t Xt   t t t
               Rt (x) = max          b     t Xt e                         (u(x) s)
                          s 0
                                 k=0
                                       X t                   k !
                              (" 1                  #                       )
                                  X k X k Ft (s)k         x
                       = max            t t
                                                       b      t Xt e
                                                                       t Xt
                                                                              (u(x) s)             (2.8)
                          s 0
                                  k=0
                                             k !         X t

                                       x                  t Xt (1   Ft (s))
                           = max b          t Xt   exp                        (u(x)   s) ;
                                 s 0   Xt

where the third line makes use of the fact that the summation in the second line is equal
to exp( t Xt Ft (s)). The search process is such that buyers contact a number n of ...rms
distributed as a Poisson with coe¢ cient t . Then, buyers choose where to purchase the
good based on which of the n ...rms'varieties they like, how specialized these varieties are,
and at what price they are sold. This complicated search process leads to the remarkably
simple expression for the pro...t of the ...rm in (2.8). Indeed, the pro...t of the ...rm is the
same that would obtain if buyers sampled a number k of ...rms distributed as a Poisson
with coe¢ cient t Xt , they liked the ...rm's variety with probability x=Xt and other sellers'
varieties with probability 1, and the distribution of the surplus o¤ered by other sellers
was given by Ft (s).
    Finally, consider the ...rm' s product design problem. The present value of pro...ts Vt (x)
for a ...rm selling a variety of the good with breadth x at date t is given by
                          Z T                        h                           i
     Vt (x) = max             e Rt+ (x)d + e T Vt+T (xn ) qt+T c(xn =Xt+T ) .            (2.9)
                 T 0;xn 2[0;1]   0

The above expression is easy to understand. At all dates t + between t and t + T the
...rm sells its existing variety of the good, and enjoys a   ow pro...t of Rt+ (x). At date
t + T , the ...rm designs a new variety of the product with breadth xn , pays the lumpy cost
qt+T c(xn =Xt+T ), and enjoys the continuation present value of pro...ts Vt+T (xn ).
   Along a BGP, some variables remain constant over time and some variables growth at
some constant, endogenous rate. Speci...cally, along a BGP, the distribution Ht of ...rms
across the breadth of their varieties grows at some constant rate gx , in the sense that
every quantile of the distribution grows at that rate.4 Formally,

                                        Ht (x exp(gx t)) = H0 (x).                                (2.10)

In a BGP, a ...rm that designs a new variety chooses the breadth x`;t , which grows at the
constant rate gx , and a ...rm scraps a variety when its breadth reaches xh;t , a cuto¤ that
   4
    This de...nition of balanced growth for a distribution is standard in the recent literature studying
growth in model with heterogeneity (see, e.g., Lucas and Moll 2014, Perla and Tonetti 2014, or Martellini
and Menzio 2020).



                                                         11
also grows at the constant rate gx . That is, in a BGP, an individual ...rm follows an (S; s)
rule for redesigning its variety of the product, where the (S; s) bands grow at the constant
rate gx . Formally,

                        x`;t = x`;0 exp(gx t), xh;t = xh;0 exp(gx t),                     (2.11)
                      Tt (x) = maxf0; log(x=xh;t )=gx g, for x           x`;t .           (2.12)

In a BGP, the price charged by a ...rm with a variety at any ...xed quantile of the breadth
distribution grows at some constant rate gp , and the surplus o¤ered by a ...rm with a
variety at any ...xed quantile of the breadth distribution grows at the constant rate gs .
Formally,

                             st (x exp(gx t)) = s0 (x) exp(gs t),                         (2.13)
                             pt (x exp(gx t)) = p0 (x) exp(gp t).                         (2.14)

Lastly, along a BGP, the present value of pro...ts for a ...rm with a variety at any ...xed
quantile of the breadth distribution grows at some constant rate gV , i.e.

                              Vt (x exp(gx t)) = V0 (x) exp(gV t).                        (2.15)

    It is important to point out that the balanced growth conditions above guarantee that
the extent of price dispersion remains constant over time. In fact, conditions (2.10) and
(2.14) imply that the price distribution Gt grows at the constant rate gp , in the sense that
every quantile of Gt grows at the rate gp . Since Gt grows at a constant rate along a BGP,
                                         R
the distribution of normalized prices p= pdGt (p)-- which is the standard way to compare
price distribution across goods or over time-- is constant over time and, in this sense, the
extent of price dispersion is constant. Similarly, conditions (2.10) and (2.13) imply that
the surplus distribution Ft grows at the constant rate gs , in the sense that every quantile
of Ft grows at the rate gs .
    Before moving on to the existence and properties of a BGP, it is useful to reformulate
the balanced growth condition (2.10). A quantile x of the ...rm distribution grows at the
rate gx between t and t + dt if and only if Ht (x) is equal to Ht+dt (x exp(gx t)). Analogously,
a quantile x of the ...rm distribution grows at the rate gx between t and t + dt if and only
if the measure of ...rms that are below x at t and above x exp(gx t) at t + dt is equal to the
measure of ...rms that are above x at t and below x exp(gx t) at t + dt. Anticipating that
gx is negative, this in  ow-out  ow condition can be written as

        Ht (x)   Ht (x exp(gx dt)) = 1    Ht (xh;t exp(gx dt)), for x 2 [x`;t ; xh;t ].   (2.16)

The left-hand side of (2.16) is the measure of ...rms that are below x at t and above
x exp(gx t) at t + dt. These are the ...rms with a variety between x exp(gx t) and x. The
right-hand side is the measure of ...rms that are above x at t and below x exp(gx t) at
t + dt. These are the ...rms that are above xh;t exp(gx dt) and in the next dt units of time

                                               12
pay the redesign cost and start producing a variety with breadth x`;t+dt . Dividing by dt
and taking limits for dt ! 0, (2.16) becomes

                             Ht0 (x)x = Ht0 (xh;t )xh;t , for x 2 [x`;t ; xh;t ].                (2.17)

     I am now in the position to de...ne a BGP.

De...nition 1. A BGP is a path for distributions fFt ; Gt ; Ht g, a path for policies fst ; pt ; x`;t ; xh;t g,
and a path for values fVt ; Rt g such that:
    (i) The policies fst ; pt ; x`;t ; xh;t g are optimal, in the sense that st (x) solves the pricing
        problem (2.8) and pt = u(x) st (x), and x`;t and xh;t solve the design problem (2.9);
 (ii) The values Vt and Rt are maxima, in the sense that they are given by (2.8)-(2.9);
(iii) The distributions are consistent with agents'behavior;
 (iv) The balanced growth conditions (2.11)-(2.15) and (2.17) are satis...ed.

     The above de...nition of a BGP may appear standard, but there are a few points worth
discussing. First, I restrict attention to equilibria in which ...rms use pure strategies in the
pricing decision, i.e. pt (x) is a function. When ...rms are identical, the only equilibrium
of the Burdett-Judd competition is such that ...rms mix over prices. When ...rms are
heterogeneous and distributed according to an atomless function, as in this paper, the
mixed pricing strategy equilibrium is puri...ed and, hence, the restriction is without loss
in generality. Second, I restrict attention to equilibria in which the surplus distribution
Ft is atomless. This is also without loss in generality as it is straightforward to rule out
equilibria in which Ft has a mass point. Third, I restrict attention to equilibria in which
...rms follow a pure (S; s) strategy for the redesign of their varieties. This restriction is
an afterthought in menu cost models (see, e.g., Benabou 1988, 1992, Caplin and Spulber
1986, Caplin and Leahy 1997). Burdett and Menzio (2017, 2018) show, however, that, in
menu cost models with Burdett-Judd competition, there may also/only exist equilibria
in which ...rms mix with respect to the (S; s) strategy. While, I do not entertain such
equilibria here, it is important to notice that the forces behind randomization on the
(S; s) strategy in Burdett and Menzio (2017, 2018) are not at work here as ...rms can
adjust prices freely.


3       Necessary Conditions for a BGP
In this section, I derive some restrictions on the fundamentals of the model (i.e. the
buyer' s utility function, the ...rm'
                                    s cost function, the exogenous growth rate of the price of
inputs) that are necessary for the existence of a BGP. These restrictions are the analogue
for our model of the restrictions on the utility function and on the production function that
King, Plosser and Rebelo (1988) showed to be necessary for the existence of a BGP in the
neoclassical growth model. Along the way, I will derive some properties of endogenous

                                                     13
objects (i.e. the endogenous growth rate of the breadth of varieties, the endogenous
distribution of varieties, etc. . . ) that must hold in a BGP.


3.1    Distribution of varieties
For t = 0, the balanced growth condition (2.17) for the distribution of varieties reads
                          0         0
                         H0 (x)x = H0 (xh;0 )xh;0 , for x 2 [x`;0 ; xh;0 ].                (3.1)

The expression above is a di¤erential equation for the initial distribution of varieties, H0 .
The solution to the di¤erential equation must satisfy the boundary condition H0 (x`;0 ) = 0
because for x < x`;0 the inow of varieties is zero. The solution to the di¤erential equation
must also satisfy the boundary condition H0 (xh;0 ) = 1 because all varieties x > xh;0 are
scrapped. The unique solution to the di¤erential equation (3.1) that satis...es the two
boundary conditions is
                                           log x log x`;0
                                H0 (x) =                   .                            (3.2)
                                         log xh;0 log x`;0
The initial distribution H0 in (3.2) is the only distribution consistent with balanced growth
between date 0 and dt.
   Now suppose that the balanced growth (2.17) is satis...ed for all 2 [0; t]. If that is the
case, the distribution of varieties at date t is an Ht such that Ht (x) = H0 (x exp( gx t)).
Hence, Ht is given by

                                log xe gx t log x`;0    log x log x`;t
                     Ht (x) =                        =                   ,                 (3.3)
                                 log xh;0 log x`;0     log xh;t log x`;t

where the second step makes use of the fact that xh;t = xh;0 exp(gxt ) and xl;t = xl;0 exp(gx t).
It is immediate to verify that the distribution Ht in (3.3) satis...es the balanced growth
condition (2.17) at date t and, hence, the distribution grows at a constant rate also be-
tween date t and t + dt. Moreover, the distribution Ht in (3.3) is the only one satisfying
the balanced growth condition (2.17) at date t.
    The above ...ndings establish that, in any BGP, the distribution of varieties Ht must
be log-uniform over the interval [x`;t ; xh;t ]. Conversely, the distribution of varieties Ht
satis...es the constant growth condition (2.17) only if the initial distribution of varieties
H0 is log-uniform over the interval [x`;0 ; xh;0 ] and and the ...rm'
                                                                    s (S; s) thresholds x`;t and
xh;t grow at the constant rate gx . These ...ndings are closely related to those in Caplin
and Spulber (1986) and Benabou (1988) showing that the only stationary distribution of
real prices in a menu cost model where ...rms follow a constant (S; s) rule is log-uniform.




                                                14
3.2     Firm'
            s pricing function
The ...rm'
         s pricing problem is

                                          x                   t Xt (1   Ft (s))
                       Rt (x) = max b           t Xt   exp                         (u(x)     s) :               (3.4)
                                 s 0      Xt

Following the same arguments as in Burdett and Judd (1983), we can use (3.4) to establish
some equilibrium properties of the Ft distribution. First, the surplus st (x) must belong
to the interval [0; u(x)). In fact, Rt (x) is strictly positive as the ...rm can o¤er a surplus
of 0 and sell its product at the price p = u(x) > 0 to the buyers who have not met any
other ...rm with a product that they like. Since Rt (x) is strictly positive, it follows that
st (x) must be strictly smaller than u(x). Second, the support of Ft must be an interval.
Suppose the support of Ft had a gap between s0 and s1 , with s0 < s1 . If that were the
case, a ...rm that o¤ered the surplus s1 could achieve a strictly higher pro...t by o¤ering
s0 instead, since it would sell the same quantity and enjoys a strictly higher pro...t per
unit sold. Third, the lower bound on the support of Ft must be zero. Suppose that the
lower bound were strictly positive. If this were the case, a ...rm that o¤ered the surplus
at the lower bound could achieve a strictly higher pro...t by o¤ering 0 instead, since it
would sell the same quantity and enjoys a strictly higher pro...t per unit sold. While the
notation in (3.4) implies a restriction to distributions Ft without mass points, it would be
straightforward to show that the restriction is without loss in generality.
    The surplus st (x) o¤ered by a ...rm is strictly decreasing in the breadth of the ...rm's
variety x. To this aim, take any x0 and x1 , with x0 < x1 , and let s0 denote st (x0 ) and s1
denote st (x1 ). Since x1 chooses s1 over s0 , it must be the case that

      exp(   t Xt (1     Ft (s0 ))) [u(x0 )    s0 ]    exp(       t Xt (1         Ft (s1 ))) [u(x0 )   s1 ] .   (3.5)

Since x0 chooses s0 over s1 , it must be the case that

      exp(   t Xt (1     Ft (s1 ))) [u(x1 )    s1 ]    exp(       t Xt (1         Ft (s0 ))) [u(x1 )   s0 ] .   (3.6)

The above inequalities together imply

       [u(x0 )   u(x1 )] [exp(       t Xt (1    Ft (s0 )))     exp(         t Xt (1      Ft (s1 )))]   0.       (3.7)

Since u(x0 ) > u(x1 ), (3.7) implies that s0     s1 and, hence, the surplus st (x) o¤ered by
a ...rm must be weakly decreasing in the breadth of a ...rm'  s variety. Further, the surplus
st (x) must be strictly decreasing, or else the distribution Ft (s) would have a mass point.
These ...ndings are intuitive. The gains from trade between a ...rm with a broad variety and
an interested buyer are smaller than the gains from trade between a ...rm with a narrow
variety and an interested buyer. Therefore, ...rms with a broad variety ...nd it optimal to
o¤er strictly less surplus than ...rms with a narrow variety.



                                                       15
3.3    Buyer'
            s utility function
The ...rst-order condition for the solution to the ...rm'
                                                        s pricing problem is
                                           0
                              1=    t Xt Ft (st (x))(u(x)       st (x)).                  (3.8)

The left-hand side of (3.8) is the (per-buyer) cost of a marginal increase in the surplus
o¤ered by the ...rm, which is given by the decline in pro...ts per sale. The right-hand side
is the (per-buyer) bene...t of a marginal increase in the surplus o¤ered by the ...rm, which
is given by the increase in the number of sales, t Xt Ft0 (st (x)), times the pro...t per sale,
u(x) st (x). Condition (3.8) states that the solution to the ...rm'  s pricing problem is such
that the marginal cost and the marginal bene...t of an increase in the amount of surplus
o¤ered by the ...rm are equated.
    Consider a ...rm producing the broadest variety xh;t in the market. Since the lowest
surplus o¤ered by a ...rm is 0 and the surplus st (x) o¤ered by a ...rm is strictly decreasing
in x, it follows that st (xh;t ) = 0 and, hence,
                                                 0
                                    1=    t Xt Ft (0)u(xh;t ).                            (3.9)

The average number of contacts per buyer t grows at the rate g . In a BGP, the average
breadth of varieties, Xt , and the highest breadth of a variety, xh;t , grow at the rate
gx . Moreover, in a BGP, the distribution Ft of surplus grows at the rate gs and, hence,
Ft0 (s exp(gs t)) is equal to F00
                                  (s) exp( gs t). In light of these observations, (3.9) can be
written as
                              1 = e(g +gx gs )t 0 X0 F0
                                                      0
                                                        (0)u(xh;0 egx t ).               (3.10)

   Di¤erentiating (3.10) with respect to t gives

                          0 = (g + gx     gs )u(xh;t ) + gx u0 (xh;t )xh;t .             (3.11)

The expression in (3.11) is a di¤erential equation for the buyer'
                                                                s utility function u, as xh;t
grows over time at the rate gx . The unique solution to the di¤erential equation is

                                                     1
                                      u(x) = u0             ,                            (3.12)
                                                     x

for some u0 > 0 and = (g + gx gs )=gx . The expression in (3.12) states that a necessary
condition for the existence of a BGP is that the buyer'   s utility is a strictly increasing and
isoelastic function of the degree of speci...city 1=x of a variety. It is important to notice
here that the condition = (g + gx gs )=gx should not be interpreted as a restriction on
the elasticity of the buyer' s utility function. The correct interpretation of the condition
is that, for an arbitrary elasticity > 0 of the buyer'  s utility function, the growth rate gs
of surplus must equal g       (     1)gx .




                                               16
3.4     Growth rates
A ...rm producing a variety with breadth x exp(gx t) o¤ers the surplus st (x exp(gx t)) to its
buyers. Therefore, the optimality condition (3.8) implies
                                              0       gx t
                                1=     t Xt Ft (st (xe     ))        u(xegx t )       st (xegx t ) .                   (3.13)

The average number of contacts per buyer, t , grows at the rate g . The average breadth
of varieties, Xt , grows at the rate gx . The surplus st (x exp(gx t)) o¤ered by a ...rm at a
...xed quantile of the breadth distribution grows at the rate gs . The surplus distribution
Ft grows at the rate gs and, hence, Ft0 (s exp(gs t)) is equal to F0  0
                                                                        (s) exp( gs t). The utility
u(x exp(gx t)) grows at the rate gx . In light of these observations, (3.13) can be written
as
                1 = e(g +gx gs )t 0 X0 F0 0
                                            (s0 (x)) (u(x)e gx t s0 (x)egs t )
                                                                                            (3.14)
                    = e(g +(1 )gx gs )t 0 X0 F0  0
                                                   (s0 (x)) u(x) s0 (x)e(gs + gx )t .
    The optimality condition (3.14) must hold for all t. Since the left-hand side of (3.14) is
constant, the right-hand side must be constant as well. The ...rst term on the right-hand
side is constant because we showed that gs must equal g (         1)gx . The second term on
the right-hand side is constant if gx + gs is equal to 0 The solution to the two equations
gs = g      (    1)gx and gx + gs = 0 is such that the growth rate gx of the breadth of
varieties is equal to g , and the growth rate gs of the surplus o¤ered by ...rms is equal
to g . That is, in any BGP, the breadth of the varieties produced by ...rms must fall at
the same rate at which the number of buyer'      s contacts grows. Moreover, in any BGP,
the surplus o¤ered by ...rms to buyers must grow at a rate equal to the rate at which
the number of buyer'   s contacts grows multiplied by the elasticity of the buyer'   s utility
function with respect to the speci...city of a variety.


3.5     Firm'
            s cost function
The pro...t for a ...rm selling a variety at a ...xed quantile of the breadth distribution grows
at the rate g . In fact,

            gx t              xegx t              t Xt (1    Ft (st (x exp(gx t))))
      Rt (xe       )   =    b          t Xt e                                         (u(xegx t )      st (xegx t ))
                               Xt
                                x               0 X0 (1     Ft (s0 (x)))                gx t                           (3.15)
                       =    b        0 X0 e                                (u(x)e              s0 (x)egs t )
                                X0
                            g t
                       =e         R0 (x):

The second line uses the fact that the average number of buyer'    s relevant contacts, t Xt ,
remains constant over time, the buyer'  s utility from consuming a variety at a given quantile
of the breadth distribution, u(x exp(gx t)), grows at the rate    gx , and the surplus o¤ered
by a ...rm selling a variety at a given quantile of the breadth distribution, st (x exp(gx t)),
as well as the surplus distribution, Ft , grow at the rate gs . The third line uses the fact

                                                                  17
that gx =     g and gs = g .
   The value of a ...rm selling a variety at a ...xed quantile of the breadth distribution is
             Z T                              h                                    i
        gx t
  Vt (xe ) =     e Rt+ (xegx t )d + e T Vt+T (x`;t+T ) qt+T c Xt+T x`;t+T ,
               0                                                                       (3.16)
  T = log(x exp(gx t)=xh;t )=gx .

In a BGP, the value of a ...rm selling a variety at a ...xed quantile of the breadth distribu-
tion grows at the rate gV and, hence, Vt (x exp(gx t)) equals V0 (x) exp(gV t) and Vt+T (x`;t+T )
equals VT (x`;T ) exp(gV t). In a BGP, the pro...t of a ...rm Rt+ (x exp(gx t)) equals R (x) exp( g t).
In a BGP, the breadth of a new variety x`;t , the breadth of a scrapped variety xh;t , and
the average breadth Xt grow at the rate gx = g . In light of these observations, (3.16)
can be written as
   egV t V0 (x)
              Z T                            h                                                             i
          g t                            T
   =e             e   R (x)d + e                 egV t VT (x`;T )   qT egq t c e     (1   )g t
                                                                                                 XT x`;T       ;   (3.17)
              0

   T = log(x=xh;0 )=gx .

    Equation (3.17) must hold for all t and, hence, the right-hand side must grow at the
same rate as the left-hand side, i.e. at the rate gV . It is easy to see that the right-hand
side grows at the same rate as the left-hand side only if all terms on the right-hand side
do. The ...rst term on the right-hand side grows at the rate gV only if gV = g . The
second term on the right-hand side grows at the rate gV = g only if

                        egq t c e   (1       )g t
                                                    XT x`;T     =e   g t
                                                                           c XT x`;T .                             (3.18)

The derivative of (3.18) with respect to t is

  gq c Xt+T x`;t+T       (1     )g c0 Xt+T x`;t+T Xt+T x`;t+T = g c Xt+T x`;t+T .                                  (3.19)

There are two cases to consider. For 6= 1, equation (3.19) is a di¤erential equation for
the ...rm'
         s cost function c, as Xt x`;t declines over time at the rate g (1 ). The unique
solution to the di¤erential equation is
                                                                       g    gq
                                       x                        X    (1    )g
                                     c                = c0                       ,                                 (3.20)
                                       X                        x

for some c0 > 0. For       = 1, equation (3.19) holds if and only if

                                                      gq = g .                                                     (3.21)

In the ...rst case, the cost function c is strictly decreasing and isoelastic in the relative
speci...city of the variety X =x, with an elasticity of ( g      gq )=((1    )g ). This is a


                                                           18
knife-edge case, as there is no reason why the elasticity of the cost function should be
tied to the elasticity of the utility function. In the second case, the growth rate gq of
the price of the input used by ...rms in the design of a new variety grows at the rate g ,
the growth rate of the price of output. This is not a knife-edge case, as there are natural
reasons why the price of the input used by ...rms should grow at the same rate as the price
of the output sold by ...rms (e.g., the input used in the design of varieties is the output of
...rms). Therefore, I will focus on the second case.


3.6    Necessary conditions for a BGP
The following theorem summarizes the ...ndings in this section.

Theorem 2. (Necessary conditions for a BGP).
  1. A BGP might exist only if:

       (a) The buyer's utility function u(x) has the form u0 =x for some u0 > 0,            > 0;
       (b) The ...rm' s cost function Ct (x=Xt ) has the form qt c(x=Xt ), where the input
           price qt grows at the rate gq = g and the quantity of input c(x=Xt ) is strictly
           decreasing in x.

  2. If a BGP exists, it must have the following properties:

       (a) The distribution of varieties Ht is log-uniform over the interval [x`;t ; xh;t ], and
           x`;t and xh;t decline at the constant rate gx = g ;
       (b) The distribution of surplus Ft grows at the constant rate gs = g ;
       (c) The distribution of prices Gt grows at the constant rate gp = g ;
       (d) The value of a ...rm producing a variety at a ...xed quantile of the Ht distribution
           grows at the constant rate gV = g .

    Part 1 of the theorem provides restrictions on the fundamentals of the model that
are necessary for the existence of a BGP. The ...rst restriction is that the buyer'      s utility
function needs to be isoelastic with respect to the speci...city of a variety. The restriction
follows from the fact that-- in order for the distribution of surplus to grow at a constant
rate while the speci...city of varieties grows at a constant rate-- the elasticity of the buyer' s
utility function with respect to the speci...city of a variety must be constant over time.
The second restriction is that the price of the input used by a ...rm to design a variety
must grow at the same rate as the price of the output and that the quantity of input to
design a new variety with breadth x`;t must be constant. The second restriction follows
from the fact that-- in order for the value of a ...rm to grow at a constant rate-- the price
of an old variety and the cost of designing a new variety must grow at the same rate.
   Part 2 of the theorem provides a characterization of the properties that any BGP must
have. The most important property is that the breadth of the varieties sold by ...rms in

                                               19
the market must decline at the same rate at which the average number of ...rms contacted
by a buyer increases. This property of a BGP is necessary to guarantee that the extent of
competition in the market remains constant, where the extent of competition is captured
by the number of ...rms contacted by a buyer who have a product that the buyer likes. As
we shall see in the next section, the property is satis...ed because, when search frictions
decline, ...rms do indeed ...nd it optimal to increase the speci...city of their varieties at a
rate that exactly o¤sets the decline in search frictions.


4     Su¢ cient Conditions for a BGP
In this section, I derive su¢ cient conditions for the existence of a BGP. I impose the
restrictions on the fundamentals of the model that are necessary for the existence of a BGP
and that are listed in the ...rst part of Theorem 2. I also make use of the characterization of
the necessary properties of the dynamics aggregate variables that must hold in any BGP
and that are listed in the second part of Theorem 2. I show that the optimal policies for an
individual ...rm conform to the requirements of a BGP, as described in De...nition 1. This
step of the analysis is carried out by showing that the problems of an individual ...rm have
a time-invariant representation. I then show that the dynamics of aggregate variables are
consistent with the policy of an individual ...rm. In the end, I show that the existence of
a BGP boils down to the existence of a solution to a system of 3 time-invariant equations
in 3 unknown scalars.


4.1    Distribution of varieties and surplus
Let x^ denote the breadth of a variety relative to the most specialized variety in the market,
i.e. x
     ^ = x=x`;t . I will refer to x
                                  ^ as the relative breadth of the variety. Similarly, let x
                                                                                           ^` and
^h denote the variety with the lowest relative breadth and the variety with the highest
x
relative breadth in the market, i.e. x    ^` = x`;t =x`;t = 1 and x^h = xh;t =x`;t . In any BGP,
the breadth distribution Ht (x) must be given by (3.3). Therefore, the relative breadth
distribution is
                  ^ (^
                  H  x)   = Ht (^
                                x x`;t )
                               log(^
                                   x x`;t ) log(^
                                                x` x`;t )        ^
                                                             log x         ^`
                                                                       log x               (4.1)
                          =                               =                    .
                              log(^
                                  xh x`;t ) log(^
                                                x` x`;t )   log x
                                                                ^h      log x
                                                                            ^`

The relative breadth distribution is log-uniform over the interval [^    ^h ], and it remains
                                                                    x` ; x
constant over time.
        ^ denote the average relative breadth, which is constant since the average breadth
    Let X
                                             ^ is given by
distribution is time-invariant. Using (4.1), X

                                     ^=        x
                                               ^h   x
                                                    ^`
                                     X                     .                               (4.2)
                                           log x
                                               ^h   log x
                                                        ^`


                                               20
Also, let denote the buyer'  s average number of relevant contacts, i.e.             ^.
                                                                            = t x`;t X
In any BGP, x`;t must decline at the same rate at which the average number of buyer'  s
contacts increases and hence must be constant. Using (4.2), it follows that

                                                        x
                                                        ^h   x
                                                             ^`
                                      = x`;0    0                   .                       (4.3)
                                                    log x
                                                        ^h   log x
                                                                 ^`

   Let s
       ^ denote the surplus o¤ered by a ...rm relative to the buyer'
                                                                   s utility from consuming
the most specialized variety in the market, i.e. s^ = s=(1=x`;t ) which is equal to sx`;t . In
any BGP, the surplus distribution Ft grows at the rate gs = g . Therefore, the relative
surplus distribution is
                          ^ (^
                          F  s)   = Ft (^
                                        sx`;t )
                                                                                            (4.4)
                                  = Ft (^
                                        sx`;0 exp( g )) = F0 (^
                                                              sx`;0 ):

Hence, the relative surplus distribution remains constant over time. Also, since the surplus
o¤ered by a ...rm is strictly decreasing in the relative breadth of the ...rm' s variety and the
relative breadth distribution is log-uniform over the interval [^     ^h ], the fraction of ...rms
                                                                 x` ; x
o¤ering a relative surplus below s ^(^x0 ) is
                                           Rx
                                            ^h
                                                     x  ^ (^
                                                     ^ dH  x)   x
                                                                ^h      x
                                                                        ^0
                             ^ (^
                             F    x0 )) = Rx
                                s(^        ^0
                                                              =            .                (4.5)
                                           x^h          ^ (^    x
                                                                ^h      x
                                                                        ^`
                                               x
                                               ^`
                                                     x
                                                     ^ dH  x)



4.2    Firm'
           s pricing problem
I now demonstrate that the ...rm'  s pricing problem has a time-invariant representation.
The problem for a ...rm selling a variety with relative breadth x^ is
                                                                           !
                                      x^ x`;t                    u 0
             Rt (^
                 x x`;t ) = max b             e (1 Ft (s))               s
                               s 0       Xt                   x
                                                              ^ x`;t
                                                                              !
                                       x
                                       ^                        u0       s
                                                                         ^          (4.6)
                            = max b       e (1 Ft (^
                                                   sx`;t ))
                               s
                               ^ 0    X^                    x^    x `;t x `;t

                                  g                       x
                                                          ^        ^ (^
                                                                (1 F  s))      u0
                             =e       x`;0 max b            e                       ^ .
                                                                                    s
                                               s
                                               ^ 0        ^
                                                          X                    x
                                                                               ^

In the ...rst line of (4.6), I make use of the fact that the buyer' s utility is isoelastic with
respect to the speci...city of the ...rm's variety. In the second line, I change the choice
variable from the surplus s to the relative surplus s ^ = sx`;t and make use of the fact that
gx = g . In the last line, I make use of (4.4).
   Notice that the problem in the last line of (4.6) depends only on the ...rm'
                                                                              s relative




                                                     21
breadth x
        ^ and not on calendar time t, i.e.

                                              x
                                              ^         ^ (^
                                                     (1 F  s))
                         r(^
                           x) = max b           e                       u0 x
                                                                           ^      ^ .
                                                                                  s             (4.7)
                                    s
                                    ^ 0       ^
                                              X
Denote with s     x) the optimal relative surplus that solves (4.7). Since a ...rm selling a
                ^(^
variety with a constant relative breadth x   ^ ...nds it optimal to o¤er a constant relative
surplus s^(^x), it follows that the surplus st (^
                                                x x`;0 exp(gx t)) o¤ered by the ...rm is equal
       g t
to x`;0 s    x) and, hence, grows at a constant rate, as required by the de...nition of a
           ^(^
BGP. Moreover, since the surplus o¤ered by a ...rm with relative breadth x    ^ grows at the
constant rate g and the distribution of relative breadths is stationary, the growth rate
of the aggregate surplus distribution Ft is consistent with the individual behavior of ...rms.
     Next, I solve for the optimal relative surplus s x). The optimality condition for s
                                                    ^(^                                ^(^
                                                                                         x)
is
                                     ^ 0 (^
                                  1= F      x)) u0 x
                                          s(^      ^                    s x) .
                                                                        ^(^                     (4.8)
                                                     ^ 0 (^
The relative surplus distribution (4.5) implies that F      x)) is equal to 1= (^
                                                          s(^                           ^0 (^
                                                                                   ^` ) s
                                                                                xh x        x) .
Therefore, I can rewrite (4.8) as a di¤erential equation for the optimal relative surplus

                                 ^0 (^
                                 s   x) =                 u0 x
                                                             ^           s x) .
                                                                         ^(^                    (4.9)
                                              x
                                              ^h    x
                                                    ^`

   The unique solution to the di¤erential equation (4.9) such that s      xh ) = 0, i.e. such
                                                                        ^(^
that the relative surplus o¤ered by a ...rm with the broadest variety in the market is zero,
is                                    Z x   ^h
                                u0                       z x ^`
                      s
                      ^(^
                        x) =                   z exp               dz .                 (4.10)
                              x
                              ^h x ^` x   ^              x
                                                         ^h x ^`
The optimal surplus o¤ered by a ...rm is strictly decreasing in the relative breadth of its
variety for all x^ on the support [^    ^h ] of the equilibrium distribution. O¤ the equilibrium,
                                   x` ; x
the optimal surplus o¤ered by a ...rm selling a variety with relative breadth x     ^<x ^` is s x` ) .
                                                                                              ^(^
Indieed, this ...rm has no incentive to o¤er surplus above s      x` ) because it already beats all
                                                                ^(^
of its competitors. Conversely, a ...rm selling a variety with relative breadth x > x     ^h o¤ers
the surplus 0. This ...rm would like to o¤er less surplus but doing so would mean having
no customers. Therefore, we have

                                       ^(^
                                       s x) = s x` ), for x
                                              ^(^         ^             ^` ,
                                                                        x
                                                                                               (4.11)
                                       s x) = 0, for x
                                       ^(^           ^           ^h .
                                                                 x

  Lastly, I characterize some properties of the ...rm'
                                                     s pro...t function r(^
                                                                          x). Substituting
   ^
1 F (^ x)) with (4.5), I can write r(^
     s(^                             x) as

                                 x
                                 ^         x
                                           ^ x
                                             ^`
                   r(^
                     x) =    b     e      ^h x
                                          x   ^`
                                                   u0 x
                                                      ^           s
                                                                  ^(^      ^ 2 [^
                                                                    x) for x         ^ h ],
                                                                                x` ; x         (4.12)
                                 ^
                                 X




                                                    22
and                                    8
                                       >   x
                                           ^
                                       < b   (u0 x
                                                 ^                            s x` )) for x < x` ,
                                                                              ^(^
                                           ^
                                           X
                                r(^
                                  x) =     x
                                           ^
                                       >
                                       : b   e u0 x^                                         for x > xh .
                                           ^
                                           X
It is easy to show that r(^x) is strictly decreasing in the relative breadth x^ if and only if
   > 1. Similarly, if > 1, it is easy to show that r(^   x) is strictly convex in the relative
breadth x ^. I will assume that > 1 in what follows.


4.3      Firm'
             s design problem
I now demonstrate that the ...rm'
                                s product design problem has a time-invariant represen-
tation. The problem for a with selling a variety with relative breadth x
                                                                       ^ is
                      Z T
   Vt (^
       x x`;t ) = max            x x`;t )d + e T [Vt+T (xn ) qt+T c (xn =Xt+T )] : (4.13)
                          e Rt+ (^
                    T;xn        0

I guess and verify that the solution to the functional equation in (4.13) is
                                                                          g
                                                      Vt (^
                                                          x x`;t ) = e                x) .
                                                                              x`;0 v (^                                          (4.14)

The function v (^
                x) in (4.14) is time-invariant and it is de...ned as
                        Z   T                                                                h                          i
           x) = max
        v (^                    e   (           g )
                                                           xeg ) d + e
                                                        r (^                  (       g )T
                                                                                                 xn )
                                                                                              v (^        ^c x
                                                                                                          q      ^
                                                                                                             ^n =X          ,    (4.15)
                 T;x
                   ^n   0

in which q
         ^ denotes the price of the input of the product design expressed as a ratio of the
                                                                 ^ = qt x`;t .
buyers'utility from consuming a variety with breadth x`;t , i.e. q
   In order to verify the guess, I substitute (4.15) in (4.14) and obtain
                            Z       T
                                                                                  T
 x`;t    v (^
            x)   = max                  e        Rt+ (^
                                                      x x`;t )d + e                    x`;t+T v (xn =x`;t+T )        qt+T c (xn =Xt+T )
                    T;xn        0
                            Z       T                                                         h                                           i
                                                             x
                                                             ^ x`;t                      T                                        ^
                 = max                  e        x`;t+ r                   d +e                x`;t+T v (^
                                                                                                         xn )       q
                                                                                                                    ^x`;t+T c x
                                                                                                                              ^n =X
                    T;x
                      ^n        0                            x`;t+
                                            Z   T                                                        h                        i
                 = x`;t         max                 e   (   g )       g
                                                                     xe
                                                                  r (^        )d + e         (    g )T
                                                                                                          v (^
                                                                                                             xn )     ^c x
                                                                                                                      q      ^
                                                                                                                         ^n =X        :
                                T;x
                                  ^n        0
                                                                                          (4.16)
The second line makes use of the fact that Rt+ (^    x x`;t ) is equal to x`;t+ r(^
                                                                                  x x`;t =x`;t+ )
and that qt+T is equal to q  ^x`;t+T . The second line also changes the choice variable from
the breadth xn of the new variety to the relative breadth x    ^n . The third line makes use of
the fact that x`;t grows at the rate g and, hence, x`;t grows at the g . Eliminating
x`;t from the left-hand side of (4.16) and from the third line on the right-hand side of
(4.16) veri...es the conjectured solution to (4.13).
    The product design problem in (4.15) depends only on the relative breadth x     ^ of the
variety sold by the ...rm and not on calendar time. The problem has a simple interpretation.

                                                                      23
The normalized value of a ...rm selling x^ is given by the sum between the present value of
the normalized     ow of pro...t between now and date T and the normalized present value
of designing a new variety with relative breadth x  ^n at date T . The normalized  ow pro...t
depends only on the relative breadth of the ...rm'    s variety, which grows at the rate g .
The normalized present value of designing a new variety depends on x       ^n . The e¤ective
rate at which the normalized pro...ts are discounted is        g , where is the rate of time
preference and g is the growth rate of the normalization factor. The ...rm chooses T
and x ^n so as to maximize its normalized present value of pro...ts. Clearly, the product
design problem in (4.15) is well-de...ned if and only if the e¤ective discount rate       g
is strictly positive.
    Denote as x  ^` the relative breadth of a new variety that solves (4.15). Notice that
^` is independent of calendar time t, since it solves a time-invariant problem, and it is
x
independent of the relative breadth of the ...rm'    s variety x ^, since it maximizes the ...rm'   s
continuation value which is independent of x    ^. Therefore x   ^` is just a constant. Since x ^` is
a constant, the breadth of a new variety created at date t is simply x        ^` x`;t , which grows
at the constant rate g . Denote as T (^     x) the time when the ...rm scraps its variety that
solves (4.15). It is easy to see that T (^
                                         x) is such that x^ exp(g T (^  x)) equals some x ^h , where
^h is a constant. Since x
x                          ^h is a constant, a variety is scrapped at date t if its breadth is
^` x`;t , which grows at the constant rate g . The two thresholds for the ...rm'
x                                                                                         s problem
grow at the constant rate g , as required by the de...nition of a BGP. Moreover, given an
initial distribution H0 that is log-uniform over [x`;0 ; xh;0 ], the growth rate of the aggregate
breadth distribuiton Ht is constant and equal to g .
   The ...rst-order condition for x
                                  ^` is
                                                 .
                                    ^c0 x
                                    q       ^
                                        ^` =X        ^=
                                                     X      v 0 (^
                                                                 x` ) .                        (4.17)

The left-hand side of (4.17) is the cost from designing a marginally narrower variety, as
c(^
  x=X^ ) is a strictly decreasing function. The right-hand side of (4.17) is the bene...t from
designing a marginally narrower variety. The marginal cost and the marginal bene...t must
be equal at the optimal relative breadth x  ^. For an appropriate choice of c(^ x=X^ ), (4.17)
is not only necessary for optimality but also su¢ cient.
   The ...rst-order condition for T (^
                                     x) is
                                               h                          i
                            r(^
                              xh ) = (             x` )
                                            g ) v (^       ^c x
                                                           q      ^
                                                              ^` =X           .                (4.18)

The left-hand side of (4.18) is the bene...t of scrapping the old variety an instant later,
which is given by the  ow pro...t r(^
                                    xh ). The right-hand side of (4.18) is the cost of scrapping
the old variety an instant later, which is given by the ...rm'    s value from producing a new
variety with relative breadth x
                              ^` , v (^
                                      x` ), net of the cost of producing a variety x ^` , q
                                                                                          ^c(^
                                                                                             x` =X^ ),
annuitized by the e¤ective discount rate            g . Since r(^x) is strictly decreasing in x  ^, it
follows that (4.18) is not only necessary but also su¢ cient for optimality.


                                                 24
   It is useful to derive a continuous-time Bellman equation for v (^
                                                                    x). For all x ^h and
                                                                                ^>x
dt > 0 small, v (^
                 x) is equal to
                                                    (     g )dt
                             v (^      x)dt + e
                                x) = r(^                             xeg
                                                                  v (^     dt
                                                                                ).         (4.19)

Subtracting v (^
               x) exp( (       g )dt) from both sides of the equation, dividing by dt, and
taking limits for dt ! 0, one recovers the standard continuous-time Bellman equation

                              (         g ) v (^      x) + v 0 (^
                                               x) = r(^           xg .
                                                                x)^                        (4.20)

The left-hand side of (4.20) is the annuity value of the normalized present value of pro...ts
for a ...rm selling a variety with relative breadth x^. The ...rst term on the right-hand side is
the instantaneous normalized       ow pro...t of the ...rm. The second term on the right-hand
side is the change in the ...rm'  s normalized present value of pro...ts, which is due to the
fact that the relative breadth of the ...rm'  s variety grows at the rate g .


4.4     Su¢ cient conditions for a BGP
The existence of a BGP boils down to the existence of a solution to a system of three
equations: the ...rst-order condition (4.17) for the relative breadth of a new variety, the
...rst-order condition (4.18) for the relative breadth of a scrapped variety, and the condition
(4.15) for the normalized value of a ...rm with a newly designed variety. These three
equations have three unknowns: the buyer'         s average number of relevant contacts, , the
relative breadth of a scrapped variety, x     ^h , and the normalized value of a ...rm with a
newly designed variety, v (^  x` ). Note that x ^` is not an unknown because it equals 1 by
construction. If a solution to the system of three equations in three unknows exists, then
a BGP exists as demonstrated in the previous pages.
     The ...rst-order condition (4.17) for the relative breadth of a new variety can be written
as
                                                                   x
                                                                   ^`      x
                                                                           ^` g
                             x` ) = (
                           r(^                     x` )
                                             g )v (^      ^c0
                                                          q                     ,          (4.21)
                                                                   X^       X^
where r(^                        ^ is given by (4.2), and q
        x` ) is given by (4.12), X                        ^ is given by

                                                log x
                                                    ^h     log x
                                                               ^`
                                    q
                                    ^ = q0                        .                        (4.22)
                                              0     x
                                                    ^h     x
                                                           ^`
To obtain (4.21), I substitute out v 0 (^x` ) using the continuous-time Bellman equation in
(4.20). To obtain (4.22), I use the de...nition of q  ^ as q0 x`;0 and then substitute out x`;0
using the de...nition of in (4.3). Intuitively, condition (4.21) is an equation that requires
  to be such that an individual ...rm ...nds it optimal to design a variety x    ^, given that the
relative breadth distribution is log-uniform over the interval [^         ^h ] and the normalized
                                                                     x` ; x
value of a ...rm with a newly designed variety is v (^ x` ) .




                                                  25
   The ...rst-order condition (4.15) for the relative breadth of a scrapped variety is
                                             h                   i
                         r(^xh ) = (            x` ) q
                                         g ) v (^      ^c x   ^ ,
                                                          ^` =X                        (4.23)

where r(^ xh ) is given by (4.12), X ^ is given by (4.2), and q   ^ is given by (4.22). Intuitively,
condition (4.23) is an equation that requires an individual ...rm to ...nd it optimal to scrap
its variety when its relative breadth reaches x       ^h , given that the distribution of relative
breadths is log-uniform over the interval [^        ^h ] and the normalized value of a ...rm with
                                               x` ; x
a newly designed variety is v (^ x` ) .
   The ...rm'
            s value from selling a variety with relative breadth x
                                                                 ^` is
               Z       xh =x
                   log(^   ^` )=g                                                g   h                      i
   v (^
      x` ) =                        e   (   g )
                                                     x` eg ) d + (^
                                                  r (^                ^` )
                                                                  xh =x      g
                                                                                      v (^
                                                                                         x` )   q
                                                                                                ^c x   ^
                                                                                                   ^` =X        ,
               0
                                                                                            (4.24)
                                       ^
  x` exp(g )) is given by (4.12), X is given by (4.2), and q
r(^                                                                 ^ is given by (4.22). The
expression above is derived from (4.15). I ...rst use the fact that the ...rm ...nds it optimal
to scrap a variety with relative breadth x  ^` after log(^   ^` )=g units of time. I then use
                                                         xh =x
the fact that the ...rm ...nds it optimal to design a new variety with relative breadth x       ^` .
The expression in (4.24) is an equation that requires v (^  x` ) to be equal to the normalized
present value of pro...ts enjoyed by a ...rm following the optimal product design strategy,
given that the relative breadth distribution is log-uniform over the interval [^       ^h ].
                                                                                  x` ; x
   I am now in the position to state the su¢ cient conditions for the existence of a BGP.

Theorem 3. (Su¢ cient conditions for a BGP) A BGP exists if:
   a. The buyer's utility function u(x) has the form u0 =x for some u0 > 0;                          > 1;
   b. The ...rm's cost function Ct (x=Xt ) has the form qt c(x=Xt ), where the input price qt
      grows at the rate gq = g and the quantity of input c(x=Xt ) is strictly decreasing
      in x and such that v (^x) qc(^   ^ ) is quasi-concave;
                                     x=X
   c. The discount rate             is greater than g ;
   d. The system of equations (4.21), (4.23)-(4.24) admits a solution with respect to ,
      ^h and v (^
      x         x` ).

    The su¢ cient conditions for the existence of a BGP are more stringent than the
necessary conditions. The elasticity of the buyer'     s utility u function is required to be
greater than 1 so as to guarantee that the necessary condition for the optimal choice of the
relative breadth of a scrapped variety is also su¢ cient. The ...rm' s design cost function c
is required to be such that the product design problem is quasi-concave to guarantee that
the necessary condition for the optimal choice of the relative breadth of a new variety is
also su¢ cient. The discount rate is required to be greater than g to guarantee that
the ...rm'
         s value function is well-de...ned. The system of equations (4.21), (4.23) and (4.24)
are required to have a solution only because I was unable to prove analytically that there
always is one. The di¢ culty in solving the system of equations is that the ...rm'  s optimal

                                                           26
choices for x
            ^` and x^h depend in a complicated way on the boundaries of the breadth
distribution x
             ^` and x
                    ^h and, hence, proving that the optimal choices can be lined up with
the boudaries is di¢ cult. In all my numerical examples, though, I did ...nd a solution.
     Let me provide some intuition for the existence of a BGP. As search frictions decline,
...rms meet more and more buyers per unit of time and, for this reason, they choose to
design varieties of the product that are increasingly specialized. When the buyer'      s utility
function is isoelastic with respect to the speci...city of a variety, the ...rm'
                                                                               s design cost is a
function of the speci...city of a variety relative to the market average, and the cost grows
over time at the rate g , then ...rms ...nd it optimal to increase the speci...city of their
varieties at exactly the same rate at which search frictions decline. When the increase
in the speci...city of product varieties exactly o¤sets the decline in search frictions, the
probability that a buyer meets n ...rms selling a variety that he likes remains constant
and, hence, the extent of competition among ...rms remains constant. For this reason, the
price distribution, the buyer'  s surplus and the ...rm's value all grow along a balanced path
at a common, constant rate.


5     Aggregate and Industry Dynamics
In this section, I describe some of the key properties of a BGP. In section 5.1, I describe
the aggreate dynamics of the market along a BGP. In section 5.2, I describe the dynamics
of individual ...rms along a BGP. At the aggregate level, the main ...ndings are that, while
declining search frictions do not generate any decline in price dispersion or any increase in
volume, they do contribute to economic growth. At the industry level, the main ...nding
is that every individual ...rm goes through the same cycle, which starts with the ...rm at
the top of the market and ends with the ...rm at the bottom.


5.1    Aggregate dynamics
The initial distribution of ...rms across the breadth of their varieties is log-uniform over the
interval [x`;0 ; xh;0 ], where x`;0 is given by (log x
                                                     ^h log x
                                                            ^` )/ 0 (^
                                                                     xh x   ^` ) and xh;0 is given
by x^h x`;0 . Firms scrap the variety of the product that they are selling when its breadth
is reached by the cuto¤ xh;t , where xh;t declines at the rate g . Firms design new varieties
of the product with a breadth of x`;t , where x`;t declines at the rate g . As a result, the
breadth distribution falls over time at the constant rate g . That is, the products sold on
the market become more and more specialized, and they do so at a rate that is exactly
equal to the rate at which search frictions decline.
    At date t, a ...rm selling a variety with breadth x ^ x`;t o¤ers to its customers a surplus
of st (^
       x x`;t ) equal to s x)x`;0 exp( g t), where s
                         ^(^                          x) is given by (4.10). The function s
                                                    ^(^                                    ^(^
                                                                                             x)
is strictly decreasing in x  ^ and such that s  xh ) = 0. Since a ...rm selling a variety with
                                              ^(^
breadth x ^ x`;t is at a constant quantile of the breadth distribution and since the surplus


                                               27
    x x`;t ) o¤ered by such a ...rm grows at the rate g , the surplus distribution Ft grows
st (^
at the rate g .
    At date t, a ...rm selling a variety with breadth x
                                                      ^ x`;t charges to its customers a price
of pt (^
       x x`;t ) equal to p x)x`;0 exp( g t), where
                         ^(^

                                       p
                                       ^(^        ^
                                         x) = u 0 x       s x).
                                                          ^(^                                    (5.1)

It is easy to verify that the function p     x) is such that p
                                           ^(^                ^0 (^
                                                                  x) = 0 implies p  ^00 (^
                                                                                         x) > 0. There-
fore, p  x) may be strictly decreasing in x
       ^(^                                     ^, strictly increasing in x ^, or strictly decreasing
over some interval [^      ^c ] and strictly increasing over the interval [^
                      x` ; x                                                      ^h ]. Irrespective of
                                                                             xc ; x
the shape of p   x), the price distribution Gt grows at the constant rate g , since a ...rm
               ^(^
selling a variety with breadth x    ^ x`;t is at a constant quantile of the breadth distribution
and the price charged by such a ...rm grows at the constant rate g . Also irrespective of
the shape of p   x), the price distribution Gt is non-degenerate because p
               ^(^                                                                   ^0 (^
                                                                                         x) = 0 implies
  00
p
^ (^ x) > 0.
   At date t, a ...rm selling a variety with breadth x
                                                     ^ x`;t trades with b(^
                                                                          x) buyers, where

                                            x
                                            ^            x^    x
                                                               ^`
                                 b(^
                                   x) = b     exp                  .                             (5.2)
                                            ^
                                            X            x
                                                         ^h    x^`

It is easy to verify that the function b(^ x) is such that b0 (^
                                                               x) = 0 implies b00 (^
                                                                                   x) < 0: Therefore,
n(^x) may be strictly decreasing in x     ^, strictly increasing in x^, or strictly increasing over
some interval [^      ^c ] and strictly decreasing over the interval [^
                 x` ; x                                                      ^h ]. Irrespective of the
                                                                        xc ; x
shape of n(^  x), the distribution of sales across ...rms remains constant over time, as the
relative breadth distribution is constant over time.
    Three aggregate properties of the BGP are worth highlighting. First, note that price
dispersion remains constant in the face of declining search frictions. The price distribution
Gt (p) is non-degenerate and grows at the constant rate g . Hence, the distribution
of normalized prices-- i.e. prices divided by the average price-- is non-degenerate and
remains constant over time. In this sense, the extent of price dispersion remains unchanged
even though search frictions become smaller and smaller. Intuitively, the extent of price
dispersion remains constant because the exogenous decline in search frictions, which tends
to increase in the extent of competition between ...rms, is undone by the endogenous
increase in the speci...city of the varieties of the product sold by ...rms.
    Second, note that trade volume remains constant in the market, despite declining
search frictions. Indeed, since a ...rm sells a quantity of output that only depends on the
relative breadth of its variety and the relative breadth distribution is constant, it follows
that trade volume remains constant over time. There is a simple intuition for this ...nding.
On the one hand, the exogenous decline in search frictions increase the probability that
a buyer locates a ...rm and the number of ...rms that he locates. On the other hand, the
endogenous increase in the speci...city of the varieties on the market lowers the probability
that a ...rm has a variety of the product that the buyer likes to consume. In a BGP, these

                                                  28
two opposing forces exactly o¤set each other.
    Third, note that, while declining search frictions do not enhance competition nor in-
crease volume, they do lead to economic growth. Indeed, the aggregate surplus captured
by buyers as well as the aggregate pro...ts enjoyed by ...rms grow over time at the rate g ,
i.e. the rate g at which search frictions decline multiplied by the elasticity of the buy-
ers'utility function with respect to the speci...city of the variety consumed. The economic
growth generated by declining search frictions is related to Smithian growth. The view of
Adam Smith is that the geographical extent of the market determines how much produc-
tion can be specialized to exploit technological di¤erences, input availability, or increasing
returns to scale etc. . . As a result, as the size of the market increases, specialization in-
creases and so does productivity. Here, declining search frictions cause a deepening of the
market and, in response to such deepening, ...rms can design more specialized products.
Specialization, in turn, leads to growth by exploting the heterogeneity in the preferences
of di¤erent buyers. The key di¤erence between Smithian growth and the type of market
deepening growth illustrated in this paper is that the former is bounded by geography
and population (a market can only expand so much), while the latter is not bounded by
geography and population (a market can always grow deeper).
    Lastly, it is useful to discuss the notion of price dispersion in the model. In the model,
price dispersion is de...ned at the level of a good, where the notion of a "good"is de...ned
by the collection of all the products sold in the market where buyers search. Given this
notion of a good, the model generates price dispersion that remains constant over time.
Yet, the varieties of sold by di¤erent ...rms are not identical, as they di¤er with respect
to their degree of specialization. Therefore, a sensibly narrower de...nition of a good is
the collection of all the varieties with a breadth in some interval [x=(1 + ); x(1 + )] for
some > 0. Also for this narrower de...nition of what a good is, the model still generates
price dispersion that remains constant over time. It is only when a good is de...ned in its
narrowest sense-- i.e. varieties with the same speci...city that appeal to the same subset of
buyers-- that the model generates no price dispersion. However, this is an artifact of the
assumption that there is a continuous distribution of breadths. Indeed, if breadths were
a discrete set, the model would generate price dispersion even among identical varieties.
   I summarize the aggregate properties of a BGP in the theorem below.

Theorem 4. (Aggregate dynamics in a BGP). In any BGP:
  a. The breadth distribution Ht declines at the constant rate gx = g , and is log-
     uniform over the interval [x`;t ; xh;t ], with x`;t = x`;0 exp(gx t), xh;t = xh;0 exp(gx t),
      = 0 (log x
               ^h log x ^` )=(^
                              xh x ^` ) and xh;0 = x  ^h x`;0 .
  b. The surplus function is st (^
                                 x x`;t ) = s x)x`;0 exp( g t), with s
                                            ^(^                        x) given by (4.10).
                                                                     ^(^
     The surplus distribution Ft grows at the constant rate gs = g .
  c. The price function is pt (^
                               x x`;t ) = p x)x`;0 exp( g t), with p
                                          ^(^                        x) given by (5.1). The
                                                                   ^(^
     price distribution Gt is non-degenerate and grows at the constant rate gp = g .


                                              29
      The distribution of normalized prices, p=Et [p], is non-degenerate and constant over
      time.
  d. Aggregate buyers'surplus and ...rms'pro...ts grow at the constant rate g .




5.2    Industry dynamics
As the market aggregates grow at a constant rate, individual ...rms repeatedly go through
cycles of length T = log(^    ^` )=g . The nature of the cycle is identical at every repetition
                          xh =x
and for every ...rm, but the timing of the cycles is di¤erent for di¤erent ...rms.
    A cycle begins when the ...rm designs and starts selling a new variety of the product.
At this moment in time, the variety of the ...rm is the most specialized in the market, since
it has a relative breadth of x ^` which is the lower bound on the support of the relative
breadth distribution H^ . The surplus o¤ered by the ...rm to its customers is the highest
among all of its competitors, as the relative surplus s   x) is a strictly decreasing function
                                                        ^(^
of x
   ^. The ...rm's  ow pro...t and the ...rm's value are also the highest among all the ...rm' s
competitors, as the normalized pro...t r(^ x) and the normalized value v (^x) are both strictly
decreasing functions of x^. Hence, at the beginning of its cycle, the ...rm is the best in
the market. The ...rm has the most specialized variety, it o¤ers the highest surplus to its
customers, it makes the highest pro...ts, and it has the highest value.
    Over the course of the cycle, the ...rm loses ground relative to the competition. The
relative breadth of the ...rm' s variety increases over the cycle, as more and more competi-
tors redesign their product and leapfrog the ...rm. Speci...cally, after units of time since
the beginning of the cycle, the ...rm'                      ^ (^
                                        s variety is at the H  x` exp(g )) = =T quantile of
the relative breadth distribution. Over the cycle, the surplus o¤ered by the ...rm decreases
relative to the one o¤ered by the competitors, as the ...rms who redesign their product
o¤er higher surplus to their customers. Speci...cally, after units of time since the begin-
ning of the cycle, the ...rm is at the 1 H  ^ (^x` exp(g )) = T =      1 quantile of the surplus
distribution. Over the cycle, the      ow pro...t and the value of ...rm decline relative to the
competition. Speci...cally, after units of time since the beginning of the cycle, the ...rm
is at the T =    1 quantile of both the pro...t and value distributions.
    After T units of time since the beginning of the cycle, the ...rm is the worst in the
market. The ...rm produces the least specialized variety, since the variety has now a
relative breadth of x  ^h , which is the upper bound on the support of the relative breadth
distribution H  ^ . The ...rm o¤ers to its customers a relative surplus of s    xh ) = 0, which
                                                                              ^(^
is the lowest surplus among all its competitors .The ...rm'      s pro...t and the ...rm'
                                                                                        s value
are both the lowest among all the ...rm'    s competitors. It is at this moment in time that
the ...rm ...nds it optimal to scrap its variety, pay the lumpy cost, and design a new, more
specialized variety of the product. The ...rm'  s cycle comes to an end and a new one begins.
   I summarize the aggregate properties of a BGP in the theorem below.

                                              30
Theorem 5. (Industry dynamics in a BGP) In a BGP, every ...rm goes through the same
cycle of length T = log(^   ^` )=g .
                        xh =x
    a. The cycle begins with the ...rm designing a new variety with breadth x`;t ;
    b. Over the cycle, the ...rm rises linearly from the bottom to the top of the breadth
       distribution, and the ...rm falls linearly from the top to the bottom of the surplus
       distribution, pro...t distribution and value distribution;
    c. The cycle ends with the ...rm scrapping its variety and paying the redesign cost.



6      Conclusions
The central observation in this paper is that, as search frictions decline in the market for
some consumer product, ...rms have an incentive to design more specialized varieties of
the product because they are more likely to ...nd buyers in their niche. While the decline
in search frictions tends to increase the extent of competition in the market, by allowing
buyers to locate and access more ...rms per unit of time, the increase in specialization tends
to lower the extent of competition, by lowering the probability that the ...rm contacted by
the buyer has a variety of the product that the buyer likes. These two countervailing e¤ect
exactly o¤set each other under relatively mild conditions on the buyer'       s utility function
over varieties that are more or less specialized, and the ...rm'  s cost function for designing
new varieties. When the two countervailing e¤ects exactly o¤set each other, the extent of
competition in the market remains constant. As a result, price dispersion and markups
remain constant. The buyer'    s surplus and the ...rm's pro...ts however grow over time at a
constant rate as the increase in specialization allows ...rms to cater better and better to
the heterogeneous desires of di¤erent buyers.




                                              31
References
 [1] Anderson, C. 2008. The Long Tail. Hyperion, New York.

 [2] Baye, M. and J. Morgan. 2001. "Information Gatekeepers on the Internet and the
     Competitiveness of Homogeneous Product Markets." American Economic Review,
     91: 454-474.

 [3] Baye, M, and J. Morgan. 2004. "Price Dispersion in the Lab and on the Internet:
     Theory and Evidence." RAND Journal of Economics, 35: 449-466.

 [4] Baye, M., J., Morgan, and P. Scholten. 2006. "Information, Search, and Price Dis-
     persion." Handbook of Economics and Information Systems. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

 [5] Bénabou R. 1988. "Search, Price Setting and Ination."Review of Economic Studies,
     55: 353-376.

 [6] Bénabou R. 1992. "In  ation and E¢ ciency in Search Markets." Review of Economic
     Studies, 59: 299-329.

 [7] Bontemps, C., J. Robin and G. Van den Berg. 2000. "Equilibrium Search with Con-
     tinuous Productivity Dispersion: Theory and Non-Parametric Estimation." Interna-
     tional Economic Review, 41: 305-358.

 [8] Burdett, K., and K. Judd. 1983. "Equilibrium Price Dispersion." Econometrica, 51:
     955-970.

 [9] Burdett, K, and G. Menzio. 2017. "The (Q,S,s) Pricing Rule: A Quantitative Analy-
     sis." Research in Economics, 71: 784-797.

[10] Burdett, K, and G. Menzio. 2017. "The (Q,S,s) Pricing Rule: A Quantitative Analy-
     sis." Research in Economics, 71: 784-797.

[11] Burdett, K, and G. Menzio. 2018. "The (Q,S,s) Pricing Rule." Review of Economic
     Studies, 85: 892-928.

[12] Burdett, K., and D. Mortensen. 1998. "Wage Di¤erentials, Employer Size and Un-
     employment." International Economic Review, 39: 257-293.

[13] Butters, G. 1977. "Equilibrium Distributions of Sales and Advertising Prices."Review
     of Economic Studies, 44: 465-491.

[14] Caplin, A., and J. Leahy. 1997. "Aggregation and Optimization with State-Dependent
     Pricing." Econometrica, 65: 601-625.

[15] Caplin, A., and D. Spulber. 1986. "Menu Costs and the Neutrality of Money." Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics, 102: 703-725.

                                           32
[16] Diamond, P. 1982. "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium."Journal
     of Political Economy, 90: 881-894.

[17] Diamond, P. 1993. "Search, Sticky Prices, and Ination." Review of Economic Stud-
     ies, 60: 53-68.

[18] Ellison, G., and S. Ellison. 2014. "Match Quality, Search, and the Internet Market
     for Used Books."Manuscript, MIT.

[19] Ellison, G., and A. Wolitzky. 2012. "A Search Cost Model of Obfuscation." RAND
     Journal of Economics, 43: 417-441.

[20] Galenianos, M., R. Pacula, and N. Persico. 2012. "A Search-Theoretic Model of the
     Retail Market for Illicit Drugs." Review of Economic Studies, 79: 1239­1269.

[21] Guthmann, R. 2020. "Price Dispersion in Dynamic Competition."Manuscript, PUC-
     Rio.

[22] Kaplan, G., and G. Menzio. 2015. "The Morphology of Price Dispersion." Interna-
     tional Economic Review, 56: 1165-1206.

[23] Kaplan, G., and G. Menzio. 2016. "Shopping Externalities and Self-Ful...lling Unem-
     plyoment Fluctuations." Journal of Political Economy, 124: 771-825.

[24] Kaplan, G., G. Menzio, L. Rudanko, and N. Trachter. 2019. "Relative Price Disper-
     sion: Evidence and Theory." AEJ: Microeconomics, 11: 68-124.

[25] Kelly, M. 1997. "The Dynamics of Smithian Growth." Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics, 112: 939-964.

[26] King, R., C. Plosser, and S. Rebelo. 1988. "Production, Growth and Business Cycles
     I. The Basic Neoclassical Model." Journal of Monetary Economics, 21: 195-232.

[27] Kiyotaki, N., and R. Wright. 1993. "A Search-Theoretic Approach to Monetary Eco-
     nomics." American Economic Rewiew, 83: 63-77.

[28] Lach, S. 2002. "The Existence and Persistence of Price Dispersion: An Empirical
     Analysis."NBER Working Paper 8737.

[29] Lester, B., L. Visschers and R. Woltho¤. 2015. "Meeting technologies and optimal
     trading mechanisms in competitive search markets." Journal of Economic Theory,
     155: 1-15.

[30] Locay, L. 1990. "Economic Development and the Division of Production between
     Households and Markets." Journal of Political Economy, 98: 965-982.

[31] Lucas, R., and B. Moll. 2014. "Knowledge Growth and the Allocation of Time."
     Journal of Political Economy, 122: 1-51.

                                          33
[32] Martellini, P., and G. Menzio. 2020. "Declining Search Frictions, Unemployment,
     and Growth." Journal of Political Economy, 128: 4387-4437.

[33] Martellini, P., and G. Menzio. 2021. "Jacks of All Trades and Masters of One: Declin-
     ing Search Frictions and Unequal Growth." American Economic Review: Insights.
     Forthcoming.

[34] Menzio, G., and N. Trachter. 2015. "Equilibrium Price Dispersion with Sequential
     Search." Journal of Economic Theory, 160: 188-215.

[35] Menzio, G., and N. Trachter. 2018. "Equilibrium Price Dispersion Across and Within
     Stores." Review of Economic Dynamics, 28: 205-220.

[36] Mortensen, D. and C. Pissarides. 1994. "Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
     Theory of Unemployment." Review of Economic Studies, 61: 397-415.

[37] Perla, J. 2019. "A Model of Product Awareness and Industry Life Cycles." Manu-
     script, UBC.

[38] Perla, J., and C. Tonetti. 2014. "Equilibrium Imitation and Growth." Journal of
     Political Economy, 122: 52-76.

[39] Pratt, J., D. Wise, and R. Zeckhauser. 1979. "Price Di¤erences in Almost Competi-
     tive Markets." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93: 189­ 211.

[40] Romer, P. 1990. "Endogenous Technological Change." Journal of Political Economy,
     98: S71-S102.

[41] Sheshinski, E., and Y. Weiss. 1977. "Ination and Costs of Price Adjustment."Review
     of Economic Studies, 44: 287-303.

[42] Sorensen, A. 2000. "Equilibrium Price Dispersion in Retail Markets for Prescription
     Drugs." Journal of Political Economy, 108: 833-850.

[43] Stigler, G. 1961. "The Economics of Information." Journal of Political Economy, 69:
     213-225.

[44] Varian, H. 1980. "A Model of Sales." American Economic Review, 70: 651-659.




                                           34
