                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          CHANGING RETURNS TO SCALE IN MANUFACTURING 1880-1930:
                      THE RISE OF (SKILLED) LABOR?

                                       Jeanne Lafortune
                                        Ethan G. Lewis
                                      José Pablo Martínez
                                         José Tessada

                                      Working Paper 28633
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28633


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We thank Javiera Garcia and Katia Everke for excellent research assistance. Lafortune and
Tessada thank Fondecyt Regular 1181812 for generous funding. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jeanne Lafortune, Ethan G. Lewis, José Pablo Martínez, and José Tessada. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Changing Returns to Scale in Manufacturing 1880-1930: The Rise of (Skilled) Labor?
Jeanne Lafortune, Ethan G. Lewis, José Pablo Martínez, and José Tessada
NBER Working Paper No. 28633
April 2021
JEL No. J23,N61,N62,R12

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper estimates returns to scale for manufacturing industries around the turn of the twentieth
century in the United States by exploiting an industry-city panel data for the years 1880-1930.
We estimate decreasing returns to scale on average over the period, contrary to most of the
existing literature, because our empirical methodology allows us to separate returns to scale from
"agglomeration" effects. We also find that returns to scale grew substantially after 1910, mostly
because the return to labor grew. We find that this was more marked in industries that were more
intensive in human capital and energy at the beginning of the period and in cells that were less
competitive. Overall, results suggest that technological change and lack of initial competition
played relevant roles in the rise of larger establishments in manufacturing.


Jeanne Lafortune                                 José Pablo Martínez
Instituto de Economia                            Fiscalia Nacional Económica
Facultad de Ciencias Economicas                  Huérfanos 670, Piso 8
y Administrativas                                Santiago, Region Metropolitana
Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile         Chile
Avda Vicuna Mackenna 4860                        jbmartinez@uc.cl
Macul, Santiago
Chile                                            José Tessada
and IZA                                          Escuela de Administracion
jlafortune@uc.cl                                 Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile
                                                 Avda Vicuna Mackenna 4860
Ethan G. Lewis                                   Macul, Santiago
Department of Economics                          Chile
Dartmouth College                                jtessada@gmail.com
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
ethan.g.lewis@dartmouth.edu
1    Introduction

The late nineteenth century was a time of rapid change in the U.S. economy, with big firms becoming
dominant in several sectors for the first time (Lamoreaux, 2019). Nutter and Einhorn (1969)
estimates that between 1895 and 1904, 32% of profits came from manufacturing industries where the
four biggest companies captured 50% of sales. The 1900 Census of Manufactures describes a trend
in some industries towards concentration in larger-sized establishments. Not only do companies
of larger sizes appear in this period, but the Census notes that the production and accumulation
of inputs are strongly concentrated in the most important cities such as Boston, Chicago, and
New York. Historians' widespread view is that this change had its origins in technological changes
that increased capital intensity and the returns to being large (Chandler Jr, 1977). However,
distinguishing this from broader ­ and potentially growing ­ agglomeration forces is challenging
and has not previously been attempted.
This paper estimates the returns to scale in manufacturing industries in the United States over
the five decades between 1880 and 1930. Using rich data that has recently become available, we
estimate at the city-industry level, instead of at the more aggregated industry- or state-industry
level of previous papers. The data come from Censuses of Manufacturers tabulations at 10-year
intervals, recently digitized and harmonized by industry and geography by Lafortune et al. (2019).
For each city-industry-time cell, we observe gross product, cost of materials, capital, and labor. We
estimate a translog production function where capital and labor are the only inputs, and control for
unobserved characteristics at the city, industry, and year level with fixed effects. We then compute
the distribution of returns to scale with the parameters of the production function we estimate.
We ask three questions. First, what is the level of returns to scale? Is it increasing, as some
previous research has found, or decreasing? Second, in light of the major technological and other
forces reshaping the U.S. economy at this time ­ including better communication and transportation
technology, increasing capital-skill complementarity, growing market concentration, and changing
sources of power (see below) ­ how did returns to scale evolve over time? Third, which forces
account for any changes we observe?
The first question is partly motivated by stylized facts indicating manufacturing was concentrated,
and the second by its growth over time. Figures 1 and A.2 show how manufacturing labor and
capital changed over time by percentile. A visible element in these figures is that the average
level of labor and capital is higher than the 75 percentile of their respective distributions. This
result indicates that there are a few industries or areas where firms are substantially larger. We
also see from the figures that capital and labor concentration increased over this period, as the
increase in both inputs was generally faster in higher percentiles. However, neither the cross-
sectional concentration nor its changes alone imply increasing or growing returns to scale. These


                                                 2
establishments might locate in cities sharing characteristics that could account for either result. As
mentioned, our strategy allows us to separate the benefits from being big to those of being in a
location where most other establishments are also big (agglomeration effects).

               Figure 1: Average workers per establishment by city-industry, 1880-1930

                          50
                          40
                          30
                          20
                          10
                          0




                            1880         1890         1900           1910            1920     1930
                                                              year

                                                25th percentile             50th percentile
                                                75th percentile             Mean




On the first question, we find that returns to scale were centered around 0.92 at the industry-
city level, well below the threshold for constant returns to scale. This contrasts with increasing
returns previously found in James (1983) and Cain and Paterson (1986).1 We show that failing to
include city fixed effects, which previous research lacked the data to do, biases upward estimates
of the returns to scale: it falsely attributes larger agglomeration effects to scale economies.2 Other
differences between our analysis and this previous work cannot account for their higher estimates.
Put differently, previous analyses missed the fact that there are strong advantages of being located
in a large city, and big firms disproportionately locate in them. On top of this, we go further than
the previous literature and attempt to correct for aggregation bias, that is, the bias from estimating
in cell- rather than establishment-level data. Basu and Fernald (1997) argued estimates of scale
economies in aggregate data might be biased upward. To address this, we re-estimate the production
functions normalized by the number of plants, thus obtaining an alternative estimate at the level
of the "average plant." When we do this ­ in contrast with Basu and Fernald (1997)'s conjecture
­ we obtain larger estimates, with a median of 0.99. So returns to scale are still mostly below one
even after correcting for this. These returns are larger in smaller cities, human capital intensive
   1
     Our estimates are, however, more aligned with Atack (1977) who found constant returns to scale in the 1850-60
period, and Margo (2015) who found few cases of increasing returns in the 1850-80 period. We also did not find
increasing returns in earlier years but ultimately exclude pre-1890 data from our analysis due to the differences in
the geographic unit presented in the census tabulations.
   2
     In contrast, Margo (2015) finds that changes in urbanicity account for little of the increase in the average size of
manufacturing plants in the nineteenth century.



                                                             3
industries, and more competitive cells. This last result reinforces that the larger establishments in
the nineteenth century did not arise out of a "natural" advantage of being large.
Our second question asks whether there is any evidence that the returns to scale grew over this
period. In this question, we are the first of existing studies to be able to estimate the returns to
scale into the XXth century and compare them to those in the XIXth. Studies by Atack (1977)
relied on micro data that was only digitized until 1880 while those of Atack et al. (2017) use the
"Hands and Machine Labor Study" which was published in 1899. We find that between the periods
1880-1900 and 1910-1930, the median return to scale for an average firm rose from 0.96 to 1.02.
We show that this stems entirely from changes in returns to factors and not to changes in the use
of factors. Broken out by the contribution of individual inputs, we find that this increase is driven
mostly by an increase in the return to labor over this period. The coefficient on log employment
rises by 20 percentage points (though a fall in the quadratic term partially offsets this change).
Finally, what forces are associated with the growth in returns? To answer this question, we conduct
a multivariate analysis of the characteristics related to larger growth in returns. We find that this
growth was particularly large for more skill- and energy-intensive industries and in cells that were
less competitive, as measured by greater initial concentration. This result points to a mix of factors
­ rising capital-skill complementarity, the arrival of new and cheaper sources of energy, and growing
market concentration ­ accounting for the increase. The historical context also suggests a plausible
role for all of these factors.
Our work contributes to a better understanding of the period known as the "Second Industrial
Revolution," which began about 1860 and ended in 1914 with World War I. This period saw the
rise of factories, which had different production processes (Sokoloff, 1984) than the handicraft
production they replaced. In handcraft production, skilled artisans created a good from start to
finish, while in factories, unskilled workers tend to specialize in one stage of production (Atack
et al., 2005). This process led to a standardization of production and facilitated work distribution.
Previous work has found specialization may account for higher productivity at larger plants (Atack
et al., 2017). The rise of factories, along with other technological changes such as new sources of
power, may have allowed production to occur efficiently on a larger scale.3
Production processes in this period show a substantial increase in the use of energy sources. Starting
in 1870, energy use in manufacturing (measured in horsepower) grew by 45% to 1880, by 74% in
the next decade, and by 89% in the following 10 years (Vol. VII, 1900 Census). Different energy
sources generate this growth: the use of steam, which grew by 93% per decade from 1870 to 1900;
the use of gas, first tabulated in 1890, grew 1,509% over the 1890s; and later, electricity production
    3
      But power is only part of the story. Atack et al. (2020) show that power use can only account for a fraction of
the productivity gap between hand and machine production, suggesting that something else, like increased division
of labor per se, accounts for the rest. Our findings are consistent with this interpretation.



                                                         4
emerges, which, while serving a trivial share of power needs in 1890, was a majority of horsepower
used by 1930 (Jovanovic and Rousseau, 2005). In contrast, the share of other energy sources such
as water declined. These new power sources, while much cheaper, may have only been efficient at
larger scales. Large establishments were more likely to use steam, and the impact of that usage on
labor productivity also increased with firm size and over time Atack et al. (2008a). Du Boff (1967)
did argue that purchased electricity enabled smaller scale production, but, in contrast, Fiszbein
et al. (2020) find that access to electricity was associated with increasing concentration in sectors
that were already dominated by large firms. Our results suggest that energy innovations may have
increased the return to being large.
Chandler (1990) argues that the arrival of railroads is also crucial in reducing transport costs
allowing firms to sell to a large market. Fogel (1964) contends that the influence of the railroad
on growth in the United States is relatively small, around 2.7% of GDP. In contrast, the work of
Atack et al. (2008b) suggests that the arrival of the railroad did have a positive effect on firms since
it facilitated their growth. The more recent work of Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016) demonstrates
large gains from market access due to the expansion of the railroad network. Their result is
relevant because this could have generated benefits from being in well-connected locations that
would account for the agglomeration benefits that we capture with our fixed effects.
At the same time, the United States was going through a very intensive urbanization process.
While a quarter of the US population lived in urban areas in 1880, that number rose to almost 60
percent by 1930. These growing cities were also, in many cases, new hubs of manufacturing activity.
The geographical concentration of manufacturing production is visible if we observe that few states
(the top five being New York, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Massachusetts, and Ohio) concentrate a large
fraction of total production. Furthermore, Kim (1995) shows that between 1860 and the beginning
of the twentieth-century, regional specialization in production increases and that industries become
more localized once specialized areas emerge in specific industrial sectors. Michaels et al. (2018)
argues that better transportation and communication technology drove this increased specialization
and allowed cities to become more concentrated in interactive tasks, their comparative advantage
(even within manufacturing). Therefore, the increased scale of manufacturing firms coincided
with increased geographical concentration, potentially confounding the role of both factors. Our
approach allows us to separate the role of agglomeration per se from the advantages of being large,
and we find that agglomeration benefits biased earlier estimates of returns to scale. However,
we also find no evidence that the benefits of being a large establishment increased differentially
depending on the city size over this period. Thus, while cities may have been growing, they played
little role in the making of bigger firms, according to our estimates.
This work, in addition to adding to the historical literature on returns to scale, also relates to the
current debate on the falling labor share observed in most world economies in the last 50 years (see


                                                   5
for example Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2018; Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2013). Our results suggest,
in contrast, that the labor share rose around the turn of the twentieth century. This is consistent
with the decrease in inequality visible during the middle of the twentieth century, with evidence from
Sweden (Bengtsson, 2014), and with Atack et al. (2019)'s argument that mechanization increased
the number of jobs for workers.4 This evidence also suggests that new technologies do not necessarily
lead to lower labor shares.
The rest of the work is structured as follows: section 2 describes the theoretical framework and
the methodology used in the estimations, section 3 depicts the data used and their adjustment for
the purpose of the investigation, section 4 shows the results for the full period while the following
estimate the change over time and, finally, section 6 concludes.


2       Methodology

The objective of this paper is to estimate returns to scale for this period. We want to do so
in a way that can reduce the confounding influence of larger firms being differentially located in
high productivity locations. We estimate a production function, an approximation of the relation
between different inputs and the product level, which is represented in its most general form by
the following equation:

                                         ln(Yict ) = ln(Aict ) + ln(F (Zict ))                                       (1)

where Yict is the output level, Aict represents factors that affect the productivity of the industries
that are not related to the level of inputs and F (Zict ) is a function that transforms inputs, repre-
sented by the vector Z of size n, into output. The function F (·) should fulfill standard suppositions:
(a) continuity, (b) strictly increasing and (c) quasi-concavity.5 The goal is to transform equation
(1) in an expression that may be estimated econometrically.
A form widely used in literature is a transcendental logarithm function (translog). Christensen
et al. (1973) proposed this function as it does not impose additivity and homogeneity but satisfies
the other assumptions of production theory. This is a flexible generalization of a Cobb-Douglas
function.6 The incorporation of non-linearities in the relation between inputs and output enables
    4
     As they summarize on page 66, "the share of time taken up by new tasks in machine labor was larger than the
share of time associated with hand tasks that were abandoned--indeed, five times larger. Among other activities,
these new tasks included maintenance of steam engines, a foreman supervising large numbers of workers ... and
workers packaging products for distant markets."
   5
     The reason for these assumptions are as follows: (i) continuity assures that small changes in inputs generate small
changes in output level, (ii) strictly increasing generates that a more intensive use of some of the inputs increases the
output level and (iii) quasi-concavity ensures isoquants curves to be convex.
   6
     It also is a second order approximation of the widely-used constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production
function.


                                                           6
the substitution elasticity not to be non-constant. For J inputs, the function F (·) is represented
in equation (2), where Xj is the input number "j" in the production process (j=1,2,...J) and 
indicates the parameters to be estimated. Sub-indexes i, c and t indicate industry, geographical
area and time, respectively.

                                                         1
                       F (Zict ) =       j ln Xj,ict +                   mk ln Xm,ict ln Xk,ict       (2)
                                                         2       m
                                     j                               k


While a flexible functional form is relevant, our main objective is to try to use our rich data to
distinguish returns to scale from other confounding factors, particularly related to location. In
our specification, these are contained in the Aict term in equation (1). For example, there may be
changes in technology affecting productivity of all cells. There may also be certain fixed unobserv-
able determinants of productivity at geographical level derived from, for example governability and
quality of certain institutions, or geographical comparative advantage related to proximity to en-
ergy sources or natural resources or agglomeration economies. At the industry level, as well, there
may be factors leading to some to be permanently more productive than others. Respectively, these
can be added to the estimation equation as fixed effects for time, area and indsutry. Adding this
to the production function we obtain equation (3) where µt , c , and i are time, area, and industry
fixed effects, respectively, and ict is the error term:

                                            1
         ln(Yict ) =       j ln(Xjict ) +               mn ln(Xmict ) ln(Xnict ) + i + µt + c + ict   (3)
                                            2   m   n
                       j


If product and factor markets are competitive, then through the maximization of profits of the
company, the elasticity of the output with respect to factor j , j is represented by equation (4)
and returns to scale, defined in the traditional way as the relative change in output resulting from
a proportional change in all inputs, is presented in equation (5).

                                         Yict Xjic
                                 j =               =j +                  mj ln(Xmict )                (4)
                                         Xjic Yict                   m

                                 Return to scale =               j                                    (5)
                                                             j


We use value-added (value of products minus the cost of materials) as the dependent variable in
the function production. Although Basu and Fernald (1997) argues that in the presence of growing
returns, estimates using gross output as a dependent variable are more consistent, we focus on
value added for a few reasons. First, what is observed in the data as to materials is the total cost,
which does not permit us to differentiate between input cost changes driven by price or quantity. It
is possible that larger companies, when producing larger quantities, obtain lower prices, which has


                                                          7
an ambiguous effect on the relation between the quantity produced and the total cost. The second
problem arises from duplication: one company's gross output can be used by a second company,
which considers it an input cost. Focusing on value added avoids this duplication. Furthermore, it
is common within this literature to employ value-added instead of value of output. Nevertheless,
we also check the robustness of our results to the use of gross output as the dependent variable.
We estimate the production function with two production factors: Capital (K) and Labor (L). The
level of observation is that of an industry i in a city c in year t. This implies that our estimation
equation will be

              ln(Yict ) =K ln(Kict ) + L ln(Lict ) + 0.5KK ln(Kict )2 + 0.5LL ln(Lict )2                (6)
                         + KL ln(Kict ) ln(Lict ) + i + µt + c + ict


We will allow ict to be correlated within a city across time by clustering by c.7
The data we will use, as detailed in the next section, consist of aggregates at the industry level in
a city in a period of time. This means that the output and inputs of all establishments are added
at the level of estimation in order to then estimate the production function. This will will allow
us to compare our estimates of returns to scale to others that have been performed at aggregate
level (see Cain and Paterson, 1986; James, 1983). However, we also wish to estimate returns at
a level that would be closer to an individual plant (establishment), like Margo (2015). While we
cannot actually obtain data at the level of an individual establishment for this period, we consider
the existence of an "average establishment" and estimating as output and inputs the value for each
"average establishment" in an industry-city-year cell, by dividing the aggregates by the number of
plants in each cell. In that case, we carry out the estimations for the average establishment by
estimating equation (7),

                                                                            2                       2
            Yict             Kict                Lict               Kict                     Lict
       ln          =K ln              + L ln           + 0.5KK ln               + 0.5LL ln              (7)
            nict             nict                nict               nict                     nict
                                    Kict        Lict
                     + KL ln               ln         + i + µt + c + ict
                                    nict        nict

In that equation, nict represents the number of establishments in each industry-city observation
and helps to measure average value added and inputs per plant. At the same level of inputs, the
productivity of an industry may be different if capital and labor are divided between a different
number of companies. If the results of equation (6) are similar to those found when estimating
equation (7), then the number of establishments is irrelevant for the productivity of an industry.
  7
  Combined with the previous equation, we have, therefore, that our estimate of returns to scale is given by
K + L + KK ln(Kict ) + LL ln(Lict ) + KL [ln(Kict ) + ln(Lict )].



                                                      8
In case they are different, this signals to us that productivity is correlated with an industry's
concentration. If the level of return to scale drops when obtaining the results of the average
company then there is a positive correlation between the number of companies and productivity,
while if the level of return to scale goes up the correlation between these variables is negative. The
two equations will also be the same if there are constant returns to scale.
Another question we deal with is whether returns to scale change over time. Access to different
technologies may have affected the level of returns to scale of the industries and capital accumulation
post 1900, if accompanied by an increase in productivity. For this purpose we estimate equation
(7) separating the sample in two different periods. The first considers the years 1880-1900 and the
second considers 1910-1930, when we saw larger firms arising in terms of workers per establishment.
This separation may show a change in the returns to scale, and we will investigate which areas and
industries are the ones that generate this result. In this analysis, we allow the fixed effects to vary
across the two periods.


3    Data

This paper uses panel data for manufacturing industries in different geographical areas for the
United States, coming from 6 waves of different surveys of the Census of Manufactures (CM).
We use tabulated data from CMs in ten-year intervals covering the years 1880-1930. For these
years there is information for industry-city cells on the value of capital employed, separated into
different categories (land, machines, buildings, etc) in later years. We estimate the production
function using the aggregate value of stock of capital as our measure of K , which is feasible in all
years.8 As for labor, the number of workers is reported by categories such as gender and broad
occupation. The measure used for the production function estimation is the sum of workers in all
categories, combining skilled and unskilled jobs together. For all samples, the output level and costs
of materials is available. We compute the value added of manufacturing as the Census computes
it, that is by subtracting the costs of materials from the value of output.
The data correspond to the aggregation of inputs and product of the establishments of an industry
in a city over a period of time. According to the definition of the census, an establishment is the
representation of one or more factories belonging to or controlled by an individual, company or cor-
poration, whether located in the same city, village or county and that belongs to the same industry.
Factories situated in a different city, village or county are considered as separate establishments,
even if they belong to the same controller.
From 1880 to 1930, the CM reports the information at the level of a city and industry. The
   8
     Capital was not tabulated in 1930, so we impute it from horsepower using the relationship between horsepower
and capital in the two previous decades, following Lafortune et al. (2019).


                                                       9
geographic coverage of the CM differs by year. The population threshold above which cities were
included in each year changed over time. In 1890, the 165 largest cities were included. In 1900,
there were 209 cities included and only cities with more than 20,000 inhabitants were detailed in the
reports. In 1910 and 1920, only cities with more than 50,000 inhabitants were included. In 1930,
the process was more complex and involved restricting cities to those that had a significant amount
of manufacturing workers (10,000 was a typical cutoff, but it depended on other factors). Due to
this change of geography, and because, with rare exception, cities are within county boundaries, we
make "county" the unit of analysis, matching each city to the county they corresponded to.9 We
merged counties over time to ensure that borders were very similar between years, as described in
Lafortune et al. (2019).
The map in Figure A.1 shows the counties that enter into our sample (using 1920 county bound-
aries). The areas in our analysis are the largest metropolitan areas of the period (including counties
whose population was 5 to 6 times that of an average US county).
We guarantee consistency of the industries throughout the panel by joining industries that were
merged by the Census in any of the periods of interest. We do this in the same way as in Fiszbein
et al. (2020). Appendix Table B.1 shows the industry groups we formed in this spirit.
For our regressions, we restrict the sample to those areas for which information is available for at
least 3 periods of time. We also exclude industry-year cells where we have information for only one
or two areas. This leaves us with a sample of 182 areas and 138 industries categories. There are a
total of 16,844 industries-area-year observations.
The database in itself is an important part of the contribution that this research provides. The work
described above with respect to the geographical areas and industry categories makes it possible to
have a complete panel with consistent industry and urban area definitions over time. This dataset
allows us to estimate returns at a lower aggregation level than was previously possible in our period
of study, and control for sources of bias fixed at the city level.
It is important to understand how our data differs from those used previously. Our data includes
only large cities. If the returns to scale in large cities differs greatly from that of less urban areas,
we would obtain different results compared to the previous literature. For example, if one sums
up all cities in the state of Massachusetts, the value of inputs and product that is obtained is not
equal to what is reported in the census at state level. This is due to the fact that the census, when
collapsing the data at the state level, includes both large cities in which detailed information is
found (and used in this paper) and other, smaller cities for which no detailed information is shown,
and that, therefore, do not appear in the sample we use. On the other hand, for cities that do
   9
     The only significant exception to this is New York City, which spans multiple counties and whose county compo-
sition changes over time. We therefore construct New York City to cover the five "boroughs" (counties) that make
it up at the end of the period. This aggregates together Brooklyn and New York City, which reported as separate
cities in earlier years.


                                                        10
show detailed information, not necessarily all industries are shown, but only detailed information
of an industry-city if there are at least 3 establishments and if they fulfill a minimum level of sales.
For those industries that do not meet the requirement for the census to show detailed data, the
information is not presented in our sample, but they would be considered at state level if there are
more than 3 establishments within the entire state. The aggregation level may also influence the
results found, as different works document that higher levels of return to scale appear at higher
aggregation levels (Basu and Fernald, 1997). We will thus be careful in our analysis to explore
these sample differences as sources of differences in results.


4    Returns to scale over the full period

With the data presented in Section 3, we can now estimate production functions and returns to
scale as was described in Section 2. Table 1 shows the results of the estimation of the Cobb
Douglas specification for equation (3). It is estimated at the industry-city level with value added
as a dependent variable. The results show that when increasing capital and labor by 1%, output
increases by 0.24 and 0.70% respectively, which says that when augmenting all inputs by 1%, output
increases by 0.94%, implying slightly decreasing returns to scale. In comparison, James (1983) finds
for the flour industry that the levels of return to scale vary between 0.85 and 1.1 over time. On the
other hand, Atack (1977) finds for the different industries that the average company has returns
to scale between 0.7 and 1.5, with the majority of establishments in the ranges of constant returns
to scale. By means of estimation tests, Cain and Paterson (1986) argue the presence of increasing
returns to scale but do not present the level of return to scale of the industries, making it impossible
to compare the magnitude between our estimates and theirs.




                                                  11
                          Table 1: Estimates at the city-industry-year level
                                         Cobb Douglas                      Translog
                                              (1)               (2)           (3)           (4)
            k                              0.242***         -0.500***     -0.269***     -0.276***
                                           ( 0.009)          ( 0.033)      ( 0.032)      ( 0.031)
            l                              0.693***          1.239***      1.067***     1.048***
                                           ( 0.014)          ( 0.028)      ( 0.024)      ( 0.022)
            kk                                               0.106***     0.065***      0.064***
                                                             ( 0.004)      ( 0.004)      ( 0.004)
            ll                                               0.119***     0.093***      0.087***
                                                             ( 0.005)      ( 0.005)      ( 0.004)
            kl                                              -0.099***     -0.064***     -0.062***
                                                             ( 0.003)      ( 0.003)      ( 0.003)
            Median return to scale            0.937            0.923         0.945         0.916
            Fixed effects Industry             No               No            Yes           Yes
            Fixed effects Area                 No               No            No            Yes
            R2                                0.957            0.962         0.971         0.974
            N=16,844. All regressions include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by
            areas. The dependent variable is the log of value added by manufactures in the cell. *
            p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


Columns (2), (3) and (4) show the results of the translog specification. Column (2) considers only
the inclusion of time fixed effects while industry fixed effects are added in Column (3) and area
fixed effects in Column (4). These specifications do not impose homotheticity. We reject that the
coefficients associated with the non-linearities are zero at the 1% level in each of columns (2)-(4)
(not shown in table) and therefore reject homotheticity; the level of returns to scale does depend
on the input level. We will only present the translog specification for the rest of the paper.
Rejecting homotheticity means there is thus no longer one value for the returns to scale but a full
distribution. We thus calculate the level of returns to scale of each observation for the specifications
of Columns (2), (3) and (4) according to equation (5). We find that the large majority of our obser-
vations display decreasing returns to scale, that is the returns summed to less than 1. The medians
for each specification range between 0.92 to 0.95 depending on the introduction of fixed effects.
Figure 2 plots the distributions of returns to scale for Columns (3) and (4), and shows the effect of
incorporating fixed effects at area level in the returns to scale. The difference between the results
with and without fixed effects for areas allow us to measure how much of the measured returns to
scale may be biased because of factors constant within a city that increases firms productivity. We
find that the returns to scale when including area fixed effects are substantially lower than those
excluding them. The median falls from 0.95 to 0.92 once they are included. This suggests that part
of the higher returns to scale observed in cities appear to be linked to agglomeration economies


                                                      12
rather than returns to being big. The fact that industries are larger in larger cities confounds the
analysis. The previous literature also attempted to capture geographical advantages but did not
have the level of geographical details we are able to employ. In Figure 3, we show that introducing
fixed effects for larger geographical units, like regions, would not lead to the same result.10 This
suggests that the productivity benefits appear to be much more local than at the region or state
level. This explains part of the differences with the existing literature that finds higher levels of
return to scale and also indicates that the inclusion of these fixed effects reduces endogeneity in
the estimations of returns to scale that were present in other papers.

                   Figure 2: Effect on returns to scale of adding the city as fixed effect
                             8
                             6
                          Density
                            42
                             0




                                    .8            .9                1                  1.1                  1.2
                                                           Returns to scale

                                         F.E. Year and Industry               F.E Year, Industry and Area




 10
      James (1983) considers 4 geographical regions: Central East, North East, South and East.


                                                              13
                                Figure 3: Comparison geographical fixed effects




                         8
                         6
                      Density
                        42
                         0




                                  .8                .9                   1                 1.1                    1.2
                                                                Returns to scale

                                                           F.E. City               F.E Region




Despite the larger set of controls used than the previous literature, our preferred specification could
still be more exhaustive. We are actually able not only to control for fixed effects by time, industry
and geographical area but also for the double interactions of these since our inputs and outputs
are measured at the cell-level. However, doing so reduces the degrees of freedom of our estimation
without much impact. Returns to scale are practically the same when the interaction among fixed
effects is included in the regression, as shown in figure 4. The medians are almost superimposed.

                                       Figure 4: Interactions between F.E.
                         8
                         6
                      Density
                       4 2
                         0




                                  .8                .9                   1                 1.1                    1.2
                                                                Returns to scale

                                        F.E. Year, Industry and Area           F.E. Industry x Year and Area x Year




                                                                       14
4.1   Differences with literature

In the previous sections the returns to scale estimated are lower than those found in the existing
literature. We find a very small number of cells appear to display increasing returns to scale.
When comparing with James (1983), who uses a methodology similar to the one used in this work,
some differences arise with regard to how estimations are carried out, of which the most important
are the following: (i) the panel incorporates years 1850-1890, (ii) James uses a higher level of
geographical aggregation, using information of inputs and outputs of industries at state level, and
(iii) he considers only the 16 industries with the highest output level.
We have already argued above that the introduction of area-level fixed effects appears to sub-
stantially lower our estimates of returns to scale, suggesting a certain source of endogeneity in
geographical advantages. We now wish to explore whether any of the other differences in our
strategy may also be responsible for the differences in results.
The differences in the years used are exploited in the next section to understand the dynamics of
returns to scale, but it does not seem to be a plausible explanation for the gap. In results not
reported here, we found little evidence that the returns for the 1860-1870 period were closer to
the increasing returns range. We chose to focus on the 1880-1930 period as this allows us to work
with the part of the sample where the information is consistently provided at the level of a city.
In years previous to that, the most fine level of geographical disaggregation provided was at the
county level.
Another factor that might make a difference is the adding of information in a larger geographical
unit. As set out before, literature has documented that higher returns to scale appear at higher
aggregation (Basu and Fernald, 1997). To find out whether this factor explains the lower level of
return to scale, we compare the distributions of returns to scale at industry-city level with industry-
state estimations (computed by aggregating our city-industry data at the state level) in which both
estimations incorporate fixed effects of time, industry and state. The results presented in Figure 5
show that the distribution of returns is quite similar in both estimates, and that results at city level
seem to be slightly higher, rather than lower, than the estimations at state level. This indicates
that the aggregation level is unlikely to be the source of difference between our results and those
from literature.




                                                  15
                                      Figure 5: Impact of aggregation




                            10
                            8
                            6
                      Density
                            4
                            2
                            0




                                 .8       .9                   1                1.1          1.2
                                                        Returns to scale

                                               State-level data            City-level data




Which geographical areas are in the sample may also affect our estimates of returns to scale. The
data presented are at city level and therefore smaller cities, towns and rural areas are excluded;
industries in some cities that do not meet minimum requirements for the census to present the
detailed information will also be excluded. We cannot know exactly what the level of return to
scale is in those places since we have no information, but we can see whether places with a different
magnitude of capital accumulation ­ a measure of size ­ have different levels of return to scale. In
order to check whether this is a likely source of differences in our results, we estimate the production
function for the 50 areas with highest capital level and the rest of the cities including fixed effects
of area, time and industry. We then plot the distribution of returns to scale in Figure 6. This
figure reveals that the larger cities show a higher level of return to scale. Thus, this does not seem
a plausible explanation for our difference with the existing literature since our estimates include
geographical areas with higher returns to scale than those that appear to have been excluded from
our analysis.




                                                           16
                                Figure 6: Returns to scale: size of cities




                         8
                         6
                      Density
                       4 2
                         0




                                .8           .9               1             1.1        1.2
                                                   Returns to scale

                                           50 Biggest            50 Biggest excluded




Finally, the work of James (1983) analyzes only 16 important industries, considering the 10 in-
dustries with highest added value in 1860 together with 6 other industries. Because our analysis
includes all industries, our differences in results could stem from the difference in coverage by in-
dustry if the industries with higher added value selected by James are also those with the highest
levels of return to scale. In order to understand whether this creates differences in the returns to
scale we estimate the production function at the area-industry-time level for all industries and for
the 16 chosen by James (1983). We then plot the returns to scale of both estimations to compare
them. The 16 industries identified by James translate into only 13 of our 122 industry groups. This
is because some of the selected industries are combined in our own data. The estimated returns to
scale, presented in Figure 7, are very similar for both sets of industries, and the medians are very
close to one another. We thus argue that the selection of industries in the previous literature does
not explain the difference in returns to scale.




                                                        17
            Figure 7: Difference in industries included does not explain the difference




                         8
                         6
                      Density
                        42
                         0




                                .8        .9                    1              1.1   1.2
                                                      Returns to scale

                                               Rest               James Industries




We argue that the combination of all these results suggests that the main difference between our
estimates and that of the previous literature stems from the fact that we are able to better capture
agglomeration economies that were previously attributed to returns to scale.


4.2   Estimations for Average Establishment

Having reconciled our results with that of the literature, we now estimate the returns for the
average establishment, by normalizing inputs and outputs by the number of plants. Table 2 shows
the estimates. In the Cobb Douglas specification, in column (1), the capital and labor elasticities
are 0.26 and 0.69 respectively, placing the return to scale at 0.95. This would be similar to the 0.94
found in the Cobb Douglas estimation above, indicating that the returns to scale are slightly less
decreasing at the average establishment than at the industry-area level.




                                                         18
                         Table 2: Estimates at the average establishment level
                                          Cobb-Douglas                        Translog
                                              (1)                  (2)          (3)             (4)
            k                                 0.262***         -0.479***     -0.303***      -0.283***
                                              ( 0.003)          ( 0.023)      ( 0.021)       ( 0.022)
            l                                 0.692***          1.494***      1.338***      1.272***
                                              ( 0.005)          ( 0.025)      ( 0.024)       ( 0.023)
            kk                                                  0.109***     0.068***       0.064***
                                                                ( 0.003)      ( 0.003)       ( 0.003)
            ll                                                  0.043***        0.008        0.023**
                                                                ( 0.010)      ( 0.010)       ( 0.009)
            kl                                                 -0.100***     -0.059***      -0.056***
                                                                ( 0.005)      ( 0.004)       ( 0.004)
            Median return to scale              0.954            0.968          1.002         0.987
            Fixed effects Industry               No               No             Yes           Yes
            Fixed effects Area                   No               No             No            Yes
            R2                                  0.928            0.937          0.952         0.957
            N=16,844. All regressions include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by ar-
            eas. The dependent variable is the log of value added by manufactures per establishment
            in the cell. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


Like in the previous specification, we again reject that the production function is homothetic. We
also see that, once more, the inclusion of area fixed effects reduces the estimates of the returns
to scale. Appendix Table A.1 shows that including fixed effects by city also reduces dramatically
the returns to scale compared to region or state fixed effects. Appendix Figure A.3 displays the
difference graphically. Thus, the importance of controlling for local advantages continues to be
relevant when looking at returns to scale for an average establishment.
We also show that the fixed effects explain a fraction of the variation present in our data. In
Appendix Table A.2, we show city fixed effects on their own explain around 9 percent of the
variation in returns to scale. Industry level fixed effects on their own explain around 29 percent of
the variation in returns to scale. Finally, combining both fixed effects can explain around 36 percent
of the variation in returns to scale. This suggests that while the introduction of these controls is
very important, it does not explain all the variation, leaving a crucial role for the inputs. In column
(4) of the table, we see that the explanatory power of our regressions is around 96 percent once we
add our full sets of input measures.
We also observe slightly larger returns to scale at the level of the average establishment than at
the level of the aggregate. This suggests a negative correlation between the number of plants
and productivity. This also suggests that the increased concentration of production documented
over this period would not have been justified by economies of scale, but rather by an absence

                                                        19
of competition. The lighter bars in Figure 8 present the returns to scale estimates obtained from
Column (4). We find again limited evidence that the returns to scale are generally above 1 over
the period. Most of the returns are concentrated between 0.9 and 1.
Finally, since the rest of our analysis will look at evolution over time, we also show, in this figure, the
returns to scale estimated for cells that are continuously present in our panel data set (darker bars
in Figure 8). We show that the returns to scale estimated in cells that are continuously present
in our panel are even lower than the ones estimated in all cells. Given that the cells that are
continuously present are larger than those who are entering and exiting our panel, this reinforces
our result of decreasing returns to scale.

       Figure 8: Returns to scale for the average establishment, total and cells in balanced panel
                         50
                         40  30
                      Density
                    20   10
                         0




                                  .85      .9              .95               1                1.05
                                                        Returns to scale

                                                Balanced Panel             Industries Total




We also correlate the returns to scale with different city, industry and cell characteristics to establish
what may explain the patterns we have presented so far. Results are available in Table 3 where
we measure characteristics in 1890. The first column suggests, as shown in Figure 6, that large
cities have lower returns to scale. Agglomeration benefits would thus stem from having many firms
together in one geographical location but not of being a larger establishment within these larger
cities. The second column indicates that industries with larger capital stocks and or skill ratios also
have higher returns to scale.11 The opposite is true for those with larger energy demands. Finally,
we use two proxies of market concentration in column (3) which includes whether the cell has above
median average establishment in terms of value-added and employment, respectively. We find that
  11
     Note the finding for capital can also be derived from the coefficients themselves: the effect of a one-unit increase
in ln capital on returns to scale is given by KK + KL > 0; a one-unit increase in the ln capital/labor ratio on returns
to scale is given by KK - LL > 0. Thus, sensibly, capital intensity is associated with higher returns to scale.


                                                           20
in both cases, more concentrated cells have lower returns to scale, indicating that monopolies of the
era were not necessarily big because that made them more productive, but more probably because
of market frictions that allowed them to gain market share. This conclusion is unaffected by adding
simultaneously all correlates in column (4). We observe that the coefficients on the industry-level
correlates shrink in size once combined, and the horsepower coefficient is no longer significant.

                   Table 3: Correlates of returns to scale for average establishment
                                                               (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)
    Above median number of                                   -0.004**                                -0.002
    establishments (areas)                                    (0.001)                               (0.001)
    Above median total capital                              -0.007***                              -0.005***
    stock (areas)                                             (0.001)                               (0.001)
    Above median capital                                                0.010***                   0.005***
    stock (industries)                                                   (0.002)                    (0.001)
    Above median skill ratio                                            0.018***                   0.010***
    (industries)                                                         (0.001)                    (0.001)
    Above median HP                                                      -0.002*                     0.000
    (industries)                                                         (0.001)                    (0.001)
    Above median average                                                             -0.007***     -0.007***
    plant size (by VA)                                                                (0.001)       (0.001)
    Above median average                                                             -0.022***     -0.019***
    plant size (by Employment)                                                        (0.001)       (0.001)
    N=7,607. This table presents the results of a regression of estimated returns to scale from column
    (4) in Table 2 on area level characteristics (column (1)), industry-level characteristics (column (2)),
    cell characteristics (3) and the combination of all in the last column. Standard errors clustered
    by area. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




5    Evolution of returns to scale over time

Having shown that returns to scale appear to have been in general below 1 over the full period,
whether we use the full cell or the average establishment, we now turn to exploring how this return
may have evolved over time. Concerns over "bigness" appear around the turn of the twentieth
century, potentially implying that the returns to scale may have been growing over time. Lafortune
et al. (2019) suggests that the complementarity between capital and skill arose over this period as
well. Finally, Fiszbein et al. (2020) emphasizes how the arrival of electricity substantially increased
labor productivity suggesting another channel through which returns to scale could have changed
over this period. This section will thus first estimate returns to scale by period and then evaluate
critically the role of different explanatory factors.




                                                       21
5.1    Estimation of returns to scale by period

In order to tackle the question about a change in returns to scale around the turn of the century,
we re-estimate equation (7) separately for two different periods, 1880-1900 and 1910-1930. Figure
9 and Table 4 show that returns to scale grew substantially between the two. While returns in the
first period are almost entirely in the range of decreasing returns (below 1), in the second period,
a substantial share of cells display increasing returns to scale with some even rising above 1.1. The
median return increases from 0.96 to 1.02. The results show that the years considered in this work
and in the work of James (1983) does not explain the gap in returns to scale; on the contrary, the
higher returns are in the years after 1890, which James (1983) does not cover.
In the previous section, we argued that the introduction of city-level fixed effect was very important
in explaining our difference with the literature. This is also the case for the change over time. While
not shown, the introduction of fixed effects by cities reduces the returns to scale for the early period
much more significantly than it does for the second, implying that we would have underestimated
the rise in returns to scale had we not properly controlled for agglomeration effects at the city level.
Turning to Table 4, we see that it is the return to labor that increased substantially over this
period. In the early period, the linear component of the return to labor was 1.0055 but increased
to 1.2081 in the later period. While the quadratic component of labor also became more negative,
the overall result is one where each unit of labor produces more output in the later period than
previously.12 Returns to capital fall significantly over this period. The non-linearity in returns is
particularly marked in the second period. Furthermore, the interaction between our two inputs
increases, suggesting increased complementarity between labor and capital in the later period.
This is consistent with Lafortune et al. (2019) who shows that capital became complementary with
skilled labor around the turn of the twentieth century. While one may think that this simply
reflects an increase in workers' skills, we find that percent of manufacturing workers in the Census
of Population that were literate increased only from 93.8 to 94.4 between 1880-1900 and 1910-1930.
Thus, it is not clear that the "skill" of workers over this period changed radically enough to fully
account for the increase.




  12
     This is even more visible if we impose a Cobb-Douglas form, not shown in table, where we estimate the return
to labor rose from around 0.55 to around 0.85.


                                                       22
                                      Figure 9: Returns to scale over time




                          15
                          10
                    Density
                          5
                          0




                               .7          .8        .9              1           1.1      1.2
                                                      Returns to scale

                                                  1880-1900              1910-1930




                                  Table 4: Returns to scale over time (average)
                                                           1880-1900          1910-1930
                                                              (1)                (2)
                              k                               -0.104**        -0.294***
                                                              ( 0.049)         ( 0.034)
                              l                               1.006***        1.208***
                                                              ( 0.067)         ( 0.036)
                              kk                              0.046***        0.045***
                                                              ( 0.008)         ( 0.004)
                              ll                               -0.024         -0.046***
                                                              ( 0.018)         ( 0.013)
                              kl                              -0.027**        -0.017***
                                                              ( 0.011)         ( 0.005)
                              Median return to scale           0.959             1.024
                              R2                                0.952            0.941
                              N                                11,178            5,666
                              All regressions include area, industry and year fixed
                              effects. Standard errors are clustered by areas. The
                              dependent variable is the log of value added by man-
                              ufactures per establishment in the cell. The first col-
                              umn includes only observations between 1880 and 1900
                              while the second, those between 1910 and 1930. *
                              p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



We confirm that the change between periods is due to changes in returns to the factors and not


                                                        23
to change in the distribution of inputs by constructing a counterfactual distribution of returns to
scale, in the spirit of an the Oaxaca decomposition. Specifically, we take the distribution of capital
and labor of cells in 1880-1900 and re-estimate the returns to scale by assuming that the coefficients
of the production function were those of the 1910-1930 period. We present these results in Figure
10. We show that returns to scale in the early period would have been almost as large as those in
the second period had only the coefficients of the production function changed. Little appears to
depend on a changing distribution of inputs at the cell level.13

                                    Figure 10: Counterfactual returns to scale
                          15
                          10
                    Density
                          5
                          0




                               .7        .8               .9              1            1.1       1.2
                                                           Returns to scale

                                              1880-1900                1880-1900 conterfactual
                                              1910-1930




To confirm that this is not due to a change in materials costs, we re-estimated the production
function but adding materials as another inputs in the translog production function. We then
use as our left-hand side variable in our estimation equation the log of value of output instead of
using value added. Figure 11 show that our conclusions are unchanged when using that alternative
specification. Returns are slightly smaller in both periods using this alternative but the increase
between the two periods is still very marked. The median rises from 0.94 to 1.
  13
    As in any Oaxaca decomposition, we could have also computed an alternative counterfactual, this time asking
what would the later period returns would have looked like if the coefficients of the production function had remained
the ones of the early period. We reach a similar conclusion in that case, namely that most of the change occurred
because of a change in the coefficients and not because of a change in the distribution of inputs. Results not presented
but are available upon request.




                                                             24
Figure 11: Returns to scale over time, by whether using value added or including materials as an
input

                                               Value Added



                      20
                      15
                   Density
                     10
                      5
                      0




                             .7    .8          .9                 1        1.1    1.2
                                                 Returns to scale


                                               With Materials
                      20
                      15
                   Density
                     10
                      5
                      0




                             .7    .8          .9                 1        1.1    1.2
                                                 Returns to scale



                                        1880-1900                     1910-1930




5.2   Explanations

Why did returns to scale increase at the turn of the twentieth century? Any explanation one can
provide must also include why the return to labor increased. We focus on a few hypotheses and
look at whether any heterogeneity analysis is consistent with that division.
To do this, we use the same regression strategy as before but expand it to measure the correlates
of the change in returns to scale rather than the levels. For this, we regress the returns to scale for
each cell against a fixed effect for each year, industry and city. We then interact city, industry and
cell characteristics with an indicator for being of the "late" time period. Through that, we wish to
test whether the impact of these characteristics on returns to scale has strengthened or weakened
over time.
Since we previously found that there was a very important role for local synergies, we first explore
whether the increase in returns to scale was more marked in big or small cities. Regression results
in Table 5 do not show any indication that the growth in returns to scale was larger for bigger

                                                    25
            Table 5: Correlates of the change in returns to scale for average establishment
                                                                        (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)
 Above median number of establishments (counties)                     -0.005                                     -0.006*
                                                                     (0.004)                                     (0.003)
 Above median total capital stock (counties)                          0.001                                       -0.000
                                                                     (0.004)                                     (0.003)
 Above median capital stock (industries)                                         -0.010***                      -0.010**
                                                                                   (0.003)                       (0.003)
 Above median skill ratio (industries)                                            0.004**                       0.010***
                                                                                   (0.002)                       (0.002)
 Above median HP (industries)                                                     0.019***                      0.018***
                                                                                   (0.002)                       (0.002)
 Above median average plant size (by VA)                                                          0.003            0.001
                                                                                                 (0.003)         (0.003)
 Above median average plant size (by Employment)                                                0.014***        0.018***
                                                                                                 (0.003)         (0.003)
 N=7,607. This table presents the results of a regression of estimated returns to scale from column (4) in
 Table 4 on an interaction between an indicator for being in 1910-1930 and area level characteristics (column
 (1)), industry-level characteristics (column (2)), cell characteristics (3) and the combination of all in the last
 column. All regressions include area, industry and year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by area.


or smaller cities. Appendix Figure A.4 shows, in the top panel the evolution of returns to scale
for the geographical areas that had above median establishments in 1880. The bottom panel
focuses on geographical areas that had below median number of establishments. It appears returns
were already larger in small cities and increased between the two periods. In larger cities, we
see a significant shift from a setting where most firms have decreasing returns to scale to one
where the majority of cells display increasing returns but the overall change is relatively similar in
magnitude.14 This suggests that the hypothesis of Michaels et al. (2018), who found an increase
in labor specialization which benefited occupations where human interactions are more important,
may have occurred later in the XXth century in manufacturing.15
Our second hypothesis stems from the results of Lafortune et al. (2019) who show that around 1880,
capital increased its complementarity with skills. We cannot consistently estimate the skills of the
work force in our data set and use a translog with that level of detail for labor input. However,
we can estimate our main equation separating industries in those that were initially more skill
intensive in 1880 from those that were less. To do that, we classify wage workers as "low skill"
and clerks as "high skill" and divide the industries by the ratio of these two factors in 1880. We
  14
      While not presented here, we also exclude as a potential explanation for our pattern composition effects from
the arrival or exit of some cities in our panel. The results look very similar if we only focus on the cells continuously
present in our balanced panel.
   15
      Indeed, the differential urban increase in the "interactiveness" of manufacturing jobs from 1880 is only statistically
significant starting in 1940 (see Table 6 in Michaels et al., 2018).


                                                            26
observe, in Table 5 that higher skill ratios industries are correlated with a larger increase in returns
to scale. Appendix Figure A.5 presents the distribution of estimated returns to scale for those with
a high-to-low skill ratio above the median in the first panel and those with such a ratio below the
median in the bottom figure. We observe a stronger movement of the distribution of returns to
scale to the right in the top panel compared to the bottom one. While the median shifts from
0.98 to 1.03 in the top panel, it moves from 0.97 to 1.01 in the bottom one. This would suggest
that returns to scale, and particularly returns to labor, increased more in sectors that were initially
more intensive in human capital. This would be consistent with capital and skill becoming more
complementarity over this period.
On the other hand, industries with higher capital stock were likely to observe a slower than average
growth in their returns to scale. This is consistent with the fact that we observed that it was the
return to labor, more than that of capital, that increased over this period.
Many have emphasized the potential role of technological change over this period. The Second
Industrial Revolution is already well under way by 1910, our inflection point, but some of the most
modern inventions of that revolution, namely electricity and the combustion engine, are making
their massive entry into the manufacturing industries around that time. To explore whether this
could be a reason explaining the increasing returns to scale we estimated, we divide our sample by
the energy-intensity of industries in 1880. Fiszbein et al. (2020) show this variable to be a good
predictor of how electric-intensive a sector is likely to become by 1910-1920. Table 5 indicates
that this also is a very good predictor of sectors whose returns to scale grew more over the period.
Appendix Figure A.6 shows the distribution of returns to scale for industries that had above median
horsepower per output in 1880 in the top panel and those that had below the median horsepower per
output in the bottom panel. This graph suggests similarly that electricity played an important role
in the rising importance of labor and in increasing returns to scale. This is because, for industries
that were high in energy demands before the introduction of electricity, we observe a large increase
in their returns to scale over time. The median increases from 0.97 to 1.02. On the other hand,
industries that had limited energy demands, displayed on the bottom panel, experienced a smaller
increase in their returns to scale. The median goes from 0.97 to 1.01 within this time period. This
suggests that the arrival of electricity to American manufacturing increased the benefits of being
large.
Finally, there is, over this period, a concern about "bigness" being synonymous with non-competitive.
The anti-trust measures in the United States are born over this period because of a clear sense
that some large firms were behaving monopolistically. We unfortunately do not have information
regarding the level of concentration of a given industry-city. However, we propose to use a measure
of size of the average establishment as a proxy for less competitive cells. The idea would be that
in an industry-city where the average establishment is substantially larger than another may have


                                                  27
firms who can exert more market power. We thus measure the size of the average establishment
(in terms of value-added or employment per establishment) in an industry-city cell in 1880 and
classify those above the median size as being "large". Results presented in Table 5 suggests that
cells that had larger firms in terms of employment (but not in terms of value-added), experienced
a more substantial increase in their returns to scale over this period. The distribution of returns is
presented graphically in Appendix Figures A.7 and A.8. In the top panel, we show the distribution
of returns for cells with small average establishments while the bottom panel shows the distribution
for cells with large average plants. Figure A.7 indicates that while cells with larger firms had lower
returns to scale before 1910, these increased substantially after that date, almost equaling those in
cells with smaller establishments. While the median increases from 0.99 to 1.02 in the top panel, it
grows from 0.94 to 1.01 in the bottom one. We show, in Appendix Figure A.8, that the pattern is
a bit weaker but still visible when separating cells by value-added rather than employment. When
combining both definitions in Table 5, we see that only the one based on employment is statistically
significantly linked to an increased in returns to scale. Thus, this would suggest that firms that
had more market power used this to find new advantages of their size in the turn of the twentieth
century.


6    Conclusion

This paper estimates production functions of capital and labor for industries in US cities in the
period 1880-1930 using a translog functional form that includes fixed effects of time, industry
characteristics and geographical location to estimate their level of return to scale. This is made
possible by the digitalization of a rich panel of industry-city data on manufacturing establishments
in the United States.
The results reject an hypothesis of returns to scale above one for a majority of the sample over the
full period, contrary to many previous studies, because of our capacity to capture the important
local synergies visible in the data. These results would indicate that Chandler's (Chandler Jr, 1977)
hypothesis of returns to scale being larger than one in this period is not true, consistent with Margo
(2015)'s argument that there were productive small firms at the end of the nineteenth century. It
seems to be that the organization in an oligopolistic structure, predominant during these years in
the US industry, was not generated by larger returns to being "big" but rather by non-competitive
practices. Instead of finding widespread evidence of "natural monopolies", our results point instead
to "agglomeration benefits" with substantial advantages to all firms located in large cities. Ignoring
those previously led to a over-estimation of returns to scale.
Interestingly, we were able, thanks to our new data to estimate the evolution of returns to scale
until the Great Depression, something that had not been done previously. We estimate that these


                                                 28
returns grew substantially after 1900, particularly because of a large increase in the returns to
labor. This appears to have occurred more importantly in industries that were more skill-intensive
and energy-intensive and in cells that had larger average establishments initially. This suggests
that the increased complementarity between skills and capital and the introduction of electricity
may explain part of the evolution. Bigger establishments appear to have been able to exploit
this increased productivity of workers and their increased complementarity with capital. New
production functions, instead of leveling the playing field, appear to have instead increased the
returns to being big for those who were already there.


References
Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2018): "The Race between Man and Machine: Implications
  of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment," American Economic Review, 108,
  1488­1542.

Atack, J. (1977): "Returns to scale in antebellum United States manufacturing," Explorations in
  Economic History, 14, 337.

Atack, J., F. Bateman, and R. A. Margo (2005): "Capital deepening and the rise of the fac-
  tory: the American experience during the nineteenth century 1," The Economic History Review,
  58, 586­595.

------ (2008a): "Steam power, establishment size, and labor productivity growth in nineteenth
  century American manufacturing," Explorations in Economic History, 45, 185­198.

Atack, J., M. R. Haines, and R. A. Margo (2008b): "Railroads and the Rise of the Factory:
  Evidence for the United States, 1850-70," .

Atack, J., R. A. Margo, and P. Rhode (2020): "`Mechanization Takes Command': Inanimate
  Power and Labor Productivity in Late Nineteenth Century American Manufacturing," Working
  Paper 27436, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Atack, J., R. A. Margo, and P. W. Rhode (2017): "The Division of Labor and Economies
  of Scale in Late Nineteenth Century American Manufacturing: New Evidence," Unpublished
  working paper presented at the National Bureau of Economic Research.

------ (2019): "'Automation' of Manufacturing in the Late Nineteenth Century: The Hand and
  Machine Labor Study," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33, 51­70.

Basu, S. and J. G. Fernald (1997): "Returns to scale in US production: Estimates and impli-
  cations," Journal of political economy, 105, 249­283.

                                                29
Bengtsson, E. (2014): "Labour's share in twentieth-century Sweden: a reinterpretation," Scan-
  dinavian Economic History Review, 62, 290­314.

Cain, L. P. and D. G. Paterson (1986): "Biased technical change, scale, and factor substitution
  in American industry, 1850­1919," The Journal of Economic History, 46, 153­164.

Chandler, A. (1990): Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism, Harvard Univer-
  sity Press.

Chandler Jr, A. D. (1977): "The Visible Hand, Cambridge, Mass. and London, England," .

Christensen, L. R., D. W. Jorgenson, and L. J. Lau (1973): "Transcendental logarithmic
  production frontiers," The review of economics and statistics, 28­45.

Donaldson, D. and R. Hornbeck (2016): " Railroads and American Economic Growth: A
  "Market Access" Approach," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 799­858.

Du Boff, R. B. (1967): "The Introduction of Electric Power in American Manufacturing," The
  Economic History Review, 20, 509­518.

Fiszbein, M., J. Lafortune, E. G. Lewis, and J. Tessada (2020): "New Technologies,
  Productivity, and Jobs: The (Heterogeneous) Effects of Electrification on US Manufacturing,"
  Working Paper 28076, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fogel, R. W. (1964): Railroads and American economic growth, Johns Hopkins Press Baltimore.

James, J. A. (1983): "Structural change in American manufacturing, 1850­1890," The Journal of
  Economic History, 43, 433­459.

Jovanovic, B. and P. L. Rousseau (2005): "General purpose technologies," in Handbook of
  economic growth, Elsevier, vol. 1, 1181­1224.

Karabarbounis, L. and B. Neiman (2013): "The Global Decline of the Labor Share," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 61­103.

Kim, S. (1995): "Expansion of markets and the geographic distribution of economic activities: the
  trends in US regional manufacturing structure, 1860­1987," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  110, 881­908.

Lafortune, J., E. Lewis, and J. Tessada (2019): "People and Machines: A Look at the
  Evolving Relationship between Capital and Skill in Manufacturing, 1860­1930, Using Immigra-
  tion Shocks," Review of Economics and Statistics, 101, 30­43.



                                                  30
Lamoreaux, N. R. (2019): "The Problem of Bigness: From Standard Oil to Google," Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 33, 94­117.

Margo, R. A. (2015): "Economies of Scale in Nineteenth-Century American Manufacturing Re-
  visited: A Resolution of the Entrepreneurial Labor Input Problem," in Enterprising America:
  Businesses, Banks and Credit Markets in Historical Perspective, ed. by W. J. Collins and R. A.
  Margo, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Michaels, G., F. Rauch, and S. J. Redding (2018): "Task Specialization in U.S. Cities from
  1880 to 2000," Journal of the European Economic Association, 17, 754­798.

Nutter, G. W. and H. A. Einhorn (1969): Enterprise monopoly in the United States: 1899-
  1958, Columbia University Press.

Sokoloff, K. L. (1984): "Was the transition from the artisanal shop to the nonmechanized
  factory associated with gains in efficiency?: Evidence from the US Manufacturing censuses of
  1820 and 1850," Explorations in Economic History, 21, 351­382.




                                              31
A   Additional Figures and Tables


             Figure A.1: Counties in our sample using 1920 boundaries




                                       32
Figure A.2: Average capital per firm by city-industry, 1880-1930




    200000
    150000
    100000
    50000
    0




              1880        1890                 1900                1910                   1920                    1930
                                                            year

                                    25th percentile                       50th percentile
                                    75th percentile                       Mean




               Figure A.3: Comparison geographical fixed effects
          15
          10
    Density
          5
          0




                     .8                   .9                           1                                    1.1
                                                    Returns to scale
                                 Industry, Year and Area F.E.              Industry, Year and Region F.E.




                                                         33
          Figure A.4: Returns to scale over time, by size of the geographical areas


                      Areas With Highest Number of Establishments
      15
      10
Density
      5
      0




            .7            .8             .9                 1        1.1              1.2
                                           Returns to scale


                      Areas With Lowest Number of Establishments
      15
      10
Density
      5
      0




            .7            .8             .9                 1        1.1              1.2
                                           Returns to scale



                               1880-1900                        1910-1930




                                              34
                Figure A.5: Returns to scale over time, by initial skill intensity


                                  Highest Skill Ratio Industries
   15 10
Density
   5
   0




           .7               .8             .9                 1          1.1         1.2
                                             Returns to scale


                                   Lowest Skil Ratio Industries
   15 10
Density
   5
   0




           .7               .8             .9                 1          1.1         1.2
                                             Returns to scale



                                 1880-1900                        1910-1930




                                                35
          Figure A.6: Returns to scale over time, by initial horsepower intensity


                                   Highest HP Industries
   20
   15
Density
  10
   5
   0




           .7            .8             .9                 1        1.1             1.2
                                          Returns to scale


                                   Lowest HP Industries
   20
   15
Density
  10
   5
   0




           .7            .8             .9                 1        1.1             1.2
                                          Returns to scale



                              1880-1900                        1910-1930




                                             36
Figure A.7: Returns to scale over time, by size of average establishment in 1880, as measured by
workers per establishment

            20
            15                   Lowest workers per establishment
         Density
           10
            5
            0




                   .7       .8            .9                 1        1.1           1.2
                                            Returns to scale


                                 Highest workers per establishment
            20
            15
         Density
           10
            5
            0




                   .7       .8            .9                 1        1.1           1.2
                                            Returns to scale



                                 1880-1900                       1910-1930




                                               37
Figure A.8: Returns to scale over time, by size of average establishment in 1880, as measured by
value-added per establishment


                                 Low Value - added by establishment
            20
            15
         Density
           10
            5
            0




                   .7       .8             .9                 1       1.1           1.2
                                             Returns to scale


                              High Value - added by establishment
            20
            15
         Density
           10
            5
            0




                   .7       .8             .9                 1       1.1           1.2
                                             Returns to scale



                                 1880-1900                        1910-1930




                                                38
                    Table A.1: Fixed effects by city-state-region (average)
                        City F.E.                 State F.E.                Region F.E
                           (1)                        (2)                       (3)
k                        -0.283***                    -0.298***            -0.298***
                          ( 0.022)                     ( 0.020)             ( 0.021)
l                         1.272***                     1.330***             1.334***
                          ( 0.023)                     ( 0.024)             ( 0.026)
kk                        0.064***                     0.067***             0.068***
                          ( 0.003)                     ( 0.003)             ( 0.003)
ll                        0.023**                        0.010                0.011
                          ( 0.009)                     ( 0.010)             ( 0.011)
kl                       -0.056***                    -0.058***            -0.059***
                          ( 0.004)                     ( 0.004)             ( 0.004)
Median return to scale     0.987                        1.005                1.004
Fixed effects Industry      Yes                          Yes                  Yes
Fixed effects Area          Yes                          Yes                  Yes
R2                         0.957                        0.954                0.953
N=16,844.



                         Table A.2: Explanatory power of fixed effects
                                   Area     Industry    Industry-Area
                                    (1)        (2)           (3)
                            R2     0.0746    0.3466         0.4057
                            N      16,867    16,867         16,867




                                                39
B   Industry classification

                      Table B.1: Industries included in each industry group

                                            Industry 1
Slaughtering and meat packing, not including retail butchering; Slaughtering, wholesale, not in-
cluding meat packing; Sausage; Slaughtering and meat packing, wholesale; Meat packing, whole-
sale; Sausage, meat puddings, headcheese, etc., and sausage casings, not made in meat-packing
establishments; Poultry, killing and dressing, not done in slaughtering and meatpacking estab-
lishments; Slaughtering and meat packing; Sausage casings--not made in meat-packing establish-
ments; Sausages, prepared meats, and other meat products--not made in meat-packing establish-
ments; Poultry killing, dressing, and packing, wholesale; Slaughtering and meat-packing, wholesale;
Sausage, meat puddings, headcheese, etc, and sausage casings, not made in meat-packing estab-
lishments, sausage; Sausage, not made in slaughtering and meat-packing establishments; Sausage,
meat puddings, headcheese, etc, and sausage casings, not made in meat-packing establishments,
sausage casings; Poultry dressing and packing, wholesale; Custom slaughtering, wholesale


                                            Industry 2
Cheese; Butter; Butter, reworking; Cheese and butter (factory); Condensed and evaporated milk;
Butter, cheese, and condensed milk; Cheese, butter, and condensed milk; Cheese and butter, urban
dairy product; Condensed milk; Creamery butter




                                               40
                                              Industry 3
Food preparations, not elsewhere classified, breadstuff preparations, cereals, and breakfast foods.
Macaroni, vermicelli and noodles; Confectionery; Bread and other bakery products; Pickled fruits
and vegetables and vegetable sauces and seasonings; Bread and other bakery products (except
biscuit, crackers, and pretzels); Ice cream; Food preparations, not elsewhere classified, except
breadstuff preparations, cereals, and breakfast foods-for animals and fowls; Pickles, preserves, and
sauces, pickles and sauces; Food preparations, not elsewhere classified, except macaroni, vermicelli
and noodles-for human consumption; Food preparations, not elsewhere classified, except breadstuff
preparations, cereals, and breakfast foods; Feeds, prepared, for animals and fowls; Food prepara-
tions, not elsewhere classified; Canning and preserving, fruits and vegetables, canned vegetables;
Food preparations; Fish, canning and preserving; Food preparations, not elsewhere specified; Can-
ning and preserving, fruits and vegetables; Canning and preserving, fruits and vegetables, canned
fruits; Fruits and vegetables, canning and preserving; Food preparations, not elsewhere classi-
fied, except macaroni, vermicelli and noodles and peanut butter and sweetening sirups-for human
consumption; Coffee and spice, roasting and grinding, coffee; Food preparations, not elsewhere
classified, except breadstuff preparations, cereals, and breakfast foods-for human consumption;
Confectionery and ice cream; Oysters, canning and preserving; Cereal preparations; Confectionery
and ice cream, confectionary; Lard, not made in slaughtering and meat-packing establishments;
Coffee and spice, roasting and grinding; Chewing gum; Food preparations, not elsewhere classified,
breadstuff preparations, cereals, and breakfast foods; Food preparations, not elsewhere classified, all
other food preparations; Canning and preserving: Fruits and vegetables: pickles, jellies, preserves,
and sauces; Canned and dried fruits and vegetables (including canned soups)


                                              Industry 4
Flouring and grist mill products; Flour and other grain-mill products; Flour-mill and gristmill
products


                                              Industry 5
Rice, cleaning and polishing; Rice cleaning and polishing


                                              Industry 6
Sugar, refining, not including beet sugar; Sugar refining, cane; Sugar and molasses, refining; Cane-
sugar refining; Sugar, beet; Beet sugar; Sugar and molasses, beet; Cane sugar-except refineries;
Sugar and molasses, not including beet sugar; Sugar, cane; Sugar, cane, not including products of
refineries




                                                41
                                              Industry 7
Chocolate and cocoa products; Chocolate and cocoa products, not including confectionery


                                              Industry 8
Mineral and soda water: except mineral and carbonated waters; Mineral and soda waters; Bever-
ages; Nonalcoholic beverages; Mineral and soda water: mineral and carbonated waters


                                              Industry 9
Alcohol, ethyl, and distilled liquors; Liquors, malt; Liquors, distilled; Liquors, vinous; Wines;
Liquors, rectified or blended; Malt liquors


                                              Industry 10
Malt


                                              Industry 11
Baking powders and yeast; Baking and yeast powders; Baking powder, yeast, and other leavening
compounds; Baking powders, yeast, and other leavening compounds


                                              Industry 12
Oleomargarine; Oleomargarine and other butter substitutes; Oleomargarine--not made in meat-
packing establishments; Oleomargarine, not made in meat-packing establishments


                                              Industry 13
Corn sirup, corn sugar, corn oil, and starch; Glucose; Starch; Glucose and starch


                                              Industry 14
Flavoring extracts; Flavoring extracts and flavoring syrups; Flavoring extracts and flavoring syrups,
not elsewhere classified; Cordials and syrups; Cordials and flavoring syrups


                                              Industry 15
Vinegar and cider


                                              Industry 16
Ice, manufactured; Ice, artificial




                                                 42
                                           Industry 17
Tobacco, chewing, smoking, and snuff; Tobacco, cigars, and cigarettes; Tobacco manufactures;
Tobacco, chewing and smoking, and snuff; Cigars; Tobacco, cigars and cigarettes; Cigarettes; Cigars
and cigarettes; Tobacco (chewing and smoking) and snuff; Tobacco: Chewing and smoking, and
snuff


                                           Industry 18
Cotton goods; Cotton thread; Cotton small wares; Cotton, compressing; Cotton, ginning; Cotton
yarn; Cotton broad woven goods; Cotton goods, including cotton small wares; Cotton lace; Cotton,
cleaning and rehandling; Cotton narrow fabrics; Lace goods


                                           Industry 19
Silk and rayon manufactures; Rayon narrow fabrics; Silk throwing and spinning--contract factories;
Rayon throwing and spinning--contract factories; Silk and silk goods, including throwsters; Rayon
broad woven goods--regular factories or jobbers engaging contractors; Silk broad woven goods--
regular factories or jobbers engaging contractors; Rayon yarn and thread, spun or thrown--regular
factories or jobbers engaging contractors; Silk and silk goods; Silk broad woven goods--contract
factories; Silk goods; Silk and silk goods, finished products; Silk narrow fabrics; Silk yarn and
thread, spun or thrown--regular factories or jobbers engaging contractors; Rayon broad woven
goods--contract factories; Silk and silk goods, throwsters and winders




                                               43
                                            Industry 20
Woolen, worsted, felt goods, and wool hats; Wool scouring; Men's and boys' hats and caps (ex-
cept felt and straw); Finishing of men's and boys' hats of fur-felt, wool-felt, and straw; Clothing,
women's, factory product; Clothing, women's, contract work, except suits, skirts, and cloaks, shirt
waists and dresses, except house dresses; Women's, children's and infants' underwear and nightwear
of cotton and flannelette woven fabrics; Hat and cap, except felt and straw men's; Millinery and
lace goods, except trimmed hats and hat frames; Wool pulling; Fur hats; Clothing, women's, except
suits, skirts, and cloaks, shirt waists and dresses, except house dresses, undergarments and petti-
coats and wrappers and housedresses; Collars and cuffs, paper; Furnishing goods, men's; Woolen
and worsted goods; Embroideries; House dresses, uniforms, and aprons--made in inside factories or
by jobbers engaging contractors; Clothing, women's, contract work, undergarments and petticoats;
Clothing, women's, regular factory products, except suits, skirts, and cloaks and shirt waists and
dresses, except house dresses; Embroideries, other than Schiffli-machine products--contract facto-
ries; Woolen goods; Men's and boys' underwear--made in contract factories; Hat and cap materials;
Millinery and lace goods; Women's and misses' clothing, not elsewhere classified--made in contract
factories; Trimmings (not made in textile mills), stamped art goods, and art needlework--contract
factories; Coats, suits, and skirts (except fur coats)-made in contract factories; Clothing, women's;
Men's neckwear--made in contract factories; Women's and misses' dresses (except house dresses)--
made in contract factories; Wool hats; Children's and infants' wear not elsewhere classified-made
in contract factories; Clothing, women's, except suits, skirts and cloaks, shirt waists and dresses,
except house dresses; House dresses, uniforms, and aprons--made in contract factories; Robes,
lounging garments, and dressing gowns; Straw goods, not elsewhere specified


                                            Industry 21
Dyeing and finishing textiles; Dyeing and finishing textiles, exclusive of that done in textile mills;
Dyeing and finishing cotton, rayon, silk, and linen textiles; Dyeing and cleaning; Dyestuff and
extracts; Dyeing and finishing woolen and worsted


                                            Industry 22
Hosiery and knit goods; Knitted underwear; Knitted outerwear (except knit gloves)--contract
factories; Hosiery--seamless; Knitted outerwear (except knit gloves)--regular factories or jobbers
engaging contractors; Knit goods; Knitted gloves; Knitted cloth; Hosiery--full-fashioned


                                            Industry 23
Cloth, sponging and refinishing; Cloth sponging and miscellaneous special finishing; Cloth sponging
and refinishing


                                                44
                                            Industry 24
Carpets and rugs, other than rag; Carpets, rag; Carpet yarn, woolen and worsted; Carpets, rugs,
and mats made from such materials as paper fiber, glass, jute, flax, sisal, cotton, cocoa fiber, and
rags; Mats and matting, from cocoa fiber, grass, and coir; Mats and matting, grass and coir; Mats
and matting; Carpets and rugs, wool; Carpets and rugs, wool, other than rag; Carpets and rugs,
rag


                                            Industry 25
Oilcloth, enameled; Asphalted-felt-base floor covering; Oilcloth; Artificial leather and oilcloth;
Oilcloth, floor; Oilcloth and linoleum, floor; Artificial leather; Oilcloth and linoleum; Linoleum;
Linoleum, asphalted-felt-base and other hard-surface floor coverings, not elsewhere classified


                                            Industry 26
Felt goods; Haircloth; Felt goods, wool, hair, or jute; Felt goods, wool, hair, and jute (except woven
felts and hat bodies and hats)


                                            Industry 27
Upholstering materials; Batting, padding, and wadding: upholstery filling; Excelsior; Upholstering
materials, not elsewhere specified; Upholstering materials, not elsewhere classified


                                            Industry 28
Processed waste and recovered wool fibers--contract factories; Waste; Cotton waste; Wool shoddy;
Shoddy; Oakum; Processed waste and recovered wool fibers--regular factories or jobbers engaging
contractors


                                            Industry 29
Cordage and twine; Cordage and twine and jute and linen goods; Linen goods; Jute goods; Bags,
other than paper; Jute and jute goods; Bags, other than paper, not made in textile mills; Jute goods
(except felt); Bags, other than paper, not including bags made in textile mills; Textile bags--not
made in textile mills; Thread, linen; Bagging, flax, hemp, and jute




                                                45
                                            Industry 30
Gloves and mittens; Clothing (except work clothing), men's, youths', and boys', not elsewhere clas-
sified; Clothing, men's, contract work, men's and youths' and boys'; Clothing, men's, buttonholes;
Dress and semidress gloves and mittens: cloth, cloth and leather combined; Trousers (semidress),
wash suits, and washable service apparel; Clothing, men's, factory product, buttonholes; Clothing,
men's; Leather gloves and mittens; Clothing, men's, custom work and repairing; Work shirts; Men's
and boys' suits, coats, and overcoats (except work clothing)--made in contract factories; Clothing,
men's, contract work, boys'; Clothing, men's, regular factory products, men's, youths'; Clothing
men's, factory products buttonholes; Collars, men's; Clothing, men's, regular factory products,
boys'; Clothing, men's, contract work; Shirts; Men's and boys' shirts (except work shirts), collars,
and night-wear made in inside factories or by jobbers engaging contractors; Clothing, men's, in-
cluding shirts; Clothing, men's, contract work, except men's and youths'; Men's and boys' suits,
coats, and overcoats (except work clothing)--made in inside factories or by jobbers engaging con-
tractors; Clothing, men's, regular factory products; Clothing, men's, contract work, men's, youths';
Clothing, men's, regular factory products, except men's, youths' and boys'; Clothing men's, factory
products; Gloves and mittens, cloth; Work clothing (except work shirts), sport garments (except
leather), and other men's and boys' apparel, not elsewhere classified; Clothing, men's, contract
work, men's and youths'; Clothing, men's, factory product; Men's and boys' shirts (except work
shirts), collars, and night-wear--made in contract factories; Work gloves and mittens: cloth, cloth
and leather combined; Gloves and mittens, leather; Clothing, men's, regular factory products, ex-
cept men's, youths', and boys'; Clothing, men's, regular factory; Clothing, leather and sheep-lined;
Raincoats and other waterproof garments (except oiled cotton)


                                            Industry 31
Corsets; Corsets and allied garments


                                            Industry 32
Saddlery and harness; Pocketbooks, purses, and card cases; Trunks and valises; Women's pocket-
books, handbags, and purses; Leather goods not elsewhere classified; Suitcases, brief cases, bags,
trunks, and other luggage; Belts (apparel), regardless of material; Pocketbooks; Leather goods, not
elsewhere classified; Trunks, suitcases, and bags; Leather goods; Belting other than leather and
rubber, not made in textile mills; Whips; Leather board; Small leather goods; Bellows; Saddlery,
harness, and whips; Belting and hose, woven, other than rubber; Leather goods, not elsewhere
specified; Leather-boards




                                               46
                                           Industry 33
Fur goods; Fur coats and other fur garments, accessories, and trimmings


                                           Industry 34
Tires and inner tubes; Suspenders, garters, and other elastic woven goods, made from purchased
webbing; Belting and hose, rubber; Rubber goods other than tires, inner tubes, and boots and
shoes; Rubber and elastic goods; Suspenders, garters, and elastic woven goods; Rubber tires, tubes,
and rubber goods, not elsewhere specified; Rubber products not elsewhere classified; Belting and
hose, linen; Rubber goods, not elsewhere specified; Belting and hose, woven and rubber; Reclaimed
rubber; Suspenders, garters, and other goods made from purchased elastic material; Belting and
hose, other than leather; Rubber tires and inner tubes


                                           Industry 35
House-furnishing goods, not elsewhere specified, mops and dusters; House-furnishing goods, not
elsewhere specified; Curtains, draperies, and bedspreads--made in regular factories or by jobbers
engaging contractors; Curtains, draperies, and bedspreads--contract factories; House-furnishing
goods, not elsewhere classified; Aluminum ware, kitchen, hospital, and household (except electrical
appliances); Housefurnishings (except curtains, draperies, and bedspreads); Aluminum products
(including rolling and drawing and extruding), not elsewhere classified; Aluminum manufactures;
House-furnishing goods, not elsewhere specified, comforts, quilts, feather pillows, and beds; House
furnishing goods, not elsewhere specified; House-furnishing goods, not elsewhere specified, except
comforts, quilts, feather pillows, and beds and mops and dusters; House-furnishing goods, not
elsewhere specified, except mops and dusters


                                           Industry 36
Awnings, tents, and sails; Canvas products (except bags); Awnings, tents, sails, and canvas covers


                                           Industry 37
Regalia, and society badges and emblems; Flags and banners; Regalia and society banners and
emblems; Clothing, horse; Nets and seines; Miscellaneous fabricated textile products not elsewhere
classified; Nets and selnes; Flags, banners, regalia, society badges, and emblems; Horse blankets,
fly nets, and related products; Regalia, badges, and emblems




                                               47
                                            Industry 38
Charcoal; Lumber and timber products; Boxes, wooden packing; Wooden boxes except cigar boxes;
Sawmills, veneer mills, and cooperage-stock mills, including those combined with logging camps and
with planing mills; Boxes, wooden, except cigar boxes; Lumber and timber products, not elsewhere
classified; Wood distillation; Charcoal, not including production in the lumber and wood distillation
industries; Logging camps and logging contractors (not operating sawmills); Boxes, wooden packing,
except cigar boxes; Plywood mills; Hardwood distillation and charcoal manufacture; Lumber and
other mill products from logs or bolts; Wood distillation, not including turpentine and rosin; Wood
distillation and charcoal manufacture


                                            Industry 39
Window shades; Venetian blinds; Planing-mill products (including general millwork), not made in
planing mills connected with sawmills; Lumber, planing mill products, including sash, doors, and
blinds; Planing mills not operated in conjunction with sawmills; Lumber, planing-mill products,
not including planing mills connected with sawmills; Window shades and fixtures; Window and
door screens and weather strip; Window and door screens and weather strips


                                            Industry 40
Mattresses and spring beds; Mattresses and spring beds, not elsewhere specified; Mattresses and
bed springs, not elsewhere classified; Mattresses and bedsprings


                                            Industry 41
Hammocks; Furniture, including store and office fixtures; Furniture, including cabinetmaking, re-
pairing, and upholstering; Refrigerators; Office furniture; Laboratory, hospital, and other profes-
sional furniture; Public-building furniture; Show cases; Upholstered household furniture; Furniture,
wood and rattan and willow; Furniture, except wood, other than rattan and willow; Partitions,
shelving, cabinet work, and office and store fixtures; Furniture, rattan and willow and metal; Fur-
niture, chairs; Refrigerators, domestic (mechanical and absorption), refrigeration machinery and
equipment, and complete air-conditioning units; Household furniture, except upholstered; Fur-
niture, metal furniture and store and office fixtures; Furniture, factory products; Furniture and
refrigerators; Refrigerators, mechanical; Furniture, rattan and willow, store and office fixtures;
Furniture, cabinet making, repairing and upholstering; Furniture, rattan and willow; Furniture,
metal; Furniture; Furniture, wood, other than rattan and willow; Furniture, metal and store fix-
tures; Furniture, factory product; Refrigerators and refrigerator cabinets, exclusive of mechanical
refrigerating equipment; Furniture, store and office fixtures




                                                48
                                            Industry 42
Chemicals; Perfumery and cosmetics; Druggists' preparations, not including prescriptions; Cellu-
loid and celluloid goods; Drug grinding; Drugs and medicines (including drug grinding); Perfumes,
cosmetics, and other toilet preparations; Druggists' preparations; Foundry supplies; Insecticides,
fungicides, and related industrial and household chemical compounds; Patent medicines and com-
pounds, patent and proprietary medicines; Patent medicines and compounds; Druggists' prepara-
tions; Plastic materials; Coal-tar products; Rayon and allied products; Perfumes, cosmetics, and
other toilet preparations; Sulphuric, nitric, and mixed acids; Compressed and liquefied gases--not
made in petroleum refineries or in natural-gasoline plants; Patent medicines and compounds and
druggists' preparations; Compressed and liquefied gases; Patent medicines and compounds , patent
and proprietary compounds, not elsewhere specified; Foundry supplies; Chemicals, not elsewhere
classified; Chemicals not elsewhere classified; Patent or proprietary medicines and compounds;
Patent medicines and compounds, except patent and proprietary medicines; Coal-tar products,
crude and intermediate


                                            Industry 43
Baskets, and rattan and willow ware; Baskets and rattan and willow ware, not including furniture;
Baskets and rattan and willow ware; Whalebone and rattan; Baskets for fruits and vegetables;
Rattan and willow ware (except furniture) and baskets other than vegetable and fruit baskets


                                            Industry 44
Boxes, cigar; Boxes, cigar, wooden; Cigar boxes: wooden, part wooden


                                            Industry 45
Rules, ivory and wood; Wood products not elsewhere classified; Woodenware, not elsewhere spec-
ified; Wood turned and shaped and other wooden goods, not elsewhere classified; Cooperage;
Wood, turned and carved; Kindling wood; Cooperage and wooden goods, not elsewhere specified;
Cooperage, except hogsheads and barrels; Wooden goods, not elsewhere specified; Wood work -
Miscellaneous; Cooperage, hogsheads and barrels


                                            Industry 46
Caskets, coffins, burial cases, and other morticians' goods; Coffins, burial cases, and undertakers'
goods


                                            Industry 47
Cork products; Cork, cutting


                                               49
                                            Industry 48
Matches


                                            Industry 49
Wood preserving; Wood, preserving


                                            Industry 50
Lasts; Lasts and related products


                                            Industry 51
Looking-glass and picture frames; Mirror and picture frames; Mirror frames and picture frames


                                            Industry 52
Pulp, from fiber other than wood; Paper; Paper and wood pulp; Pulp goods; Pulp mills; Pulp, wood;
Pulp goods (pressed, molded); Wood pulp; Fabricated plastic products, not elsewhere classified;
Paper and paperboard mills; Pulp (wood and other fiber)


                                            Industry 53
Converted paper products not elsewhere classified; Die-cut paper and paperboard, and converted
cardboard; Envelopes; Stationery goods, not elsewhere specified; Cardboard, not made in paper
mills; Cardboard; Card cutting and designing; Paper goods, not elsewhere classified; Stationery
goods, not elsewhere classified; Paper goods, not elsewhere specified; Coated and glazed paper;
Pencil cases; Greeting cards (except hand-painted); Card board


                                            Industry 54
Bags, paper; Bags, paper, exclusive of those made in paper mills; Paper bags, except those made
in paper mills


                                            Industry 55
Boxes, fancy and paper; Boxes paper, not elsewhere classified, shipping containers; Boxes, paper,
not elsewhere classified; Boxes, paper and other, not elsewhere specified; Paperboard containers
and boxes not elsewhere classified; Boxes paper, not elsewhere classified, cartons; Boxes paper, not
elsewhere classified, set-up paper boxes; Fiber cans, tubes, and similar products; Boxes paper, not
elsewhere classified, all others




                                               50
                                            Industry 56
Paper hangings; Wall paper; Wallpaper; Wall paper, not made in paper mills


                                            Industry 57
Printing and publishing, newspapers and periodicals; Engraving and diesinking; Printing and pub-
lishing, music; Printing and publishing, newspaper and periodical; Bookbinding and blank book
making; Printing, tip; Printing and publishing; Printing and publishing, book and job, job print-
ing and book publishing and printing; Type founding; Labels and tags; Printing and publishing,
book and job; Engraving on metal (except for printing purposes); Lithographing and engraving;
Engraving, steel, including plate printing; Type founding and printing materials; Printing and
publishing, newspaper and periodical, printing, publishing, and job printing; Machine and hand
typesetting (including advertisement typesetting); Engravers' materials; Paper patterns; Engrav-
ing, wood; Printing and publishing, book and job, book publishing and printing, linotype work
and typesetting; Engravers materials; Periodicals: publishing without printing; Bookbinding and
blank-book making; Printing and publishing, book and job , book publishing and printing; Printing
materials; Printing and publishing, book and job, job printing; Newspapers: publishing without
printing; Printing and publishing, book and job ; Engraving (steel, copperplate, and wood); plate
printing; Printing and publishing, book and job, except job printing; Printing-trades machinery
and equipment; Books: publishing without printing; Periodicals: publishing and printing; Printing
and publishing, music ; Printing and publishing, book and job, book publishing without printing
and linotype work and typesetting; Printing materials, not including type or ink; Lithographing
and photo-lithographing (including preparation of stones or plates and dry transfers); Books: print-
ing without publishing; General commercial (job) printing; Lithographing; Newspapers: publishing
and printing; Printing and publishing, book and job, book publishing and printing, linotype work
and typesetting; Bookbinding and related industries; Books: publishing and printing; Engraving
(other than steel, copperplate)


                                            Industry 58
Photolithographing and photoengraving; Photo-engraving, not done in printing establishments;
Photo-engraving; Photoengraving, not done in printing establishments (including preparation of
plates); Gravure, rotogravure, and rotary photogravure (including preparation of plates); Pho-
tolithographing and engraving


                                            Industry 59
Stereotyping and electrotyping; Stereotyping and electrotyping, not done in printing establishments;
Electrotyping and stereotyping, not done in printing establishments


                                               51
                                             Industry 60
Paint and varnish; Varnishes; Paints and varnishes; Colors and pigments; Paints; Varnish; Dyestuffs
and extracts; Paints, varnishes, and lacquers; Tanning materials, natural dyestuffs, mordants and
assistants, and sizes; Tanning materials, natural dyestuffs, mordants, assistants, and sizes; Dyestuffs
and extracts--natural


                                             Industry 61
Oil, not elsewhere specified; Fish and other marine oils, cake, and meal; Oil, lubricating; Essential
oils; Oil, essential; Oil, cake, and meal, linseed; Oil, cottonseed and cake; Oil and cake, cottonseed;
Oil, resin; Oil, linseed; Oil, not elsewhere specified, composite; Linseed oil, cake, and meal; Oil,
castor; Oil, lard; Oils, not elsewhere classified; Oil, not elsewhere specified, vegetable, animal,
and mineral oils; Oil, cake, and meal, cottonseed; Lard, refined; Oils, essential; Soybean oil, cake,
and meal; Oil, vegetable, essential; Oil, not elsewhere specified, vegetable; Oil, cottonseed, cake;
Cottonseed oil, cake, meal, and linters; Oil, not elsewhere specified, except vegetable and composite;
Oil, illuminating, not including petroleum refining; Oil, not elsewhere specified, composite oils;
Vegetable and animal oils, not elsewhere classified


                                             Industry 62
Soap and candles; Soap; Candles; Soap and glycerin


                                             Industry 63
Turpentine and rosin; Wood naval stores; Tar and turpentine; Gum naval stores (processing but
not gathering or warehousing)


                                             Industry 64
Fertilizers


                                             Industry 65
Explosives; Gunpowder; High explosives


                                             Industry 66
Salt


                                             Industry 67
Bone black, carbon black, and lampblack; Bone, ivory, and lamp black; Bone, carbon, and lamp
black; Bone black, carbon black, and lamp black

                                                52
                                             Industry 68
Ink, printing; Ink, printing; Ink, writing; Printing ink; Ink, writing; Ink; Writing ink


                                             Industry 69
Firearms; Firearms and ammunition; Ammunition and related products; Ammunition


                                             Industry 70
Cleaning and polishing preparations, blackings, and dressings; Cleansing and polishing prepara-
tions; Blacking, stains, and dressings; Blacking; Cleansing and polishing preparations, except metal
polish and cleansing preparations; Blacking and cleansing and polishing preparations; Cleaning and
polishing preparations; Cleansing and polishing preparations, except metal polish; Cleansing and
polishing preparations, metal polish; Cleansing and polishing preparations, cleansing preparations;
Cleansing and polishing preparations, polishing preparations


                                             Industry 71
Glue, not elsewhere specified; Glue and gelatin; Glue


                                             Industry 72
Grease and tallow (except lubricating greases); Grease and tallow; Grease and tallow, not including
lubricating greases


                                             Industry 73
Petroleum, refining; Gas, illuminating and heating; Axle grease; Lubricating greases; Lubricating
oils and greases--not made in petroleum refineries; Petroleum refining; Lubricating oils and greases,
not made in petroleum refineries; Gas, manufactured, illuminating and heating


                                             Industry 74
Fireworks; Fire-works


                                             Industry 75
Bluing


                                             Industry 76
Mucilage, paste, and other adhesives, except glue and rubber cement; Mucilage and paste; Mucilage,
paste and other adhesives, not elsewhere specified



                                                53
                                            Industry 77
Coke; Coke, not including gas-house coke; Beehive coke; Oven coke and coke-oven byproducts


                                            Industry 78
Paving materials; Paving and paving materials; Paving materials: Asphalt, tar, crushed slag, and
mixtures; Paying blocks and paying mixtures: asphalt, creosoted wood, and composition


                                            Industry 79
Roofing materials; Roofing and roofing materials; Roofing, built-up and roll; asphalt shingles; roof
coating (except paint); Roofing, built-up and roll; asphalt shingles; roof coatings other than paint


                                            Industry 80
Fuel, artificial; Fuel Briquettes and boulets; Fuel briquets; Fuel, manufactured


                                            Industry 81
Rubber boots and shoes (including rubber-soled footwear with fabric uppers); Boots and shoes,
rubber


                                            Industry 82
Leather, tanned, curried, and finished; Leather: tanned, curried, and finished-regular factories
or jobbers engaging contractors; Leather: Tanned, curried, and finished; Leather: tanned, curried,
and finished--contract factories; Leather, patent and enameled; Leather, morocco; Leather, dressed
skins; Leather, tanned and curried


                                            Industry 83
Belting, leather; Belting and hose, leather; Industrial leather belting and packing leather; Packing
hose




                                               54
                                           Industry 84
Boots and shoes, other than rubber; Boot and shoe cut stock; Boots and shoes; Boots and shoes,
factory product; Boot and shoe cut stock, not made in boot and shoe factories; Boot and shoe
findings; Boots and shoes, custom work and repairing; Boot and shoe findings, exclusive of those
produced in boot and shoe factories; Boot and shoe uppers; Boot and shoe cut stock, exclusive
of that produced in boot and shoe factories; Boots and shoes, not including rubber boots and
shoes; Boots and shoes, including cut stock and findings; Boots and shoes, other than rubber,
stitching and crimping; Boots and shoes, other than rubber, regular factory products; Boots and
shoes, stitching and crimping; Boots and shoes, regular factory products; Boots and shoes, other
than rubber, except regular factory products; Boot and shoe findings, not made in boot and shoe
factories; ; Boots and shoes, other than rubber, contract work; Footwear (except rubber); Boot and
shoe cut stock and findings; Boots and shoes, contract work


                                           Industry 85
Glass; Tableware, pressed or blown glass, and glassware not elsewhere classified; Glass containers;
Flat glass


                                           Industry 86
Glass, cutting, staining, and ornamenting; Mirrors; Mirrors, framed and unframed, not elsewhere
specified; Mirrors, framed and unframed; Glass products (except mirrors) made from purchased
glass; Mirrors and other glass products made of purchased glass; Glass, cutting, staining, and
ornamenting, decalcomania work on glass; Glass, cutting, staining, and ornamenting, except decal-
comania work on glass


                                           Industry 87
Lime and cement; Cement; Lime




                                               55
                                              Industry 88
Pottery, including porcelain ware; Pottery, terra-cotta and fire-clay products; Masonry, brick and
stone; Pottery, terra cotta, and fire-clay products; Porcelain electrical supplies; Brick and tile, terra-
cotta, and fire-clay products, except building bricks and terra-cotta products; Artificial stone; Brick
and tile, terra-cotta, and fireclay products; Whiteware; Concrete products; Brick and tile, terra-
cotta, and fire-clay products, building brick; Brick and tile; Clay products (other than pottery)
and nonclay refractories; Brick and tile, terra-cotta, and fire-clay products, stove lining and terra-
cotta products; Artificial stone products; Crucibles; Clay refractories, including refractory cement
(clay); Roofing tile; Concrete products; Brick and hollow structural tile; Clay and pottery products;
Terra cotta; Clay products (except pottery) not elsewhere classified; Sand-lime brick, block and
tile; Nonclay refractories; Pottery products not elsewhere classified; Brick and tile, terra-cotta,
and fire-clay products, fire brick; Floor and wall tile (except quarry tile); Vitreous-china plumbing
fixtures; Pottery; Sand-lime brick; Sewer pipe and kindred products; Hotel china; Brick and tile,
terra-cotta, and fire-clay products, terra-cotta products


                                              Industry 89
China firing and decorating, not done in potteries; China decorating; China decorating, not includ-
ing that done in potteries; China firing and decorating (for the trade)


                                              Industry 90
Plastering and stuccowork; Wall plaster and composition flooring; Wallboard and wall plaster
(except gypsum), building insulation (except mineral wool), and floor composition; Wall plaster,
wall board, insulating board, and floor composition; Mineral wool; Statuary and art goods (except
stone and concrete)--factory production; Wall plaster; Gypsum products; Statuary and art goods,
factory product; Statuary and art goods
                                              Industry 91
Monuments and tombstones; Mantels, slate, marble, and marbleized; Monuments, tombstones, cut-
stone, and stone products not elsewhere classified; Marble and stone work; Marble and stone work,
monuments and tombstones; Marble, granite, slate, and other stone products, other marble and
stone work, except slated; Marble, granite, slate, and other stone products; Marble and stone work,
except monuments and tombstones
                                              Industry 92
Emery and other abrasive wheels; Emery wheels and other abrasive and polishing appliances;
Emery wheels; Sand and emery paper and cloth; Abrasive wheels, stones, paper, cloth, and related
products; Hones, whetstones, and similar products; Sand paper, emery paper, and other abrasive
paper and cloth


                                                  56
                                            Industry 93
Asbestos products (except steam packing and pipe and boiler covering); Asbestos products, not
including steam packing; Steam packing; Steam and other packing, pipe and boiler covering, and
gaskets, not elsewhere classified; Steam and other packing; pipe and boiler covering; Asbestos
products, other than steam packing or pipe and boiler covering


                                            Industry 94
Graphite, ground and refined; Graphite and graphite refining; Natural graphite, ground and refined;
Graphite ground and refined


                                            Industry 95
Minerals and earths, ground or otherwise treated; Kaolin and ground earths; Kaolin and other
earth grinding


                                            Industry 96
Iron and steel, steel works and rolling mills; Iron and steel: Steel works and rolling mills; Iron and
steel; Iron and steel, blast furnaces; Steel castings; Blast-furnace products; Tin and terne plate;
Iron and steel: Blast furnaces; Steel works and rolling mills; Iron and steel, tempering and welding;
Ferroalloys; Tin plate and terneplate




                                                57
                                            Industry 97
Gas machines and gas and water meters, gas meters and water meters; Ironwork, architectural and
ornamental; Gas machines and meters; Plumbers' supplies; Construction and similar machinery
(except mining and oil-field machinery and tools); Hardware, except locks and builder's hard-
ware; Vault lights and ventilators; Foundry and machine-shop products, machine shop and foundry
combined; Steam engines, turbines, and water wheels; Signs and advertising novelties, signs, elec-
tric and others; Signs, advertising displays, and advertising novelties; Foundry and machine shop
products; Foundry and machine-shop products, boiler shops; Hardware, locks; Bridges; Lightning
rods; Steam fittings, regardless of material; Pumps, not including steam pumps; Steam fittings
and heating apparatus; Foundry and machine-shop products, except machine shops; Steel barrels,
kegs, and drums; Registers, car fare; Hardware; Locomotives, not made by railroad companies;
Enameled-iron sanitary ware and other plumbers' supplies (not including pipe and vitreous and
semivitreous china sanitary ware); Signs and advertising novelties; Mining machinery and equip-
ment; Foundry and machine-shop products, except foundries; Vending, amusement, and other
coin-operated machines; Hardware, saddlery; Oil-field machinery and tools; Mechanical power-
transmission equipment; Plumbers supplies; Hardware not elsewhere classified; Pumps (hand and
power) and pumping equipment; Locomotives, not made in railroad repair shops; Steel barrels,
drums and tanks, portable; Engines, steam, gas, and water; Gray-iron and semisteel castings;
Blowers; exhaust and ventilating fans; Foundry and machine-shop products, not elsewhere classi-
fied; Hardware, vehicle hardware; Cast-iron pipe; Steam fittings and steam and hot-water heating
apparatus; Textile machinery and parts; Signs and advertising novelties, electric and other signs;
Iron and steel, processed; Steam fittings and steam and hot-water heating apparatus, radiators and
cast-iron heating boilers


                                            Industry 98
Gold and silver, reducing and refining, not from the ore; Tinsmithing, coppersmithing, and sheet-
iron working; Smelting and refining, not from the ore; Smelting and refining, lead; Secondary smelt-
ing and refining of nonferrous metals, not elsewhere classified; Sheet-metal work not specifically
classified; Copper, tin, and sheet-iron products; Tinware, not elsewhere specified; Zinc, smelting
and refining; Gold, silver, and platinum, reducing and refining, not from the ore; Smelting and
refining, metals other than gold, silver, or platinum, not from the ore; Smelting and refining, cop-
per; Lead, smelting and refining; Smelting and refining, zinc; Cooper, tin, and sheet-iron work;
Primary smelting and refining of nonferrous metals; Silversmithing; Copper, smelting and refining;
Smelting and refining; Secondary smelting and refining, gold, silver, and platinum; Tin cans and
other tinware not elsewhere classified; Zinc; Tin cans and other tinware, not elsewhere classified;
Copper, tin, and sheet-iron work, including galvanized iron work, not elsewhere classified


                                               58
                                              Industry 99
Wire; Wire, drawn from purchased bars or rods; Wire drawn from purchased rods


                                              Industry 100
Iron and steel, nails and spikes, cut and wrought, including wire nails; Nails, spikes, etc. not made
in wire mills or in plants operated in connection with rolling mills; Iron and steel, nails and spikes,
cut and wrought, including wire nails, not made in steel works or rolling mills; Nails, spikes, etc.,
not made in wire mills or in plants operated in connection with rolling mills; Iron, steel, nails,
spikes, cut and wrought, including wire nails, not made in steel works or rolling mills


                                              Industry 101
Wirework, including wire rope and cable; Wirework, not elsewhere specified; Wirework not else-
where classified; Wirework, not elsewhere classified


                                              Industry 102
Cutlery (except aluminum, silver, and plated cutlery) and edge tools; Machine-tool and other
metalworking-machinery accessories, metal cutting and shaping tools, and machinists' precision
tools; Metal working machinery and equipment, not elsewhere classified; Tools, not elsewhere spec-
ified; Cutlery and edge tools; Machine tools; Tools, not elsewhere specified, except machinists';
Tools (except edge tools, machine tools, files, and saws); Cutlery and tools, not elsewhere specified;
Cutlery and edge tools, except razors; Cutlery (not including silver and plated cutlery) and edge
tools; Cutlery and edge tools, razors; Tools, not elsewhere specified, machinists'; Tools, not in-
cluding edge tools, machine tools, files, or saws; Machine-tool accessories and small metal-working
tools, not elsewhere classified; Tools, not elsewhere specified, shovels, spades, scoops, hoes, and
carpenters' tools, not elsewhere classified


                                              Industry 103
Files


                                              Industry 104
Saws




                                                 59
                                            Industry 105
Stoves, ranges, water heaters, and hot-air furnaces (except electric); Gas and oil stoves; Gas stoves;
Heating and cooking apparatus, except electric, not elsewhere classified; Stoves, gas and oil; Stoves
and hot-air furnaces; Stoves and furnaces, including gas and oil stoves; Stoves and hot air furnaces,
stoves and ranges; Oil burners, domestic and industrial; Stoves and ranges (other than electric)
and warm-air furnaces; Stoves and hot air furnaces, hot-air furnaces


                                            Industry 106
Japanning; Enameling; Stamped ware; Enameling, japanning, and lacquering; Stamped and pressed
metal products (except automobile stampings); Automobile stampings; Enameling and enameled
goods; Enameling and japanning; Stamped and enameled ware, not elsewhere specified; Vitreous
enameled products, including kitchen, household, and hospital utensils; Stamped ware, enameled
ware, and metal stamping, enameling, japanning, and lacquering; Enameled goods


                                            Industry 107
Galvanizing; Galvanizing and other coating processes; Galvanizing and other coating--carried on
in plants not operated in connection with rolling mills; Galvanizing and other coating not done in
plants operated in connection with rolling mills


                                            Industry 108
Iron and steel, doors and shutters; Doors, shutters, and window sash and frames, metal; Doors,
window sash, frames, molding, and trim (made of metal)
                                            Industry 109
Bolts, nuts, washers, and rivets, not made in plants operated in connection with rolling mills; Iron
and steel, bolts, nuts, washers, and rivets; Bolts, nuts, washers, and rivets made in plants not
operated in connection with rolling mills; Iron and steel, bolts, nuts, washers, and rivets, not made
in rolling mills; Iron and steel, bolts, nuts, washers, and rivets, not made in steel works or rolling
mills


                                            Industry 110
Iron and steel, forgings; Horseshoes, not made in steel works or rolling mills; Forgings, iron and
steel--made in plants not operated in connection with rolling mills; Iron and steel forgings; Iron
and steel forgings, not made in steel works or rolling mills; Forgings, iron and steel, not made in
plants operated in connection with rolling mills; Horseshoes, factory product; Horse-shoes




                                                60
                                           Industry 111
Iron and steel, wrought pipe; Wrought pipe, welded and heavy riveted, not made in plants oper-
ated in connection with rolling mills; Iron and steel, pipe, wrought; Iron and steel pipe, wrought;
Wrought pipes, welded and heavy riveted--made in plants not operated in connection with rolling
mills


                                           Industry 112
Springs, steel, except wire, not made in plants operated in connection with rolling mills; Springs,
steel, car and carriage, not made in steel works or rolling mills; Springs, steel (except wire)--made
in plants not operated in connection with rolling mills; Springs, steel, car and carriage


                                           Industry 113
Screws; Screws, machine; Screw-machine products and wood screws; Screws, wood


                                           Industry 114
Safes and vaults


                                           Industry 115
Bronze castings; Nonferrous-metal products not elsewhere classified; Lead, bar, pipe, and sheet;
Brass castings and brass finishing; Alloying; and rolling and drawing of nonferrous metals, except
aluminum; Bells; Brass, bronze, and copper products; Lead, bar, pipe and sheet; Brass and bronze
products; Brass; Babbitt metal and solder; Brass castings; Nonferrous-metal foundries (except
aluminum); Brass and copper, rolled; Brassware; Brass, bronze and copper products, brass and
bronze products; Brass, bronze and copper products, copper and all other products; Nonferrous-
metal alloys and products, not including aluminum products


                                           Industry 116
Watch and clock materials, except watchcases; Watches and watch movements; Clocks; Watch and
clock materials; Clocks and watches, including cases and materials; Watch and clock materials and
parts, except watchcases; Watches; Watchcases; Watch cases; Clocks, watches, and materials and
parts (except watchcases); Clocks, clock movements, time-recording devices, and time stamps


                                           Industry 117
Costume jewelry and costume novelties (jewelry other than fine jewelry); Jewelry; Jewelers' findings
and materials; Jewelry (precious metals)




                                                61
                                              Industry 118
Lapidary work


                                              Industry 119
Silverware and plated ware; Silverware; Plated and britannia ware; Silversmithing and silverware;
Plated ware


                                              Industry 120
Electroplating, plating, and polishing; Electroplating


                                              Industry 121
Calcium lights; Lamps and reflectors; Gas and lamp fixtures; Gas and electric fixtures, lamps and
reflectors; Gas and electric fixtures; lamps, lanterns, and reflectors; Gas and electric fixtures; Gas
and electric fixtures, electric fixtures; Gas and electric fixtures, except electric fixtures; Lighting fix-
tures; Lamps and reflectors, all other lamps; Lamps and reflectors, reflectors; Lamps and reflectors,
automobile lamps


                                              Industry 122
Tin and other foils, not elsewhere specified; Collapsible tubes; tinfoil; Tin and other foils (except
gold and silver foil); Tin foil; Tin and other foils, not including gold foil; Tinfoil


                                              Industry 123
Gold and silver, leaf and foil; Gold leaf and foil; Gold and silver leaf and foil


                                              Industry 124
Electrical machinery, apparatus, and supplies; Phonographs and graphophones; Electric light and
power; Insulated wire and cable; Generating, distribution, and industrial apparatus, and appara-
tus for incorporation in manufactured products, not elsewhere classified; Electric lamps; Batteries,
storage and primary (dry and wet); Electrical apparatus and supplies; Electrical measuring in-
struments; Electrical products not elsewhere classified; Automotive electrical equipment; Electrical
appliances; Wiring devices and supplies; X-ray and therapeutic apparatus and electronic tubes; Ra-
dios, radio tubes, and phonographs; Communication equipment; Phonographs; Beauty-shop and
barber-shop equipment; Carbon products for the electrical industry, and manufactures of carbon
or artificial graphite




                                                   62
                                          Industry 125
Agricultural implements; Agricultural machinery (except tractors); Windmills; Windmills and
windmill towers; Tractors


                                          Industry 126
Typewriters and supplies; Typewriters and supplies, carbon paper; Office and store machines, not
elsewhere classified; Typewriters and supplies, typewriters and parts; Carbon paper and inked
ribbons; Typewriters and supplies, except typewriters and parts and carbon paper; Typewriters
and parts


                                          Industry 127
Scales and balances


                                          Industry 128
Washing machines and clothes wringers; Washing machines, clothes wringers; Washing machines,
wringers, driers, and ironing machines, for household use; Laundry equipment, domestic


                                          Industry 129
Sewing machines and attachments; Sewing machines, domestic and industrial; Sewing machines,
cases, and attachments; Sewing-machine cases


                                          Industry 130
Carriage and wagon materials; Carriages and wagons, including repairs; Wheelbarrows; Automo-
biles, including bodies and parts; Carriages, wagons, sleighs, and sleds; Carriages and wagons;
Automobile bodies and parts; Motor vehicles, not including motorcycles; Motor-vehicle bodies and
motor-vehicle parts; Carriages and wagons,including repairs, repair work only; Carriages and wag-
ons,including repairs, cars and wagons; Carriage, wagon, sleigh, and sled materials; Automobiles;
Carriages and wagons and materials; Automobile trailers (for attachment to passenger cars); Mo-
tor vehicles, motor-vehicle bodies, parts and accessories; Transportation equipment not elsewhere
classified




                                               63
                                             Industry 131
Cars and general shop construction and repairs by steam-railroad companies; Car and general con-
struction and repairs, steam-railroad repair shops; Cars, street-railroad, not including operations
of railroad companies; Cars, electric-railroad, not including operations of railroad companies; Cars,
railroad and street, and repairs, not including establishments operated by steam railroad companies;
Cars and general shop construction and repairs by steam railroad companies; Cars, electric and
steam railroad, not built in railroad repair shops; Cars and general shop construction and repairs
by street railroad companies; Cars and general shop construction and repairs by street-railroad
companies; Cars, street railroad, not including operations of railroad companies; Car and general
construction and repairs, electric-railroad repair shops; Cars, steam-railroad, not including opera-
tions of railroad companies; Cars, steam railroad, not including operations of railroad companies;
Cars and car equipments-railroad, street, and rapid-transit; Cars and general shop construction
and repairs by electric-railroad companies


                                             Industry 132
Bicycles and tricycles; Aeroplanes, seaplanes, and airships, and parts; Bicycles, motorcycles, and
parts; Motorcycles, bicycles and parts; Aircraft and parts, including aircraft engines; Motorcycles,
bicycles, and parts; Aircraft and parts


                                             Industry 133
Shipbuilding, including boat building; Shipbuilding; Shipbuilding, wooden, including boat building,
yards where work on new vessels was done; Shipbuilding, wooden, including boat building, yards
engaged entirely on repair work; Shipbuilding, wooden, including boat building, boats under 5 tons;
Boat building and boat repairing; Shipbuilding, iron and steel; Shipbuilding, steel, repair work only,
small boats, and masts, spars, oars, and rigging; Shipbuilding, steel, new vessels; Shipbuilding,
steel, new vessels, small boats, and masts, spars, oars, and rigging; Shipbuilding, steel; Ship and
boat building, steel and wooden, including repair work; Shipbuilding and ship repairing; Ship and
boat building, wooden; Shipbuilding, steel, repair work only; Shipbuilding, wooden, including boat
building; Shipbuilding, wooden, including boat building, masts, spars, oars, and the rigging of
vessels




                                                64
                                           Industry 134
Instruments, professional and scientific; Surgical appliances; Artificial limbs; Surgical and medi-
cal instruments; Surgical supplies and equipment not elsewhere classified; orthopedic appliances;
Instruments, professional and scientific, medical and surgical; Surgical and orthopedic appliances,
including artificial limbs; Surgical appliances and artificial limbs; Instruments, professional and
scientific, except medical and surgical; Professional and scientific instruments (except surgical and
dental)


                                           Industry 135
Photographic materials, motion-picture films not exposed, and motion-picture projection films;
Photographic apparatus, except cameras and motion-picture machines; Photographic apparatus
and materials; Photographic materials; Photographic apparatus; Photographic apparatus and ma-
terials and projection equipment (except lenses); Photographic apparatus, cameras and motion-
picture machines; Photographic materials, except motion-picture films; Photographic materials,
motion-picture films; Photographic materials, except motion-picture films not exposed, and motion-
picture projection films


                                           Industry 136
Optical goods; Optical instruments and lenses; Ophthalmic goods: lenses and fittings


                                           Industry 137
Dentists' materials; Dental goods; Dental equipment and supplies; Dental goods and equipment


                                           Industry 138
Musical instruments, piano and organ materials; Musical instruments, organs and materials; Mus-
cial instruments: Organs; Musical instruments: Pianos; Musical instruments and parts and materi-
als, not elsewhere classified; Musical instruments and materials, not specified; Musical instruments,
pianos; Musical instruments, pianos and organs and materials; Musical instruments, parts, and ma-
terials not elsewhere classified; Musical instruments, pianos and materials; Pianos; Organs; Musical
instruments, organs; Musical instrument parts and materials: Piano and organ; Piano and organ
parts and materials


                                           Industry 139
Toys and games; Games and toys (except dolls and children's vehicles); Dolls (except rubber); Toys
(not including children's wheel goods or sleds), games, and playground equipment




                                                65
                                             Industry 140
Carriages and sleds, children's; Children's vehicles


                                             Industry 141
Sporting and athletic goods; Sporting goods; Sporting and athletic good not elsewhere classified;
Sporting and athletic goods, not including firearms or ammunition; Billiard tables and materi-
als; Billiard tables, bowling alleys, and accessories; Billiard and pool tables, bowling alleys, and
accessories


                                             Industry 142
Pens, steel; Pens, gold; Pencils (except mechanical) and crayons; Pens, fountain and stylographic;
Pens, fountain, stylographic and gold; Artists' materials; Pencils, lead; Pens, fountain and stylo-
graphic; pen points, gold, steel, and brass; Pens, mechanical pencils, and pen points; Pencils, lead
(including mechanical)


                                             Industry 143
Stencils and brands; Hand stamps, stencils and brands; Hand stamps; Hand stamps, stencils, and
brands; Hand stamps and stencils and brands


                                             Industry 144
Buttons


                                             Industry 145
Jewelry and instrument cases; Jewelry cases and instrument cases


                                             Industry 146
Feathers and plumes; Artificial feathers and flowers; Artificial flowers; Feathers, plumes, and manu-
factures thereof; Feathers, plumes, and artificial flowers; Artificial and preserved flowers and plants;
Artificial flowers, feathers and plumes


                                             Industry 147
Brooms and brushes; Brooms; Brushes; Brooms, from broom corn; Brushes, other than rubber;
Brushes, except toilet; Brushes, toilet; Brooms, except from broom corn; Brushes, other than toilet


                                             Industry 148
Furs, dressed; Furs, dressed and dyed


                                                 66
                                           Industry 149
Umbrellas and canes; Umbrellas, parasols, and canes


                                           Industry 150
Pipes (tobacco); Pipes, tobacco; Tobacco pipes and cigarette holders


                                           Industry 151
Soda water apparatus; Soda fountains, beer dispensing equipment, and related products; Soda-
water apparatus


                                           Industry 152
Models and patterns; Models and patterns (except paper patterns); Models and patterns, not
including paper patterns


                                           Industry 153
Hair work; Hairwork


                                           Industry 154
Needles, pins, hooks and eyes, and snap fasteners; Needles and pins; Hooks and eyes; Needles, pins,
hooks and eyes, and slide and snap fasteners; Needles, pins, hooks and eyes; Needles, pins, and
hooks and eyes


                                           Industry 155
Fire extinguishers, chemical




                                               67
                                           Industry 156
Ivory and bone work; Combs; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, paper
and wood novelties; Fancy articles, not elsewhere specified; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not
elsewhere classified; Theatrical scenery and stage equipment; Ivory, shell, and bone work, not in-
cluding combs and hairpins; Fancy articles, not else where specified; Ivory, shell, and bone work,
not including buttons, combs, or hairpins; Miscellaneous fabricated products not elsewhere clas-
sified; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, except beadwork, celluloid and
metal novelties; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, metal novelties; Fancy
and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, except metal and paper novelties; Theatrical
scenery; Combs and hairpins, not made from metal or rubber; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not
elsewhere classified, except beadwork, celluloid, metal and paper novelties; Fancy and miscellaneous
articles, not elsewhere classified, metal and wood novelties; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not
elsewhere classified, beadwork and celluloid novelties; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not else-
where classified, paper novelties; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, metal
and paper novelties; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, wood novelties;
Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, except paper and wood novelties; Fancy
and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, except metal and wood novelties; Combs and
hairpins, except those made from metal or rubber; Lamp shades




                                               68
