                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    TAXING PROPERTY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
                       THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM MEXICO

                                       Anne Brockmeyer
                                       Alejandro Estefan
                                     Karina Ramírez Arras
                                   Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato

                                       Working Paper 28637
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28637


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




The project was funded by the World Bank. Brockmeyer's time was partly funded by UKAID
from the UK government through an Accountable Grant Agreement for the Centre for Tax
Analysis in Developing Countries (TaxDev) at the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS). The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of the
World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments that they represent, nor do
they reflect the views of the Ministry of Finance of Mexico City or the Federal Ministry of
Finance in Mexico, nor those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Anne Brockmeyer, Alejandro Estefan, Karina Ramírez Arras, and Juan Carlos Suárez
Serrato. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Taxing Property in Developing Countries: Theory and Evidence from Mexico
Anne Brockmeyer, Alejandro Estefan, Karina Ramírez Arras, and Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
NBER Working Paper No. 28637
April 2021
JEL No. H21,H26,H71,O23

                                          ABSTRACT

Property taxes in developing countries are plagued by noncompliance and can exacerbate
liquidity constraints. We characterize optimal enforcement and taxation policies as functions of
revenue elasticities and measures of taxpayer hardship. We estimate these parameters using
multiple sources of variation and administrative data from Mexico City. Both rate increases and
enhanced enforcement raise revenue, but liquidity constraints also shape taxpayer behavior.
Despite the presence of liquidity constraints, we find that raising tax rates increases welfare. In
contrast, enforcement generates higher private costs than welfare benefits. On the margin,
welfare-maximizing governments would prefer to increase tax rates rather than enhance
enforcement.

Anne Brockmeyer                                  Karina Ramírez Arras
Institute for Fiscal Studies                     Ministry of Finance, Mexico
7 Ridgmount Street                               Palacio Nacional
London WC1E 7AE                                  (Calle Correo Mayor esquina con calle Soledad)
United Kingdom                                   Ciudad de México. C.P. 06060
anne.brockmeyer@ifs.org.uk                       karina_ramirez@hacienda.gob.mx

Alejandro Estefan                                Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
1010 Jenkins Nanovic Halls                       Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame                         Duke University
Notre Dame, IN 46556                             213 Social Sciences Building
United States of America                         Box 90097
mestefan@nd.edu                                  Durham, NC 27708
                                                 and NBER
                                                 jc@jcsuarez.com
    We study the design and effectiveness of the most under-utilized tax in developing countries:
the property tax. While lower-income countries generally raise less revenue as a share of GDP
than higher-income countries, Figure 1 shows that this pattern is much more pronounced for the
property tax than for any other tax. This paper studies whether cities in the developing world can
tax property to provide local public goods and fund infrastructure investment. Do governments
have the capacity to increase tax revenue? How should property tax systems account for welfare
costs arising from liquidity constraints? Is it better for welfare-maximizing governments to raise
tax rates on existing taxpayers or enforce taxes on delinquent households?
    We answer these questions by combining administrative tax data from Mexico City, multiple
sources of variation in different policy instruments, and a model of optimal property taxation. Our
analyses pay particular attention to two specific features of developing economies that may hamper
tax collection: weak administrative capacity and household liquidity constraints. Weak administra-
tive capacity could imply that property tax rate increases and enforcement actions yield little or no
additional tax revenue. We evaluate this hypothesis leveraging multiple quasi-experimental tax in-
creases and a field experiment varying enforcement messages delivered to delinquent taxpayers. We
show empirically that despite significant under-compliance, both tax rate increases and additional
enforcement can be successful strategies to raise revenue.
    Given the prevalence of liquidity constraints in developing countries, policymakers are concerned
that property tax increases may inflict hardship on taxpayers. Specifically, property taxes may
exacerbate liquidity constraints as such taxes are based on an illiquid stock rather than a flow of
income or consumption. We validate these concerns empirically by showing that following a tax
increase, taxpayers are more likely to pay in installments and significantly reduce their consumption.
    Our model formalizes the government's trade-off between raising revenue to provide public goods
and containing the welfare costs of raising tax rates. We conduct policy simulations by combining
our model with empirical estimates. While the presence of liquidity constraints increases the welfare
cost of property taxation, we find that the government can still raise welfare by increasing property
tax rates.
    An alternative approach to increasing revenue is to more strictly enforce existing taxes on
delinquent taxpayers. In contrast to other forms of taxation to which taxpayers may respond by
hiding income or assets, the property tax base is easily observable, which reduces the scope for
evasion. Our model evaluates the welfare effects of enforcement by comparing the revenue gains
from enforcement to the private costs incurred by taxpayers facing enforcement actions. While
enforcement raises revenue, our estimates imply that private enforcement costs exceed the gains
from the increase in tax revenue.
    Our results provide a fundamental reassessment of the ways in which cities in developing coun-
tries can design property tax systems. Empirically, we show that even in settings with significant
under-compliance, governments may be able to use property tax revenue to provide public goods
and invest in infrastructure. Our theoretical framework informs the design of property tax systems


                                                  1
by considering both the revenue gains and the welfare costs of different policy instruments. Despite
the presence of liquidity constraints, our empirical estimates imply that on the margin, a welfare-
maximizing government would prefer to raise property tax rates rather than rely on revenues from
additional enforcement.
     Our empirical analyses use administrative tax data on the universe of residential properties in
Mexico City--the second-largest city in the Western Hemisphere. Mexico City exhibits important
features that are common to many developing contexts: its households face liquidity constraints,
and its government has limited enforcement capacity. In Mexico City, less than 20 percent of
households have access to credit cards, and over 40 percent of taxpayers are delinquent on their
property taxes.1
     Our analysis proceeds in four steps. We first construct a simple model of optimal policy design,
building on Keen and Slemrod (2017). Our objective is to ensure that the model is accessible, can
be tied to our empirical estimates, and speaks to policymakers' desire to raise revenue while limiting
taxpayer hardship. The model studies the interaction of three policy tools currently used by the
government of Mexico City: tax rates, enforcement, and provision of liquidity. In our setting, the
government observes the tax liability, but taxpayers with low tax morale may not comply with the
tax. When households are subject to liquidity constraints, they see a larger drop in consumption
when they pay property taxes. The model characterizes optimal tax and compliance rates as
functions of tax and enforcement elasticities as well as the consumption drop that households
experience when they pay property taxes.
     We note two guiding insights for policy. First, liquidity constraints increase the welfare cost of
taxation and yield lower optimal tax rates. Put differently, a government can set higher tax rates
if it also provides liquidity to taxpayers. Second, while enhanced enforcement raises tax revenue,
it also lowers welfare by increasing the private costs of tax delinquency. The model motivates
our empirical analyses, which deliver sufficient statistics to evaluate the welfare effects of different
policies.
     In our second step, we estimate tax rate and enforcement elasticities. Our analysis leverages
large quasi-experimental tax hikes, which affect properties in specific cadastral value bands. Figure
2 shows that depending on the year, tax rates increased by between 18 to 47 percent. We use a
regression discontinuity (RD) design to estimate short-term responses and a difference-in-differences
(DiD) design to estimate medium-term responses. These research designs are bolstered by a number
of checks, including checks that cadastral values are not manipulated, that property characteristics
do not change discontinuously around band thresholds, and that treated and never-treated proper-
ties have similar pretrends. The two strategies yield similar estimates, implying revenue elasticities
of between 0.3 and 0.7. While these estimates directly show that governments can collect additional

   1
     Appendix H builds on the seminal work by Attanasio and Davis (1996) and Attanasio and Jappelli (2001) and
its application to Mexico in Attanasio and Székely (2004) to show that households in Mexico City are imperfectly
insured against income shocks, suggesting that liquidity constraints are pervasive.

                                                       2
tax revenue, we also find that tax hikes significantly reduce compliance with the property tax.
    A crucial feature of our setting is that even before the tax hikes, 40 percent of taxpayers were
delinquent on their property taxes. This is despite the fact that the government applies fines and
interest to late payments and occasionally seizes the property of delinquent taxpayers. We study
whether enforcement actions can succeed at raising revenue from delinquent taxpayers using a field
experiment in which the tax authority sent enforcement letters to 80,000 delinquent taxpayers.
Compared to a control group that received no letters, delinquent taxpayers who received letters
emphasizing sanctions and fines displayed triple the likelihood of making a payment. Variation in
letter content allows us to identify enforcement messages that are more effective at encouraging
compliance. Letters with female signatories had slightly higher impacts than those signed by men,
and letters from fiscal attorneys raised 50 percent more revenue than letters from compliance officers.
    These empirical results demonstrate that the government is able to raise property tax revenue
through either tax rate increases or enforcement. These results reject the notion that tax capacity
is at the heart of the under-reliance on property taxes in developing contexts; rather, governments
may worry that increased property taxation may exacerbate household liquidity constraints and
cause hardship.
    The third step of our analysis provides two pieces of evidence that liquidity constraints affect
the ability of households to comply with the property tax. First, we show that tax hikes affect
taxpayers' choice of payment modality. Since households that pay in full and before a given date
receive a discount on their tax liability, the choice to pay in installments is equivalent to taking
out an implicit loan from the government.2 We exploit an unusual inflection point in the tax rate
schedule to show that higher tax rates are associated with a higher likelihood of taxpayers paying
in installments instead of paying their annual liability all at once. Conditional on attempting to
pay in installments, the likelihood that a taxpayer completes all installment payments is inversely
related to the tax rate. We complement this evidence using a DiD design that shows that tax hikes
reduced taxpayers' propensity to pay their tax all at once and increased the likelihood of paying in
installments.3
    To provide a second piece of evidence that property taxes interact with liquidity constraints,
we combine administrative records with household survey data on consumption. We use a split-
sample instrumental variables approach that leverages the quasi-experimental tax rate variation to
estimate the impact of tax payments on consumption. The first stage--the effect of predicted tax
changes on tax payments--is statistically very strong and has a magnitude similar to that of our
estimates using administrative tax data. The exclusion restriction is that the predicted tax change
impacts consumption through the tax reforms only. This restriction is likely to hold because the tax

   2
      Discounts, d, range between 5 percent and 8 percent during our period of study. The implicit loan carries an
                  d
interest rate of 1- d.
    3
      Appendix I provides additional evidence that liquidity constraints shape taxpayer behavior by using daily
payment data and variation in the deadlines for early-bird discounts to estimate a dynamic discrete choice model of
payment timing. The estimated model shows that taxpayers place a very high value on liquidity.

                                                        3
variation is very sharp, and as we show in our regression discontinuity and difference-in-differences
analyses, tax increases are otherwise unrelated to other property characteristics and treated and
untreated properties have similar trends prior to the tax increases. We find that tax increases affect
the consumption of liquidity-constrained households. For instance, doubling property taxes would
reduce the consumption of households without a credit card and at the 25th percentile of the income
distribution by 7 percent.4 The impact of tax rate increases on consumption is a key ingredient of
optimal tax formulas. We implement our model using a range of these estimates to quantify how
liquidity constraints impact the welfare cost of property tax hikes.
    The fourth and final step of our analysis implements our model of optimal tax administration
and provides guidance to policymakers based on our empirical results. The model shows that even
though compliance levels are low, raising revenue through stricter enforcement has negative effects
on welfare. This result follows from the fact that the model weighs the gains from additional
revenue against the disutility that delinquent taxpayers face from additional enforcement. While
our enforcement intervention finds large effects on tax revenue, increasing enforcement is not welfare
improving.5 By contrast, raising property tax rates to provide public goods can increase welfare.
This result is robust to assuming that tax hikes cause significant consumption declines for a large
share of households. Thus, even though liquidity constraints increase the welfare cost of property
taxes, the model shows that existing tax rates are below the optimal tax rate.6
    Overall, this paper shows that developing countries can increase their reliance on property
taxation to provide public goods and fund infrastructure investment. While both tax rate increases
and additional enforcement increase tax revenue, the government can improve welfare by increasing
tax rates and loosening enforcement. By providing liquidity to taxpayers, governments can also
lower the welfare cost of taxation and implement higher tax rates.
    Our results are internally valid for Mexico City and should be interpreted as the effects of a set
of large interventions. The tax hikes that we analyze were part of reforms that coincided with a
36 percent increase in property tax revenue for the city (see Figure B.1, Panel A). Our rigorous
evaluations of these reforms show that a large part of this increase can be attributed to the causal
impacts of tax increases. Similarly, by contacting 80,000 taxpayers, our field experiment reached
close to 14 percent of delinquent taxpayers. Finally, because our enforcement intervention was
part of a regular enforcement campaign, our results can be interpreted as in-equilibrium effects of
existing policies.
    Mexico City is a very useful laboratory for studying property taxation in a developing country


   4
      The reduction in consumption would not be surprising if taxpayers perceived the tax rate hikes as permanent. In
our setting, however, the tax rate hikes did not affect consumption among richer households, suggesting that the tax
rate changes were perceived as temporary and disproportionately affected households unable to smooth consumption.
    5
      This result mirrors that of Allcott and Kessler (2019), who model interventions such as ours and show that they
can lower welfare even if they succeed at changing behavior.
    6
      In Appendix K, we use estimates from the different tax changes to estimate the revenue-maximizing tax rate.
We find that existing tax rates are significantly below the revenue-maximizing tax rate.

                                                         4
context characterized by administrative capacity limitations and household liquidity constraints.7
First, tax administrations in lower-income countries display weaker capacity in terms of human
resources, skills, and technical equipment. For example, the number of tax audits per capita--a
widely used proxy for tax administration capacity--is increasing in GDP per capita (see Panels A1
and A2 of Figure B.2). Mexico fits this pattern well, exhibiting a level of administrative capacity
similar to that of other middle-income countries. Second, households in lower-income countries
suffer from liquidity constraints. For instance, the share of households that have a bank account,
have a credit card, are able to take a loan, or are able to finance an unexpected expense is increasing
in country per capita income.8 As with tax capacity, measures of liquidity constraints in Mexico
City are broadly representative of places with similar income levels, suggesting that our results are
likely externally valid for other developing countries.
    This paper integrates two complementary approaches in the public finance and development
economics literatures. The economists-as-plumbers framework of Duflo (2017) notes the crucial role
of details in the implementation of policies. With its emphasis on working with local policymakers
to evaluate specific details of actual policies, this approach uncovers margins for policy improvement
that are absent from textbook models of property taxation. For example, our results can inform the
design of payment schedules to relax liquidity constraints and identify cost-effective enforcement
messages. Similarly, the tax systems approach of Slemrod and Gillitzer (2013) notes that in practice,
issues related to remittance, compliance costs, and enforcement are key determinants of the success
of tax policies. We follow this approach by focusing on elements of the property tax system that are
often overlooked--e.g., implicit loans in the form of discounts or alternative payment modalities--
and by considering interactions between tax rates and enforcement policies.9
    This paper contributes to the emerging literature on taxation in developing countries (Besley
and Persson 2013, Pomeranz and Vila-Belda 2019). This literature has argued that the optimal mix
of tax instruments may diverge from traditional public finance theory prescriptions in a context of
limited enforcement capacity (Best et al. 2015). We introduce household liquidity constraints as an
additional characteristic of developing economies that is empirically important but often neglected
by traditional optimal tax theory. We show that property taxes can generate larger distortions in



    7
      A challenge with studying property taxes is that tax systems vary across municipalities, restricting micro-studies
of system features to one municipality. The data from Mexico City provide one of the largest possible samples of
properties in a developing country municipality, allowing us to employ data-demanding estimation techniques.
    8
      Households in developing countries experience more income volatility (Morduch 1995), have less access to
insurance (Jack and Suri 2014; Townsend 1995), and have less access to saving and borrowing in the formal financial
system (Morduch and Karlan 2009; Demirguc-Kunt et al. 2017) than households in higher-income countries. Table
B.1 describes consumer debt in Mexico City, and Panels B1-B4 in Figure B.2 compare measures of liquidity constraints
in Mexico with countries around the world.
    9
      This approach is also related to that of Meiselman (2018) and Brockmeyer et al. (2019), who build on Keen
and Slemrod (2017) to examine the effectiveness of enforcement letters to taxpayers in Detroit and Costa Rica,
respectively, and to that of Basri et al. (2019), who compare tax rate increases and tax administration investments
in the context of corporate income taxation in Indonesia.

                                                           5
the presence of liquidity constraints.10
    Our paper is also related to the tax compliance literature (for a recent survey, see Slemrod 2018).
This literature has traditionally been concerned with the accurate reporting of liabilities and the
impact of detection but has recently noted that payment enforcement is a separate and similarly
important challenge, even in the US (Versprille, 2020). Recently, researchers have started evaluating
novel tools for the enforcement of outstanding payments (Slemrod and Organ, 2020; Kessler, 2020;
Perez-Truglia and Troiano, 2018; Dusek et al., 2020). Our study adds to these papers by showing
how tax rates affect the level of delinquency and by evaluating the success of different enforcement
messages in reducing delinquency. Our optimal tax model also considers the welfare gains from
policies that target delinquency relative to the gains from other tax policies.
    In addition, this study contributes to research that uses property taxes to study questions related
to taxation and development (e.g., Khan et al., 2016, 2019; Okunogbe, 2019; Weigel, 2020; Balan
et al., 2020). Best et al. (2020) study the implications of horizontal inequities for tax morale and
compliance. Bergeron et al. (2020) study the effects of tax rates and enforcement on compliance
and how these instruments jointly determine the revenue-maximizing rate. Consistent with our
results, they find that responses to tax rate changes are likely driven by liquidity constraints. Our
paper shows that governments in developing countries can improve the design of the property tax
by accounting for both revenue and welfare effects of tax and enforcement policies.
    Finally, there is a large body of work on property taxes in the US, reviewed in Agrawal et al.
(2020).11 While this paper emphasizes aspects of property taxation that are more salient in devel-
oping countries, our results may be applicable to some developed-country settings. For instance,
liquidity constraints are also important in rich countries.12 Similarly, several US cities have been
found to have trouble collecting property taxes with noncompliance rates above 10 percent (Chirico
et al., 2019).
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 1 presents an optimal property taxation
model that guides our empirical analysis. Sections 2 and 3 present the property tax system in
Mexico City and the administrative data that we use. We study the effect of tax rate changes on
tax revenue in Section 4, the effect of enforcement on revenue in Section 5, and the role of liquidity
constraints in Section 6. In Section 7, we use our empirical estimates to implement our optimal
property tax model and discuss policy implications. Section 8 concludes.


   10
      Relative to the set of papers that focus on the role of information in enforcing taxes (Pomeranz, 2015; Naritomi,
2019), this papers studies compliance in a setting where the government has full information.
   11
      A central concern in this literature is the impact of property taxes on the real estate market. We document that
new construction is not strategically designed to target property tax thresholds and that tax increases are not likely
to impact investment in existing housing units. Property taxes are unlikely to affect household location decisions, as
funding for education services is not tied to neighborhood-level taxes and internal migration is lower in lower-income
countries. This is especially true in our setting, as Mexico City offers unique amenities.
   12
      Cabral and Hoxby (2012) show that property taxes are less popular when households lack escrow accounts to
smooth tax payments. Similarly, Wong (2020) shows that small property tax increases in the US can lead to financial
hardship, including mortgage delinquencies and declines in consumption.

                                                          6
1        Optimal Property Tax Administration with Liquidity Constraints
This section develops a model of optimal property taxation for developing countries building on work
by Keen and Slemrod (2017). To match our empirical setting, we adjust their model by considering
an observed and fixed tax liability and by focusing on compliance along the extensive margin.13 We
then show that liquidity constraints imply lower optimal property tax rates by raising the welfare
cost of taxation. For this reason, governments can improve the administration of property taxes by
providing liquidity to taxpayers. Finally, alleviating liquidity constraints also reduces the relative
desirability of enforcement as a means of raising revenue.


1.1      Model Setup
Households i live two periods. They consume a private good c and a public good g and have
uncertain income y in the first period. Households start owning a property of value H , pay a tax t
in the first period, and use the liquidated value of the asset for consumption in the second period.
These assumptions represent an initial state where households have committed to a level of housing
consumption and a second period where households re-optimize housing and consumption.14
    While the government observes the tax liability, households may decide not to pay the property
tax. I[Delinquenti ] denotes the event of household i being delinquent. Households face two types
of costs when they are delinquent. First, they incur a "tax morale shock," Mi (), which is a
function of the level of enforcement . We assume Mi () = m() + i . That is, households have a
common private cost, m() with m () > 0, as well as idiosyncratic disutility from not paying taxes,
i  F (·).15 Second, when households are delinquent, the value of their property depreciates by a
factor z . This factor corresponds to back taxes collected by the government, including through the
seizure of the property in lieu of property tax payments. Households solve the following problem:

                         max            u(c) + u(c ) + v (g ) - Mi () × I[Delinquenti ]
                      s,Delinquent
                                c = y - tH (1 - I[Delinquenti ]) - s
                               c     = s(1 + r) + H (1 - z × I[Delinquenti ])
                                s  0,

where savings receive an interest rate r and the level of public goods g is set by the government.


    13
      In contrast, Keen and Slemrod (2017) consider a model where taxpayers can take costly actions to "hide" income
from the tax authority. Table C.1, Panel B, shows that most taxpayers either pay their tax in full or do not pay;
very few pay partially.
   14
      We present a simple model for clarity of exposition and discuss extensions in Section 1.5.
   15
      Glaeser (2006) argues that interventions such as ours act as emotional taxes--a cost that needs to be taken into
account in welfare evaluations (see also Caplin, 2003; Loewenstein and O'Donoghue, 2006). Appendix A discusses
our interpretation of m() with reference to other approaches that also recognize the importance of private costs for
welfare evaluations (e.g., Allcott and Kessler, 2019).

                                                          7
    Conditional on the decision j  {Pay, Delinquent}, optimal consumption is determined by the
first-order condition:
                                    u (cj                 ,j
                                        s )  (1 + r )u (cs ),

where we index consumption by savings, s. When s > 0, this equation holds with equality. When
s = 0, the household is liquidity constrained, and this equation holds with a strict inequality.
    Households decide whether to comply with the property tax by comparing indirect utilities from
paying and being delinquent. Denoting the mean indirect utility of payment decision j by V j , the
overall utility for household i is then Vi = max{V Pay , V Delinquent + i }. Finally, let V denote the
population expectation over Vi .
    Let N Pay = Pr(V Pay > V Delinquent + i ) be the fraction of households that pay the tax. Following
                                     dV        j
Busso et al. (2013), we note that dV    j = N . This expression shows that because households have

already optimized over being delinquent or paying, the overall effect on welfare from marginal
                                                                                         Pay
changes to mean utilities does not depend on changes in delinquency status (i.e, dN   dV Pay
                                                                                             ).
    Consider now the effects of taxes on mean utilities:

                            V Delinquent         V Pay
                                         = 0 and       = -u (cPay
                                                              s )H.
                               t                 t

By the first expression, tax increases do not impact the mean utility of being delinquent. While
the second equation applies both when s = 0 and when s > 0, the interpretation differs across
these cases. When s > 0, the envelope theorem holds, and households readjust their savings, but
the welfare effect of this readjustment cancels out. When s = 0, there is no such readjustment,
as households are constrained. Because marginal utility is higher when s = 0, the welfare cost of
raising taxes is also higher in this case.
    Consider now the effects of increasing enforcement by raising :

                              V Delinquent             V Pay
                                           = -m () and       = 0.
                                                       

Enforcement lowers the mean utility of delinquency by increasing the private cost of not paying
taxes, while tax-paying households are not directly affected by changes in enforcement.
   Finally, the government uses tax revenue to provide public goods g and enforcement  at a cost
a(). Its budget constraint is:

                                g + a() = tHN Pay + zH (1 - N Pay ),

where z represents the back-taxes that the government will eventually collect from delinquent
taxpayers. While the effects of policy changes on welfare do not depend on changes in the decision
to pay or be delinquent, the effects of t and  on N Pay are crucial drivers of tax revenue.




                                                  8
1.2    Optimal Property Tax
The government maximizes V subject to its budget constraint. To simplify exposition, we consider
the case where income can take two values, one where households are liquidity constrained, s = 0,
and one with positive saving, s > 0. Substituting the government's constraint for g , a tax increase
has the following impact on welfare:

                                     Pay   Pay                                                          N Pay
             -N Pay H [s
                       Pay
                           u (cPay
                               s ) + 0 u (c0 )] + v (g ) × HN
                                                              Pay
                                                                  + (t - z )H                                 ,
                                                                                                        t

        Pay
where s      denotes the share of households who pay taxes with s = 0 and s > 0. We simplify
                                                                                  Pay
this expression by rearranging, defining the tax elasticity of compliance Pay
                                                                          t   = N      t
                                                                                  t N Pay
                                                                                          < 0 and
approximating the marginal utility with a Taylor expansion (e.g., as in Chetty, 2006) to obtain:

                                                                     Pay   Pay   Pay
                                          v (g )               1 -  (0 ,c c0   + s,c cPay
                                                                                      s )
                     M V P Ft =                            -                                            ,         (1)
                                          u (c)                                   ~)Pay
                                                                         1 + (1 - z t
                                   Value of Public Goods           Welfare Cost Per Dollar of Revenue


where  = -u   u (c)c
                (c)
                                                                   ~  1 is the fraction of back-taxes
                     is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, z
collected in the future, and c measures the decrease in consumption in response to the property
tax increase.16
    Equation 1 shows that the marginal value of public funds (MVPF) (e.g., Atkinson and Stern,
1974; Slemrod and Yitzhaki, 2001; Hendren, 2016) from raising taxes depends on the value of public
goods and the distortions associated with raising revenue. A positive M V P Ft implies that welfare
increases when property taxes are used to fund public goods. The costs of raising tax revenue are
larger when taxpayers are less likely to comply with a tax increase (large t in absolute value), when
paying taxes leads to large drops in consumption, and when the government is not able to collect
back-taxes in future periods (low value of z  ~). Funding public goods through property taxes is less
desirable in each of these cases.
    We obtain an expression for the optimal property tax by setting M V P Ft = 0. Writing cPay   s =
   c            c
-t,s t, where t,s   > 0 is the tax semi-elasticity of consumption, the optimal tax rate is:

                                                        ~)Pay
                                              (1 + (1 - z     v (g )
                                                          t ) u (c) - 1
                                        t=           Pay c     Pay c              .                               (2)
                                                    (s,c t,s + 0 ,s t,0 )


The optimal tax is larger when public goods are more valuable (a larger value of v           (g )
                                                                                           u (c)
                                                                                                  ) and when
                                                Pay
taxes have a smaller effect on delinquency (t is close to zero). Similarly, because the consumption
                                                                             c      c
response is likely to be greater for liquidity-constrained households (i.e., t, 0 > t,s ), the government
can set higher property taxes when the fraction of liquidity-constrained households is smaller.
  16                                   Pay
     Note that Equation 1 depends on s,c   , which represents the share of consumption by households that pay taxes
with a given value of s. See Appendix A for details.

                                                               9
1.3     Optimal Enforcement
Consider now the government's choice to expend resources on enforcement. Increasing  has the
following effect on welfare:

                                                                           N Pay
                         -(1 - N Pay )m () + v (g ) × (t - z )H                  - a () .
                                                                           

In our setting, enforcement can be interpreted in terms of the money spent on mailing enforce-
ment letters, so we assume that a() = , where  is money spent on enforcement. Defining the
                                             Pay
enforcement elasticity of compliance Pay
                                         = N     
                                             N Pay
                                                     > 0, the MVPF from enforcement is then:

                                               v (g )      1 - N Pay
                                M V P F =             -          Pay     .                                       (3)
                                               m () (1 - z
                                                         ~)N Pay  Ht - 1

The first expression is the value of public goods relative to the welfare cost of enforcement. The
second is the welfare cost of raising revenue from a 1 - N Pay fraction of households. The term
        Pay
     ~)  Ht captures the revenue gains from enforcement net of the public cost of enforcement,
(1 - z
, and the reduction in future back taxes, z  ~.17 We can use Equation 3 to evaluate whether an
enforcement action improved welfare, i.e., whether M V P F > 0.
   Setting M V P F = 0 yields the following condition for the optimal enforcement level  :

                                                   (1 - N Pay ) m  ()
                                                                v (g )
                                                                       +
                                         Pay
                                               =                                  .
                                                      (1 - z
                                                           ~)N Pay Ht

At the optimum , the government equates the enforcement elasticity Pay        to the ratio of enforce-
ment costs to tax revenue. Importantly, this ratio accounts for both public enforcement expenditures
 and the private disutility from enforcement m() that is incurred by the 1 - N Pay delinquent
taxpayers.18
   For a given enforcement level , this expression defines the equilibrium compliance rate that
equates the marginal costs and benefits of enforcement:

                                                                m ()
                                         Pay
                                                         1+     v (g )
                                        N      =              Pay
                                                                         m ()
                                                                                  .                              (4)
                                                        ~)  Ht +
                                                   (1 - z                v (g )


This expression is useful from a policy perspective, as it tells the government whether the marginal
   17
      Our model assumes that changes in  do not impact z  ~. This assumption is supported by Figure C.2, which shows
that the share of back-taxes eventually collected by the government is stable over time. Moreover, to the extent that
enforcement collects "low-hanging fruit" (such that z~ on the remaining tax debt is smaller), this assumption errs on
the side of making enforcement look more effective. We do not study the effects of policies that directly change z  ~
(such as increasing property seizures) since we do not observe such policy variation in the data.
   18
      Keen and Slemrod (2017) call this term the adjusted marginal cost-revenue ratio. The term m () can be
viewed as a first-order approximation of m(). Private enforcement costs are discounted by the value of public goods
v (g ) since an increase in  requires lowering g .

                                                         10
                                                                              Pay
benefit exceeds the marginal cost of enforcement, which happens when N            < N Pay . The govern-
                                                                 Pay
ment can then raise welfare by increasing enforcement when N         --which combines the administra-
tive costs, private costs, and effectiveness of enforcement--is smaller than the observed compliance
rate N Pay .19


1.4    Relative Value of Enforcement and Liquidity Constraints
Equations 1 and 3 can also inform policy by showing whether it is preferable to raise tax revenue
by increasing tax rates or by tightening enforcement. Suppose the government increased taxes and
reduced enforcement to keep spending g constant. Such a reform would improve welfare if:

                                 M V P Ft × u (c) - M V P F × m () > 0.                                        (5)

Since this is a balanced-budget reform, this condition compares only the welfare costs of raising
revenue and does not depend on the value of public goods. Importantly, because M V P Ft depends on
consumption changes but M V P F does not, the relative value of taxation over enforcement depends
on the degree to which liquidity constraints increase the welfare costs of taxation. By providing
liquidity, the government can reduce the fraction of liquidity-constrained taxpayers, which increases
M V P Ft as well as the relative value of taxation over enforcement.20


1.5    Limitations and Extensions
Our model simplifies the analysis to focus on the main forces in our empirical setting. We now
discuss possible limitations and extensions to our conceptual framework.
    1. Uncertainty. Our model assumes a discrete distribution for income shocks. Allowing for a
range of possible incomes would not alter the main results. In this case, the average consumption
drop across the range of possible incomes would measure the welfare costs from taxation.
    2. Dynamics. Our model can also be extended to allow for multiple time periods, and the im-
portance of liquidity constraints carries over to dynamic models with uncertain income.21 Moreover,
as in other sufficient statistic models (e.g., Chetty and Finkelstein, 2013), consumption changes are
robust welfare measures in the presence of dynamic considerations.
    3. Consumption commitments and housing choice. Our analysis assumes that housing consump-
tion is initially fixed. While the model could endogenize the decision to adjust housing, the ranges
of property tax changes that we consider are unlikely to trigger such decisions from homeowners,
who represent the vast majority of households in our data.

  19
      Figure A.1 provides graphical intuition for this result.
  20
      Appendix A provides a detailed derivation of Equation 5 and discusses the role of liquidity provision.
   21
      For example, Deaton (1991) shows that even in periods when households are not constrained, precautionary
savings produce behavior similar to that under liquidity constraints. This shows that interactions between property
taxes and liquidity constraints continue to be important in dynamic settings.

                                                        11
    Nonetheless, consumption commitments can impact our analysis by amplifying the welfare cost
of income shocks. Chetty (2004) shows that consumption commitments lead to larger drops in
adjustable consumption and can further exacerbate welfare costs when housing and flexible con-
sumption are complements. In our empirical implementation, we considering a range of values for
 , including larger values that account for these forces.
    4. Housing market effects. Our model abstracts away from the effects of taxes on the supply of
housing or on property values. While property taxes can impact the supply of housing, these effects
are likely to be small in our setting. In Appendix F, we show that the complexity of the property
tax system implies that increasing the property tax rate does not impact the supply of housing.
Moreover, because property taxes are based on outdated cadastral values, the government's budget
constraint is not affected by policy-driven changes in market values.
    Nonetheless, a potential concern is that tax and spending policies can be capitalized into property
values and that this will affect inter-temporal consumption decisions. Brueckner (1982) models the
capitalization of local taxes and public goods into property values. A key result in this literature is
that at the efficient level of provision, increasing local public spending through property taxes leaves
the value of housing unaffected. Our assumption of no capitalization effects is therefore correct when
MVPFt = 0, leaving Equation 2 unaffected by this assumption.22 When public goods are under-
provided, increasing public good provision by taxing property would increase property values.23
Capitalization would increase the wealth of property owners. Unconstrained households would then
reduce savings, which would be reflected by a smaller consumption drop in our data. Constrained
households would not change their consumption today but would have higher consumption in the
future. Ignoring this positive impact on consumption would then lead us to overestimate the
welfare cost of taxation. Assuming no capitalization effects therefore biases us against finding that
MVPFt > 0. We return to this discussion in our empirical implementation.
    5. Location decisions and tax competition. Unlike other models of property taxation (e.g.,
Agrawal et al., 2020), we do not consider migration or tax competition. These concerns are less
important in developing countries where internal migration is generally lower (Bell et al. 2015) and
in our specific setting because Mexico City offers unique amenities, which makes the possibility of
tax-driven migration less relevant. Moreover, as found in Brueckner (1982), migration decisions are
neutral to property tax changes in equilibrium.
    6. Redistribution and fairness. We assume that the tax rate applies to properties of similar
values. This assumption matches our setting, as the government relies on a partially progressive

   22
      Because enforcement actions are directed at delinquent individuals, rather than at the market as a whole,
Equations 3­4 are unlikely to be affected by capitalization effects.
   23
      Bradbury et al. (2001) and Cellini et al. (2010) provide evidence that tax-financed increases in public good
provision have positive effects on property values in the US. Gadenne (2017) finds that tax-financed public spending
has significant impacts on the quality of public goods in Brazil. Gonzalez-Navarro and Quintana-Domeque (2016)
show that randomly assigned street pavement increased property values in Mexico City. We safely ignore the case
when public goods are over-provided, since MVPFt < 0 implies that property taxes reduce welfare with or without
capitalization effects.

                                                        12
tax schedule with different tax rates for different value bands. If households responded to progressive
property taxes by moving to properties of lesser value, our model could be extended by accounting
for the resulting fiscal externality. However, as discussed above, we do not believe that this is the
primary margin of adjustment in the context of developing countries. Future work can extend our
model to consider whether a progressive property tax could be used to redistribute wealth.
    Finally, our model does not allow for the rate of noncompliance to impact the utility of taxpayers.
Besley et al. (2019) develop a model with fairness considerations to study the introduction of a poll
tax in the UK that increased evasion by 300­500 percent. While we show that tax hikes increase
noncompliance, our effects are orders of magnitude smaller than those of the poll tax. Fairness
motives are therefore unlikely to play a central role in the context of the policies that we study.
    Overall, the framework allows policy makers to go beyond revenue maximization and to consider
the welfare effects of tax system changes. Equations 1­4 evaluate the welfare effects of tax and
enforcement policies and provide actionable policy implications. These equations also motivate
our empirical analysis to estimate key effects of different policies, including Pay t , c, and  .
                                                                                                   Pay

Section 7 implements these formulas using our empirical estimates and provides policy guidance for
governments in developing economies.

2        Property Taxes in Mexico City
This section presents the property tax system in Mexico City.24 We start by explaining the con-
struction of the tax base and the tax rate schedule. We then discuss the main elements of the tax
payment regulation and enforcement.25


2.1      Tax Base
The base for the property tax is the cadastral value Vit of property i in year t, which is determined
by the following formula:

                    Vit = (Ait Lit + Uit Mit )[1 - Dt · (1{t-t0 40} (t - t0 ) + 1{t-t0 >40} 40)],

where Ait is the unit value of land in the neighborhood of property i, Lit is the total land area of
the property in square meters, Uit is the unit value of construction in the neighborhood of property
    24
       We abstract away from political economy issues for a couple of reasons. First, Mexico City has had leftist
governments since 1997. Because these governments have relied on political support from lower-income individuals,
it is unlikely that pressure from wealthy individuals limits property taxation. Second, current government officials
have expressed a desire to increase tax revenue specifically through property taxation. However, these officials are
also sensitive to declining compliance rates and potential hardship for taxpayers. Given that political economy
constraints are unlikely to explain the under-reliance on property taxes, we focus our analysis on the importance of
compliance and liquidity constraints.
    25
       While housing property is also taxed indirectly, these taxes do not interact with our variation. Property buyers
pay a 2 percent transfer tax, income from property sales is subject to capital gains tax at a rate between 2 and 35
percent, and inheritances above 10,000,000 MXN (400,00 USD) are taxed at a rate between 10 and 30 percent. In
contrast to those in the US, property taxes in Mexico do not determine neighborhood-level public goods.

                                                          13
i, Mit is the total construction area of the property, Dt is a reduction applied per each year of
antiquity, and t0 is the year of construction of the property. That is, the tax base is the sum
of the land and construction value, discounted for antiquity until the property is forty years old,
whereupon the property value remains constant in age.26 Assessed property values in the cadaster
correlate strongly with commercial values (Figure B.1, Panel B).
    The distribution of property values is quite stable during the period of our study. The unit
values of land and construction, Ait and Uit , are based on commercial values and were updated
only once during the period of our study (between 2008 and 2009). This change does not affect
our estimations, which exploit variation between 2009 and 2012. In theory, taxpayers can appeal
the cadastral valuation proposed by the government and propose their own valuation. In practice,
less than 0.2 percent of appeals are approved.27 Finally, the age discount makes it possible for
properties to change cadastral value bands over time. However, because the discount factor is so
small (Dt = 0.01), very few properties drop to a lower cadastral value band during the five-year
period that we study. We exclude properties with a change in cadastral value band between 2009
and 2012 from our analyses.28


2.2     Tax Rates
Figure 2 shows that the property tax schedule is partly progressive. The schedule relies on 16
cadastral value bands: A to P.29 For bands A­D, the tax is a band-specific lump-sum amount
that increases over time with inflation. While the lump-sum amounts increase across bands A­D,
they increase by less than the property value. For this reason, the average tax rate is decreasing
in property values at the lower end of the value distribution. Properties in bands E­P face a
progressive schedule, with marginal tax rates ranging from 7.5­16.9 basis points (a percent of a
percent), which yield average tax rates that increase with property values. Using household survey
data, we calculate that on average, property tax payments correspond to between 0.5 and 1 percent

   26
      The registry of property transactions and the cadaster are held by two different levels of government (states and
municipalities, respectively) and are not readily mergeable. For this reason, property transactions cannot be used to
update cadastral values. While the tax base may depart from market values, note that this is also often the case in
high-income countries as well. For instance, California's Proposition 13 generates large differences between assessed
and market values. Similarly, Howard and Avenancio-Leon (2019) show that racial differences in assessment appeals
drive large differences between assessments and market values across demographic groups.
   27
      In 2010, 319,019 taxpayers filed appeals, but only 379 successfully obtained a reduction in their tax base. In
2011, 249 out of 177,681 taxpayer appeals were successful. In 2012, 162 out of 116,729 appeals were successful.
   28
      In total, we exclude 284,686 properties, 87 percent of which registered a cadastral value band change due to an
increase in the construction area, for an average cadastral value change of 42 percent. Changes in land area, special
amenities (e.g., lifts), and value depreciation over time account for the remaining 13 percent of value-band changes.
Our results are robust to including these properties. In addition, exemptions of 30 percent or more of the annual
tax liability are available to single mothers with children and seniors with incomes below a specified threshold. Our
results are robust to dropping the approximately 7 percent of properties that ever received these exemption (Tables
D.4 and E.3).
   29
      The thresholds for these bands are constant over time, except between 2008 and 2009, when both the band
thresholds and the tax rates were updated for inflation. In later years, only the tax rates are updated for inflation
each year. Table B.2 shows the property tax schedule for 2009 as an example.

                                                          14
of annual household income, with higher values for poorer households (see Figure B.1, Panel C).30
    While marginal tax rates change little over the years, the average tax rates in bands E­J are
also affected by abatements, which are applied to the gross tax liability. Abatements vary over time
and have large impacts on average tax rates: abatements vary between 65 percent (in band E) to 10
percent (in band J). The original purpose of abatements was to ensure that the mean tax liability
increased gradually from band E to J. Following the 2008 financial crisis, the government decided
to remove the abatements one cadastral value band at a time.31
    The removal of abatements led to large and unexpected changes in mean tax rates over time
and across value bands. Because our data cover the years 2008­2012, our analysis exploits three
reform episodes: (1) the 2010 abatement removal for value band I, (2) the 2011 removal for band
H, and (3) the 2012 removal for band G. Figure 2 shows that the largest rate changes between 2008
and 2012 were caused by removing these abatements. Among the three reform episodes, properties
in band G saw the largest increase in taxes, and those in band I saw the smallest increase.
    The government of Mexico City announced these rate increases every year when it published
property tax rates for the following year. It is unlikely that the changes were anticipated by
taxpayers, as they were not widely discussed in the media and each reform episode affected only a
small subset of properties. We show below that there is no evidence for any behavioral change prior
to the reforms. Figure B.4 shows that properties treated with the quasi-exogenous tax rate increases
are well distributed across the city. The average share of treated properties within a zipcode is only
about 3 percent. The responses to these reforms therefore constitute individual taxpayer responses
to tax rate changes rather than responses driven by public debate or general equilibrium changes
in policy, attitudes, or perceptions.


2.3     Tax Payment and Enforcement
The legal liability for the property tax rests with the property owner. Property tax bills are delivered
to the property and are addressed to the owner. At the beginning of the calendar year, taxpayers
receive a bill for the yearly liability. To encourage early payment and increase compliance, the
government offers early-bird and super-early-bird discounts if taxpayers pay their yearly liability in
full before specific dates. The exact deadlines for the discounts and the discount rates vary over time
(see Table B.4). While tax bills include the yearly tax liability, they can be paid in six bi-monthly
installments. Taxpayers are sent additional bills at the beginning of each bi-monthly period with
a reminder that payments are due by the last day of the period. Property tax bills can be paid in

   30
       Panel D in Figure B.1 shows the year-on-year growth rate of property tax payments. Given the small annual
inflation adjustments to the liability, there is no anchoring of tax payments at the previous year's liability. Instead,
the nominal payment amounts increase slightly each year.
    31
       Table B.3 lists the abatement rates by value band and year. The government's intention was to remove all
abatements but to do so gradually to minimize potential backlash or unrest. Removing abatements was the admin-
istratively simplest way of raising tax rates. Figure B.1, Panel A, shows that property tax revenues dramatically
increased after 2008 in Mexico City.

                                                          15
person at government offices, banks, and convenience stores.32
    When taxpayers miss a payment, the government automatically updates the unpaid liabilities
for monthly inflation and applies a surcharge for every month that a payment is late. Taxpayers who
have not paid their yearly liability by April 30th of the following year are catalogued as delinquent
taxpayers and face additional penalties and surcharges.33
    The Ministry of Finance of Mexico City regularly conducts enforcement campaigns to encourage
the payment of outstanding property tax debt and to sustain voluntary compliance. Enforcement
interventions have varied over time. For instance, enforcement letters have varied in message con-
tent over the years (e.g., emphasizing sanctions or public goods provision or simply conveying a
reminder). The delivery method for these messages (e.g., letter, phone call, or email) has also varied
over time, as has the target group. In some years, all delinquent taxpayers were contacted, while
in other years, enforcement has focused on smaller subsets of taxpayers with large debts. We use
one of these enforcement interventions to estimate the effects of enforcement in Section 5.
    While taxpayers who are unresponsive to administrative enforcement can be prosecuted, the
government does not have the capacity to do this in a systematic way. In extreme cases, the
government can seize a delinquent taxpayer's property. While this is rare, it does happen (see
Table C.1, Panel C). The government can even pursue a jail sentence of up to ten years for tax
delinquency.


3        Administrative Tax Data
Our empirical analyses exploit three datasets on the universe of tax-liable residential properties in
Mexico City from 2008 to 2012. First, the cadaster--or tax register--lists all properties with their
unique property tax ID, post code, and property characteristics such as land area, construction
area, land and construction value, and total property value.
    Second, we use data from annual and bi-monthly property tax bills for all properties. These
bills include the property value, tax liability, bill issue date, and due date. Third, we use data from
the universe of property tax payments. For each payment, we have data on the relevant tax bill
and period, amount, date, and additional variables including inflation adjustments, surcharges, and
penalties for late payment. We link the billing and payment data to the cadaster via the unique
ID. Our main dataset consists of a balanced panel of 1.42 million properties.
    32
       Figure B.3 shows a typical property tax bill. While the owner may not receive the tax bill if renters do not
notify owners or if the cadaster is out of date, this is a minor concern for enforcement in Mexico City, where renters
account for only 15 percent of households. Table B.5 shows descriptive statistics on property owners and renters.
While it is possible (though not observable to us) that property tax compliance is lower for rented properties, this
can explain only part of the delinquency rate, which is much higher (40 percent) than the rental rate.
    33
       While the monthly surcharge varies over time, it is on average 1 percent of the outstanding liability for each
month of delay. That is, if a taxpayer makes an overdue payment after 6 months, the government adds a 6 percent
surcharge to the inflation-updated liability. Table C.1, Panel C, shows the additional fees paid by delinquent taxpayers
who made outstanding tax payments in 2008 and 2009. The table shows that late payment fines are applied to almost
all late-payers and that the fines represent a substantial fraction--between 15 and 30 percent--of the tax liability.

                                                          16
    The majority of our analyses study outcomes at the property-year level. The main outcome
variables are the annual payment amount in current Mexican pesos (MXN, thousand) and the
compliance share, defined as the ratio of tax payment to gross liability. Additional outcomes
include dummies for zero, partial, and full payment of the net tax liability (net of any early-bird
and super-early-bird discounts). Finally, we characterize payment timing with dummies indicating
early (all-at-once), bi-monthly (payment in installments), and late payment.
    A salient feature of the data is that the distribution of properties is skewed toward low value
bands. While the majority of properties fall into bands A­E, the distribution of cadastral values
is slightly less skewed. Because of the progressive tax schedule, tax liabilities are more evenly
distributed across value bands. However, because compliance is higher for low value bands, the
distribution of tax payments is less evenly distributed (see Figure C.1 for details).
    The data reveal interesting trends. While the gradual eliminations of abatements led to a rise
in the mean tax liability, average tax payments--in absolute terms and as a share of the yearly
liability--have decreased over time. The decrease in tax payments is partly driven by a rise in
the share of properties making zero payments and a decline in the share of properties paying in
full. These patterns showcase the importance of understanding how households respond to tax rate
increases and whether enforcement efforts can influence the decaying compliance rate.34


4        The Elasticity of Tax Revenues to the Tax Rate
This section estimates the effects of tax rate changes on tax payment and compliance. We study
three quasi-experimental reforms: the mean tax increases for properties in value bands I, H, and G
in 2010, 2011, and 2012, respectively. We first present results from an RD estimation that exploits
the sharp discontinuities in tax rate changes at thresholds between the treated value bands and
bands below them. This approach yields estimates of short-term local average treatment effects for
properties close to each threshold. We then estimate medium-term effects with a DiD design that
uses properties in never-treated value bands as controls.


4.1      Short-Term Effects: Regression Discontinuity Estimation
Our RD estimation relies on discontinuous tax rate changes at the lower thresholds of cadastral value
bands that experienced large tax rate increases. We focus on rate changes--rather than levels--
since tax rate levels differ between value bands and there are small yearly inflation adjustments to
rates in all bands. Finally, we use the band below as the counterfactual since properties in the band
above the treated band were treated in the previous year.
    Consider the properties in a treated band in year t as well as the properties in the band im-

    34
    Table C.1 describes additional property characteristics. For instance, the average property was built in 1985
and has a land area of 123 square meters and a construction area of 126 square meters.

                                                       17
mediately below it. Let V^i = Vi - V- denote the distance between the value of property i, Vi , and
the lower limit of the treated band, V- . Let Yi,t denote the outcome of interest for property i in
period t. We estimate the effect of the tax rate increase on the year-on-year change in the outcome
of interest as follows:

                                                    ^i ) + g (V
                                  Yi,t =  + Ti + f (V         ^i )Ti +        i,t ,


where Ti is an indicator for properties in the treated band, i.e., Ti = 1{Vi V- } , f and g are continuous
functions, and i,t is an error term.
    The validity of this approach relies on the assumption that taxpayers cannot manipulate their
property valuation in response to a change in the tax rate. To validate this assumption, we test
for a discontinuity in the distribution of the running variable around the treatment cut-off. We are
unable to reject the null hypothesis of no manipulation of property values around the treatment
cut-off for all three reforms using either the McCrary (2008) test (see Figure D.1, Column (A))
or the Bugni and Canay (2020) test (see Table D.1).35 In addition, we test for discontinuities in
property characteristics around the treatment thresholds and find no significant differences in the
year of construction, land area, or construction area (see Figure D.1, Columns B­D). Finally, we
note that in the unlikely case that taxpayers anticipated the tax rate increase and responded before
the change went into effect, our estimates of the tax payment increase would be biased towards
zero. We show below that there is no evidence for an anticipatory response.

Estimates

Figures 3 and 4 show the results for the three different reform episodes (rows) and four different
outcomes (columns). Each panel plots the year-on-year (pre- vs post-reform) change for a given
outcome in 20 equally spaced cadastral value bins around the lower threshold of the treated band.
Each graph reports a third-order polynomial fit along with 95 percent confidence intervals.
    Column (A) of Figure 3 shows that the legislated tax rate increases were indeed applied as
intended and generated a 9.1 basis point increase in the mean tax rate at the band threshold in
2010 and even larger increases of 12.1 and 18.0 basis points in 2011 and 2012. Column (B) shows that
tax payments jumped substantially--between 450 and 600 MXN--in all reform episodes. However,
payments increased by less than the mechanically expected increase, as compliance fell.36 Figure 4
shows that the share of taxpayers paying their liability in full fell by 5.5 ppt in 2010, by 6.4 ppt in
2011, and by over 10 ppt in 2012. The compliance share also decreased in all reform episodes by


   35
      The Bugni and Canay (2020) test provides an alternative approach to testing for manipulation of cadastral
values. This test examines the balance in the number of observations around the cut-off. Unlike the McCrary (2008)
test, it does not rely on local density estimates.
   36
      The tax liability for a property at the value band threshold of 2.3 million MXN increased by 2100 MXN in 2010.
Liabilities increased by close to 2350 MXN in 2011 and 2900 MXN in 2012.

                                                        18
3.2­6.2 ppt.37
    Table 1, Panel A, presents the implied tax rate elasticities for the outcomes considered in Figures
3­4.38 Column (2) lists the elasticities of tax revenue to the tax rate. When the change in the mean
tax rate is 9.1 basis points, the elasticity of tax revenues is 0.55, whereas the estimate is 0.31 when
the tax rate increases by 18.0 basis points. While these estimates are consistent with the notion
that larger tax rate changes also generate larger compliance responses, we cannot reject the null
that these elasticities are equal to each other at conventional significance levels. Table 1 also reports
tax compliance elasticities, which we use in our policy analysis in Section 7.
    To demonstrate the robustness of our results, we compare our main estimates from the cubic
polynomial regression with the results from local polynomial regressions with varying bandwidths
and degrees of polynomial in Figure D.2. Table D.2 shows the results from specifying an optimal
bandwidth in local linear regressions as in Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik (2014). The estimates
are statistically indistinguishable from those in Table 1.
    As an additional robustness test, we consider an alternative specification for our RD estimates.
Because we study the effects of discontinuous tax changes around thresholds, we follow Lalive
(2008), Lemieux and Milligan (2008), and Grembi, Nannicini and Troiano (2016) by estimating a
differences-in-discontinuities model on our panel data:

                              Yi,t =0 + 0 Ti + f0 (V^i ) + g0 (V^i )Ti +,

                                    [1 + 1 Ti + f1 (V^i ) + g1 (V^i )Ti ]Dt +     i,t ,


where Dt is an indicator for the time period when the abatement is removed. The effect of the
abatement removal, in excess of the effect of the smaller year-on-year tax rate changes, is given by
1 . The results displayed in Table D.3 show that the 1 estimate from this equation is very similar
to our main estimates, and we can generally reject the null hypothesis that 1 = 0 .
    These results show that while sharp increases in average tax rates have sizable effects on tax
payments, taxpayers also respond by decreasing their compliance with the property tax. While the
RD approach yields precise and highly credible estimates of the short-term responses to the tax
increases, compliance in future years may depend on broader responses by taxpayers.39


4.2     Medium-Term Dynamics: Differences-in-Differences
An important question for policymakers is whether the effects of tax rate increases persist over time
or are temporary. For instance, while liquidity-constrained taxpayers may temporarily decrease

   37
      Note that these compliance drops are not due to changes in the tax base, as the latter is not updated during
the study period and appeals against the tax liability are overwhelmingly unsuccessful, as mentioned in Section 2.1.
Because administrative tax data do not record whether properties are occupied by renters or owners, we cannot
explore heterogeneity along this margin.
   38
      We compute the elasticity y,t = y   t       y                             t
                                       t y using t from the RD estimates and y from outcome means at baseline.
   39
      Because the control bands are treated in t + 1, we cannot use the RD approach to estimate dynamic responses.

                                                        19
compliance after a tax rate increase, they may also make up for missed payments in later years. In
this example, RD estimates would under-estimate the medium-term revenue elasticities.
    We estimate medium-term effects using a DiD design that captures the evolution of compliance
outcomes over time. This approach compares properties in the treated value band to properties in
other high-value bands that never experienced a tax increase. Specifically, for a tax rate increase
occurring in year t0 , we estimate:

                                        Yit =  + DDit  + i + t +            it ,                                   (6)

where Yit denotes the compliance outcome of property i in year t,  is a constant, DDit is a
dummy taking the value of 1 when property i belongs to the treated value band and t  t0 , t
and i denote year and property fixed effects, and it is the error term. For all years, we use
properties in bands K and L as controls.40 The identifying assumption is that absent the tax hikes,
the outcomes for properties in the treatment and control groups would have trended in parallel.
Under this assumption, the point estimate for  captures the causal effect of the tax rate change
on compliance. Given the large share of zeros in our outcome variables, we estimate Equation 6 in
levels. To obtain a relative effect, we scale the point estimates and standard errors by the mean
outcome in the treatment group in the last pre-reform year.41

Estimates

Figures 5 and 6 capture dynamic responses to tax rate changes. The figures are structured like
Figures 3 and 4: the rows pertain to the three different reform episodes, while the columns reflect
the different outcome variables. In each graph, the vertical black line indicates the timing of
treatment, the red solid line represents the average outcome in the treated band, and the blue
dotted line represents the average outcome in control bands K and L. In all panels, outcomes are
scaled by the pre-reform group-specific mean.
    The timing of the reforms and the length of our dataset mean that we can observe three post-
reform periods for the 2010 reform, two post-periods for the 2011 reform, and one post-period for
the 2012 reform. On the other hand, we observe the longest pre-reform period (four years) for the
2012 reform and the shortest (two years) for the 2010 reform. We detect no significant difference in
pre-trends between the treatment and control groups for any reform episode and no evidence of an
anticipated response to the reform. In contrast, we observe a precise and sharp deviation in trends
in each of the reform years.

   40
      Among the properties in bands that are never treated with one of the large quasi-experimental tax rate increases,
those in bands K and L are the closest in value to the properties in the treated bands. Figures E.2­E.4 show that
properties in other untreated bands also exhibit similar pre-reform trends and yield similar results.
   41
      The results are very similar when we estimate Equation 6 via pseudo-Poisson maximum likelihood (Santos Silva
and Tenreyro 2006), which is suitable when outcome variables are highly skewed or have a large share of zeros
(Brockmeyer and Hernandez 2019).

                                                          20
    Consistent with the legislative changes, mean tax rates increased significantly after every reform
event (Figure 5, Column (A)). As with the RD estimates, we find large increases in tax payments
(Column (B)). However, decreases in the share of taxpayers paying in full and in the compliance
share (Figure 6) show that compliance also fell significantly. The results are qualitatively similar
across the three reform episodes, though the magnitude of the compliance drop is largest for the 2012
reform, which triggered the largest tax rate change. Following the 2012 reform, the full payment
share fell by 30 percent, and the compliance share fell by 18 percent. For the 2010 reform, a 17
percent increase in the mean tax rate triggered a 11.6 percent increase in tax payment amounts.
The payment response was moderated by a 4 percent reduction in the compliance share. In turn,
the drop in the compliance share was partly driven by a 10 percent drop in the share of on-time
payments-in-full.
    One possible explanation for the smaller estimates for the 2010 and 2011 reforms is that these
estimates capture effects over longer post-reform periods (two and three years, respectively), while
the estimate of the 2012 tax change only captures the effect for a single post-reform period. However,
we obtain similar compliance drops for the 2010 and 2011 tax changes when we estimate DiD effects
using a single post-reform period (see Table E.1). These results raise the possibility that larger tax
changes can trigger more-than-proportional compliance responses.42
    Table 1, Panel B, summarizes the treatment effect estimates and the implied elasticities. The
elasticity of tax revenues with respect to the tax rate is presented in Column (6). This elasticity
ranges from 0.697 in response to the 17 percent increase in the tax rate affecting band I in 2010
to 0.489 in response to the 40 percent increase in the tax rate affecting band G in 2012.43 While
these numbers are very similar to the RD estimates, the DiD estimates are more precisely estimated.
Exploiting variation in tax rates across all value bands in panel regressions yields an average payment
elasticity of 0.69 (SE=0.09) and a compliance elasticity of -0.29 (SE=0.10) (see Table E.5).
    The results of our DiD analysis show that tax rate increases lead to persistent changes in both
tax payment and compliance behaviors. By using a different set of control properties than in the
RD analysis, the DiD also bolsters the likelihood that we are measuring the causal effects of changes
in tax rates.44


5        The Elasticity of Tax Revenues to Enforcement
Governments around the world have two options when seeking to raise tax revenue: increasing
tax rates on taxpayers who are not delinquent or increasing the number of taxpayers by enforcing
    42
      We also find that the tax rate hikes increased taxpayers' likelihood of making an appeal against their tax liability
(Figure E.1), even though hardly any appeals lead to a change in the tax liability (see footnote 27).
   43
      In Appendix E, we perform robustness tests of our DiD estimations. We confirm that the results are very similar
when we use other value bands as the control group (Table E.2 and Figures E.2­E.4), dropping taxpayers benefiting
from exemptions (Table E.3) and clustering the standard errors at different levels or bootstrapping them (Table E.4).
   44
      A potential concern is that tax rate increases might reduce investment in real estate. We discuss this possibility
and test for it empirically in Appendix F. We find no evidence of impacts on real estate investment.

                                                           21
existing taxes on delinquent taxpayers. In the context of Mexico City, this trade-off is stark since 40
percent of taxpayers are delinquent. We characterize it by estimating the elasticity of tax payment
to enforcement using a field experiment that we designed and evaluated in collaboration with the
Ministry of Finance of Mexico City.


5.1      Field Experiment
The Ministry of Finance sent out enforcement letters to 80,000 delinquent taxpayers between July
28 and August 11, 2014, requesting that they pay their outstanding tax debt accumulated from
bimester 4 of 2009 to bimester 3 of 2014. A control group of 10,000 delinquent taxpayers received
no letter. The mode of delivery, sample selection, and information provided in the letters cor-
responds to the ministry's typical practices. Therefore, our estimates can be viewed roughly as
in-equilibrium effects. Our estimates also have general validity, as the cadastral value distribution
among delinquent taxpayers is similar to that of the population (Table G.1). Each personalized
letter lists the bimester(s) for which the tax payment is overdue, requests payment within 15 work-
ing days after receipt of the letter, and lists the institutions accepting payment (tax administration
offices, bank branches, convenience stores).
    The treatment group in our intervention was divided into eight groups of 10,000 taxpayers,
each receiving a slightly different variant of the letter. Figure G.1 illustrates the experimental
design, and Figure G.3 shows the text of the letters. Half of the letters put additional emphasis on
sanctions used to enforce the tax (referred to below as the sanctions treatment), while the other
half emphasized the fact that property tax revenue is used to fund health services, education, and
community infrastructure (referred to as the public goods treatment). Within these two main
groups, half of the letters were signed by a compliance officer and the other half by a (more senior)
fiscal attorney. In addition, the gender of the signatory was varied arbitrarily. Fiscal attorney
signatures were either male or gender neutral (the first name was signed only as an initial), while
compliance officer signatures were either female or gender neutral.


5.2      Empirical Results
Figure 7 displays the effects of the enforcement intervention. The plots show trends in payment
outcomes around the time of the intervention and distinguish the control group, the sanctions
treatment, and the public goods treatment. As expected, the three groups exhibit linear trends in
all outcomes prior to the intervention. The treatment groups start diverging in early August when
the first letters are delivered.45 The divergence accelerates sharply by mid-August. This timing
coincides with the end of the 15-day deadline to respond to the letter starting after all the letters
are delivered. In contrast, we do not see any trend changes for the control group.


  45
       It takes three to five days for letters to be delivered.

                                                              22
    The graphs display point estimates for 1 and 2 from the regression:

                                         Yi =  + 1 T 1i + 2 T 2i + i ,

where Yi is the outcome for property i evaluated 40 days after the sending of all letters,  is a
constant, T 1i and T 2i are dummies indicating the two mutually exclusive treatments (the sanctions
treatment and the public goods treatment), and i is the error term.
    The results in Figure 7 show that the sanctions treatment generated a 9.4 ppt increase in the
likelihood of making a payment toward outstanding tax debt and a 54 peso increase in the payment
amount. Relative to the control group, the intervention close to tripled the payment likelihood
and doubled overall payments. The public goods treatment had smaller but statistically significant
effects. Comparing Panels B (any payment) and C (payment amount) suggests that the public
goods treatment is relatively more regressive, generating payment by taxpayers with disproportion-
ately smaller liabilities.46 We find similar results when we control for property characteristics Xi
(e.g., cadastral value and age of the property) or when we estimate treatment effects using a DiD
framework (Table G.2).
    Table 2 reports estimates of the treatment effects for all treatments in pair-wise comparisons.
Panel A lists the effects on the likelihood of making a payment toward outstanding tax debt,
and Panel B shows the effects on the payment amount. In addition to confirming the significant
difference between the sanctions and public goods treatments (Column (1)), the table shows that
the seniority of the enforcement officer matters: a fiscal attorney signature achieves a larger impact
than a compliance officer signature (Column (2)). Furthermore, although one might expect a gender
bias in taxpayers' response to male/female signatures, our evidence rejects this idea. In fact, male
signatures have a smaller impact than gender-neutral signatures, and female signatures have a
slightly larger impact than gender-neutral signatures (Columns (3) and (4)). While we consistently
reject the null hypothesis that male signatures have larger effects, we can reject the null hypothesis
that female signatures have smaller effects only when we control for property characteristics (Table
G.2).
    The size of the enforcement effects in Mexico City compares favorably to that of other compliance
interventions. In a meta-analysis of tax compliance experiments, Atinyan and Asatryan (2019) find
that deterrence nudges increase extensive-margin compliance on average by only 1.­2.5 percent.
When focusing on comparable property tax compliance interventions, we find that our effects are
slightly smaller than those in Weigel (2020), who shows that a door-to-door campaign in the Congo
increased compliance (likelihood of payment) from 0.05 percent to 11 percent; similar to those
in Okunogbe (2019), who finds that a detection and penalty intervention in Liberia increased

   46
     We interpret the public goods treatment effect as being due to enforcement, since we compare the public
goods letter to a non-letter control and since any type of letter from the Ministry of Finance is likely to give the
impression of increased enforcement. Studies comparing public goods messages to neutral baseline messages from
tax administrations mostly find no effect (Atinyan and Asatryan 2019).

                                                        23
compliance from 3 percent to 9 percent; and larger than those in Del Carpio (2014), who finds that
a social norms intervention in Peru increased compliance from 29 percent to 34.5 percent.
    The results of our field experiment show that enforcement actions are a cost-effective means of
raising revenue for the government. However, while stricter enforcement may raise tax revenue, the
welfare costs of doing so may not always exceed the increase in private costs to delinquent taxpayers.
Section 7 uses these estimates to implement our model and provides policy guidance on whether it
is preferable to raise tax revenue through increased tax rates or through stricter enforcement.


6        Property Taxes and Liquidity Constraints
The model in Section 1 shows that the welfare costs of taxing property may be exacerbated by
the presence of liquidity constraints. We now implement two empirical strategies that show that
household liquidity constraints shape taxpayer behavior. We first show that property tax rates
affect taxpayers' choice to pay late or in installments. We then show that tax increases lead to
consumption drops for households without access to credit.47


6.1      Evidence from the Choice of Payment Modality
We examine how taxpayers' choice of payment modality responds to the tax rate. Taxpayers can
pay their annual liability in installments or in full at the beginning of the year to take advantage
of the early-bird discount. Liquidity constraints may lead households to pay in installments rather
than all at once. By giving up the discount, these households effectively take out a loan from the
government. Conditional on attempting to pay in installments, liquidity-constrained taxpayers may
also be less likely to remain compliant.
    We provide two pieces of evidence that taxes impact payment modality. First, we exploit
variation generated by the non-monotonous shape of the tax rate schedule in a regression-kink-style
analysis. As discussed above, the mean tax rate as a share of the property value is first decreasing
and then increasing with property value. The lines with blue square markers in Panels A­C of
Figure 8 plot the mean tax rate schedule, which features an inflection point in value band D.
    Panel A in Figure 8 also shows that the likelihood of making a tax payment (including a partial
payment) is negatively correlated with the mean tax rate. Payment compliance is first increasing
and then decreasing in property values, with a peak in band D, where the tax rate is minimized.
Panel B shows that conditional on the taxpayer making a payment, the likelihood of paying all at
once (as opposed to paying in installments) is also negatively correlated with the mean tax rate,
again with an inflection point in band D. Panel C shows that conditional on the taxpayer attempting
to pay in installments, the likelihood of paying all six installments on time (as opposed to paying

    47
     In addition, in Appendix I, we use data on the timing of payments to show that households place a high value
on liquidity.

                                                       24
partially or late) is also negatively correlated with the mean tax rate, again with an inflection point
in band D. This evidence is highly consistent with liquidity constraints shaping taxpayer behavior,
as the inflection points in these three data series are otherwise hard to explain.
    To provide a second piece of evidence that taxes impact payment modality, we now show that
the quasi-experimental tax rate increases that we analyze in Section 4.2 are also associated with
changes in payment modality. In Panels D­F of Figure 8, we implement the DiD design in Equation
6 using the sample of taxpayers who make at least a partial payment in each year. Consistent with
the view that tax rate increases activate liquidity constraints, we find that treated taxpayers become
more likely to pay their liability in installments instead of all at once. These taxpayers hence forgo
the early-bird discounts. One interpretation of the discounts is that taxpayers who do not pay in
full before the deadline take out a loan from the government. The results suggest that taxpayers
are more likely to avail themselves of these loans when tax rates increase.


6.2    Evidence from Consumption Data
We now study whether property tax increases impact consumption. As we discuss in Section 1,
liquidity constraints can increase the welfare cost of taxing property, and the effect of taxes on
consumption is a key input for our optimal tax formulas.48
    Because our administrative tax data do not measure consumption, we use additional data from
the Mexican Household Income and Expenditure Survey (Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos
de los Hogares, ENIGH, collected by INEGI (2019)). To study the impact of taxes on consumption,
we estimate the following specification:

                              ln Cit =  + 1 ln Pit + 1 ln Iit + 1 Xit + it ,                              (7)

where Pit is the property tax payment of household i in year t, Cit is household per capita con-
sumption, Iit is household per capita income, and the control vector Xit contains year dummies and
delegación (i.e., city district) fixed effects. In this equation, 1 measures the consumption elasticity
with respect to property tax payments. If paying property taxes leads households to decrease their
consumption, we would expect to find that 1 < 0.
    Previous work has estimated regressions similar to Equation 7 to study the impacts of unexpected
income shocks (e.g., Attanasio, 1999; Blundell et al., 2008) and unemployment insurance payments
(e.g., Gruber, 1997; Kroft and Notowidigdo, 2016) on consumption. An important concern with
Equation 7 is that property tax payments are likely correlated with other factors that influence
consumption. For instance, households facing unmeasured income shocks may decide to skip a
property tax payment and may also decrease everyday consumption. These kind of shocks would


  48
     Appendix H shows that household consumption in Mexico City is not fully insured against income shocks and
that property tax payments also respond to income shocks.

                                                     25
lead to upwardly biased estimates of 1 .49
    To provide unbiased estimates of 1 , we use the tax increases that we analyze in Section 4
to isolate variation in property tax payments that is unrelated to other drivers of consumption.
Consider the following first-stage equation:

                                 ln Pit = 1 + 2 Zit + 2 ln Iit + 2 Xit +       it ,                            (8)

where the instrument Zit measures the percentage increase in mean property tax rates driven by the
removal of abatements. As our RD and DiD estimations show, tax increases have significant effects
on tax payments, suggesting that Zit would be a relevant and statistically strong instrument. The
exclusion restriction is that tax rate changes impact consumption through property tax payments
only. Our results in Section 4 show that tax changes lead to sharp variation between treated and
untreated households and that these households have parallel trends on a number of outcomes prior
to the tax increases. These results suggest that the tax-change-driven variation in Zit is likely
unrelated to other determinants of household consumption.50
    Our instrumental variables strategy requires three key variables: consumption, Cit ; tax pay-
ments, Pit ; and tax rate changes, Zit . Unfortunately, while the ENIGH data measure consumption
and property tax payments, they do not record tax liabilities. We overcome this issue by using
a split-sample instrumental variables strategy (e.g., Angrist and Krueger, 1992; Card and McCall,
1996) that combines information from our administrative tax data and our household survey data.
Specifically, we use property characteristics that are common in both datasets to construct a proxy
for the change in tax liability. As we discuss in Section 2.1, a property's cadastral value--and hence
the tax liability--is based on land and construction area, unit values of land and construction
that vary across districts (delegaciones ), and property age. We therefore use the administrative
tax data to calculate Zit as the average year-to-year change in tax liability for fine bins of land
area×construction area×property age×district×year. We then assign values of Zit to the ENIGH
data based on household characteristics.51 Finally, to account for the uncertainty in our measures
of Zit , we bootstrap this procedure to calculate standard errors.
    We obtain an estimate of 2 = 0.473(SE = 0.069) when we estimate Equation 8 (see Table
J.1). The first-stage regression shows that Zit is highly predictive of tax payments and yields an
F -statistic over 40. 2 has a natural economic interpretation: it is the elasticity of tax payments to
changes in mean property tax rates. It is therefore reassuring that our estimate of 2 has a similar
magnitude to our estimated elasticities in Table 1.
    Table 3 reports the IV estimates of Equation 7. Column (1) shows that while tax payments
have a negative effect on consumption, this relationship is not statistically significant. Because
  49
      Indeed, OLS estimations of Equation 7 yield positive estimates of 1 .
  50
      Unlike in the US, property tax revenue in Mexico is not used to fund neighborhood schools or other amenities.
Any benefits from additional tax revenue would be spread among the more than 20 million residents of Mexico City.
   51
      Because we compute Zit using the universe of property tax records, this procedure measures precise changes in
tax liability. Appendix J provides additional details.

                                                        26
we expect tax payments to have larger impacts for lower-income households and for households
without access to credit, we augment Equation 7 by including interactions with income and credit
access.52 Column (2) shows the estimates produced when we interact tax payment with household
income, where we normalize log income relative to the cross-sectional mean. This column reveals
a statistically significant difference in the effects of tax payments on consumption across different
households. Column (3) shows the results from interacting tax payment with credit constraints,
as measured by access to a credit card. The interaction of tax payment with credit constraints is
statistically significant and is negatively related to consumption. This interaction is particularly
important since 80 percent of households do not have access to credit cards.53 Finally, Column
(4) shows that the interactions with income and credit constraints have the same sign and are
statistically significant when we include both interactions in the estimation.54
    The last specification of Table 3 helps us understand the magnitude and heterogeneity in the
effects of property taxes on consumption. According to these parameters, doubling property taxes
leads to a decline in consumption of 3.5 percent + 1.2 percent for households without access to
credit.55 The decline is even larger for low-income households. For a family with income in the
25th percentile of the distribution, doubling property taxes leads to a 3.8 percent decrease in
consumption. Additionally, if that family does not have access to credit, doubling property taxes
would lead to a consumption decline of 7.3 percent.56
    While doubling property taxes might seem extreme, recall that the sanctions treatment in our
field experiment in Section 5 led to a doubling of tax payments relative to payments made by the
control group. To put these estimates in the perspective of our tax changes, recall that property
taxes increased by 20 percent in 2010, by 27 percent in 2011, and by 47 percent in 2012. According
to our estimates, these tax changes led to consumption drops of 1.9­3.4 percent for the most affected
households.
    These estimates show that policy makers are right to be concerned about the potential of
property taxes to exacerbate liquidity constraints. In the next section, we quantify the extent to
which liquidity constraints increase the welfare cost of taxes, using a range of estimates that includes
   52
      We also include interactions between the instrument and relevant variables in the first stage.
   53
      The fact that we observe a consumption response for households without a credit card but we do not observe a
response for those with access to credit or with higher incomes is inconsistent with the idea that the tax change was
perceived as permanent. This is because permanent tax changes should impact the consumption of all households
regardless of liquidity constraints.
   54
      These estimates are robust to using an alternative definition for Zit . Namely, we define Z   ~it as the predicted
probability that a household's property is part of the treated cadastral value band in 2010 (band I). As with our
previous formulation, this instrument isolates reform-driven variation in the tax liability. Tables J.2 and J.3 show
that we find similar estimates when we use this instrument or when we use both instruments.
   55
      This magnitude is reasonable since as mentioned above, household survey data report that average property tax
payments can be close to 1 percent of annual income. Moreover, Chetty (2004) notes that income shocks can lead
to larger changes in consumption when households face consumption commitments, such as with housing.
   56
      Table J.4 reports the details of these marginal effects. To gauge the magnitude of these effects, note that Gruber
(1997); Kroft and Notowidigdo (2016) estimate that losing a job without unemployment insurance (UI) would lead
to a 23 percent drop in consumption in the US and that increasing the UI replacement rate by 10 ppt would reduce
this drop by 2.7 percent.

                                                          27
our IV estimates.


7        Policy Analysis
We now use our results to provide policy guidance for the design of the property tax. Following
the model in Section 1, we assume that the government aims to set tax and enforcement policies to
maximize the well-being of its residents.57
    We implement this model using our estimates of the effects of tax increases on tax payments and
consumption as well as the effects of enforcement actions on compliance. Table 4 summarizes all the
parameters and estimates that we use. To capture the potential effects of liquidity constraints, we
set the consumption drop to c0 = -0.07 for liquidity-constrained households and to cs = -0.01
for unconstrained households, based on our IV estimates. The estimate of c0 = -0.07 is for
households at the 25th percentile of the income distribution that do not have access to a credit card.
The estimate of cs = -0.01 is for households at the 75th percentile of the income distribution
that have access to a credit card. We then vary the fraction of liquidity-constrained households
between 80 percent--the fraction of households without access to a credit card in our survey data--
and zero.58 In the model, the tax elasticity captures the decrease in compliance following a tax
increase. This concept is best approximated by the compliance share elasticity, which weights drops
in compliance by revenue. For illustrative purposes, we use the smallest and largest DiD estimates
of this elasticity: Payt    {-0.24, -0.46}. However, recall that Pay   t    = -.29 in our pooled DiD
                                                                         59
estimation. We calibrate three parameters. First, we let   {1, 3}. Second, we consider values
of v (g )
   u (c)
           [1, 3].60 Finally, we use data on the fraction of back-taxes that the government collects in
future years to set z ~ = 10%.61
    We first consider whether the government can increase welfare by increasing taxes. That is, we
implement the MVPF of tax increases and the optimal tax rate from Equations 1 and 2. Panel A1
of Figure 9 implements Equation 1. As expected, the MVPF is increasing in the marginal value of
public goods. The blue solid line plots an initial parametrization that assumes that there are no
liquidity-constrained households, that  = 1, and that the tax elasticity is low at Pay t  = -0.24. In
this case, raising property tax rates increases welfare as long as the value of public goods is greater
than 1.25. Additional lines show the effect of progressively assuming that 80 percent of households
are liquidity constrained, that  = 3, and that compliance is more elastic to tax rate increases.
The green dot-dashed line shows that--in the most conservative case--increasing taxes only raises
    57
      In Appendix K, we alternatively assume that the government aims to maximize revenue, and we show that the
current tax rates are far below the revenue-maximizing rates.
   58           Pay        Pay                                              c    cs
      That is, 0 ,c = 1 - s,c = 80% or zero. Based on these estimates, t,s =  , where  is the average tax rate.
   59
      Chetty and Looney (2006) offer a similar calibration in a developing country context. The larger value captures
the possibility that consumption commitments amplify welfare costs (Chetty, 2004).
   60
      While estimates of the value of public goods from the United States imply v      (g )
                                                                                     u (c)  1.5 (Cellini et al., 2010;
Suárez Serrato and Wingender, 2014), this value may be larger in countries with a lower provision of public goods.
   61
      Figure C.2 shows that the government recovered 10 percent of the outstanding debt between 2008 and 2012.

                                                         28
welfare if the value of public goods is greater than 1.75. This figure shows that the government can
increase welfare by raising property tax rates to provide public goods and that this conclusion is
robust to accounting for liquidity constraints as well as a range of other parameter values.
    Panel A2 of Figure 9 implements the optimal property tax from Equation 2.62 For ease of
interpretation, we plot only positive tax rates, and we top-code optimal tax rates at 250 basis
points. The relaxed assumptions behind the blue solid line imply that as long as the value of public
goods exceeds 1.5, the optimal tax rate is greater than 250 basis points. Liquidity constraints (red
dotted line), higher welfare costs of consumption declines (yellow dashed), and larger compliance
drops (green dot-dashed) all work to reduce the optimal tax rate. While these lines illustrate how
different forces influence optimal tax rates, the red dotted line is a reasonable case for practical
purposes. This line shows optimal tax rates greater than 70 basis points whenever the value of
public goods is greater than or equal to 1.5. This suggests that while liquidity constraints generally
work to lower optimal tax rates, current property tax rates are likely below the optimal rates.63
    While the ingredients above suffice to implement the tax formulas, the enforcement formulas in
Equations 3 and 4 depend on the welfare costs of enforcement: m (). In contrast to the marginal
value of public goods, we know relatively little about the tax morale costs of enforcement (Singhal
and Luttmer, 2014). To implement these equations using our empirical estimates, we express m ()
as the utility cost of a tax that raises the same revenue as an increase in enforcement.64 We can
                                   Pay
then write m () = u (c) Ht   
                                   
                                  -Pay
                                         , such that the M V P F is now:
                                        t



                                 v (g ) -Pay
                                           t             1 - N Pay
                       M V P F =              -                         .                                         (9)
                                 u (c) Pay
                                        (Ht/)        ~)N Pay Pay
                                                (1 - z        (Ht/) - 1


Similarly, the compliance rate that equates the marginal cost and benefit of enforcement is now:

                                                               Pay    v (g )
                                                        1-   Pay
                                                                 t
                                                              (Ht/)   u (c)
                                             Pay
                                            N      =                           .
                                                                ~)Pay
                                                       1 - (1 - z t
                                                                      v (g )
                                                                      u (c)


One benefit of these equations is that we can implement them using estimates of Pay     in addition
to the values used to implement Equation 1. Interestingly, while a larger value of Pay      implies
that enforcement is more effective at collecting tax revenue, it also discounts the value of public
goods. The intuition for this result is that more effective enforcement actions have larger welfare
costs (through m()).65 We implement this equation using estimates from Section 5. To do so,
   62
      As with all sufficient statistic formulas (Chetty, 2009), we assume constant elasticities to implement Equations
2 and 4. Equations 1 and 3 do not rely on this assumption, as they measure marginal effects of policy changes.
   63
      As we note in Section 1, allowing for the capitalization of taxes and spending on property values would result
in higher optimal tax rates.
   64
      This strategy is similar to that of Bertrand et al. (2010); Allcott and Taubinsky (2015) label this approach the
equivalent price metric. See Appendix A for a derivation.
   65
      As in Keen and Slemrod (2017), this is a feature and not a bug. That is, maximizing welfare necessarily
discounts the benefits of policies that harm the well-being of delinquent taxpayers.

                                                             29
                      Ht
note that Pay
              ×       
                            is the effect of receiving a letter on tax payments. We therefore use the
values Pay
             × Ht
                       {54, 16}, where the larger value corresponds to the sanctions treatment and
the lower value corresponds to the public goods motivation. In addition, we use the observed share
of compliers N Pay = 60% as well as a hypothetical value of greater compliance of N Pay = 75%.
    Panel B of Figure 9 implements Equation 9 and the compliance rate at the optimal enforcement
level. The blue solid line in Panel B1 plots the MVPF under an initial parametrization that assumes
                                                                                                        Pay
low values of the compliance elasticity Pay   (from the public goods treatment), the tax elasticity t ,
and the compliance rate N Pay . In this case, stricter enforcement does not increase welfare within
the range of the graph. More effective enforcement (from the sanctions treatment), larger values of
Pay
 t , and greater compliance all work to make enforcement more effective at raising welfare. While
these hypothetical scenarios show how different parameters impact the MVPF of enforcement, our
setting is best described by the parameters used to draw the red dotted line. Thus, even though
enforcement interventions are effective in raising revenue, they are not a desirable policy tool for a
welfare-maximizing government.
    Panel B2 plots the compliance rate that equates the marginal cost and benefit of enforcement. As
                                                                                                      Pay
we discuss in Section 1, the government can increase welfare by increasing enforcement when N             <
N Pay . Conversely, it would be preferable to reduce enforcement when N         Pay
                                                                                    > N Pay . Regardless of
the value of public goods, the observed compliance rate of N Pay = 60% lies below N         Pay
                                                                                                in both our
baseline parameterization and the case with higher Pay       . While the optimal compliance rate is not
very sensitive to the enforcement elasticity, a larger tax elasticity implies a lower value for m (),
                                  Pay
which shifts down the curve N         . In this case, the green dot-dashed line shows that when the value
of public goods is close to 1.75, current compliance rates are close to optimal.
    Finally, we use the model to evaluate whether it is preferable to increase tax rates or tighten
enforcement. We use Equation 5 to compute the welfare effect of a balanced-budget policy that
increases taxes and reduces enforcement. Panel C shows how the welfare effect of this policy varies
with the tax elasticity Payt .
                               66
                                   Since taxes are less distortionary when Pay   t   is closer to zero, the
                                                  Pay
welfare effect of this policy increases with t . The dashed lines report the range of our RD and
DiD estimates of Payt   as well as the DiD estimate that pools data from the three tax hikes. The blue
solid line shows that increasing tax rates and reducing the reliance on enforcement raises welfare
as long as Payt   is greater than our smallest estimate of -0.46. The relative desirability of taxes
over enforcement diminishes slightly when we allow larger utility costs of consumption changes
(red dotted line) and when we additionally allow more effective enforcement intervention (yellow
dashed line). Nonetheless, our pooled DiD estimate of Pay      t   implies that taxation is more desirable
                                                            67
than enforcement as a means of raising tax revenue. Finally, the green dot-dashed line shows a

   66
      Specifically, the figure plots the money metric utility value for every dollar of tax revenue that was previously
collected through enforcement and is now collected through a tax increase.
   67
      Figure A.2 explores the robustness of this result to discounting the private cost of enforcement m(). At the
pooled estimate of Payt   , this balanced-budget policy continues to raise welfare even when we discount m() by close
to 50 percent.

                                                          30
hypothetical case where we additionally assume a higher level of compliance. The welfare cost of
enforcement is smaller in this case since fewer taxpayers incur the private cost m(), which increases
the relative desirability of enforcement.


8    Conclusion
This paper brings together the economists-as-plumbers framework of Duflo (2017) and the tax
systems approach of Slemrod and Gillitzer (2013) to study the design of property taxes in a holistic
and detailed manner. Our work draws on administrative tax data from the universe of residential
properties in Mexico City and various quasi-experimental and experimental identification strategies.
We examine traditional policy tools featured in optimal tax theory--i.e., the tax rate--in addition
to tax system features such as enforcement, payment schedules, and payment modality as well as
interactions among these different tools.
    We show that it is possible to raise property tax revenue through higher tax rates or through
enforcement. Collectively, the variation that we study contributed to a 36 percent increase in
total property tax revenue. However, we also find that taxpayer behavior is sensitive to liquidity
constraints. Tax rate increases lead to drops in compliance, an increased likelihood of paying in
installments, and reductions in consumption. Liquidity constraints thus need to be taken into
account in the design of property tax systems in developing countries. Because our study is based
in Mexico City, a setting that is similar to other developing countries in terms of the prevalence
of household liquidity constraints and the level of administrative capacity, our findings carry broad
relevance.
    Our optimal tax model combines our empirical estimates of tax, enforcement, and consumption
elasticities to quantify the optimal tax rate and compliance level. The model illuminates when a
welfare-maximizing government would prefer to increase tax rates or enhance enforcement. Since
we calculate that our field experiment generated welfare losses, we conclude that it is not desirable
to increase enforcement. In contrast, while liquidity constraints increase the welfare cost of raising
tax rates, we find that current tax rates are still below their optimal level. Because optimal tax
rates depend on the share of liquidity-constrained taxpayers, we identify provision of liquidity as
an important policy tool that can lessen the welfare costs of property taxation.
    Overall, our results reveal that details of property tax systems can have important impacts on
taxpayer welfare and revenue collection. In particular, the optimal design and administration of
loans for liquidity-constrained taxpayers--including terms of eligibility, interest rates, and payment
schedules--is an important avenue for future research. Future work continuing to build on the
economists-as-plumbers and tax systems paradigms are likely to yield important insights in other
settings (e.g., Okunogbe, 2019; Bergeron et al., 2020) and to illuminate the roles of tax fairness and
equity (e.g., Best et al., 2020).



                                                 31
References
Agrawal, David R., William H. Hoyt, and John D. Wilson, "Local Policy Choice: Theory and Empirics,"
  2020. Working Paper. 6, 12
Allcott, Hunt and Dmitry Taubinsky, "Evaluating Behaviorally Motivated Policy: Experimental Evidence
  from the Lightbulb Market," American Economic Review, August 2015, 105 (8), 2501­38. 29, 46
   and Judd B. Kessler, "The Welfare Effects of Nudges: A Case Study of Energy Use Social Comparisons,"
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, January 2019, 11 (1), 236­76. 4, 7, 47
Andreoni, James, "IRS as loan shark tax compliance with borrowing constraints," Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics, 1992, 49 (1), 35 ­ 46. 49
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger, "The Effect of Age at School Entry on Educational Attainment:
  An Application of Instrumental Variables with Moments from Two Samples," Journal of the American
  Statistical Association, 1992, 87 (418), 328­336. 26
Atinyan, Armenak and Zareh Asatryan, "Nudging for Tax Compliance: A Meta Analysis," 2019. Working
  Paper. 23
Atkinson, A. B. and N. H. Stern, "Pigou, Taxation and Public Goods12," The Review of Economic Studies,
  01 1974, 41 (1), 119­128. 9
Attanasio, Orazio and Steven Davis, "Relative Wage Movements and the Distribution of Consumption,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 1996, 104 (6), 1227­62. 2
Attanasio, Orazio P, "Consumption," Handbook of Macroeconomics, 1999, 1, 741­812. 25, 81
   and Miguel Székely, "Wage shocks and consumption variability in Mexico during the 1990s," Journal
  of Development Economics, 2004, 73 (1), 1­25. 2, 81
Attanasio, Orazio P. and Tullio Jappelli, "Intertemporal Choice and the Cross-Sectional Variance of
  Marginal Utility," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2001, 83 (1), 13­27. 2
Balan, Pablo, Augustin Bergeron, Gabriel Tourek, and Jonathan Weigel, "Local Elites as Tax Collectors:
  Experimental Evidence from the DRC," 2020. Mimeo. 6
Basri, Chatib M., , Mayara Felix, Rema Hanna, and Ben Olken, "Tax Administration vs. Tax Rates:
  Evidence from Corporate Taxation in Indonesia," 2019. NBER Working Paper 26150. 5
Bell, Martin, Elin Charles-Edwards, Philipp Ueffing, John Stillwell, Marek Kupiszewski, and Dorota
  Kupiszewska, "Internal migration and development: comparing migration intensities around the world,"
  Population and Development Review, 2015, 41 (1), 33­58. 12
Bergeron, Augustin, Gabriel Tourek, and Jonathan Weigel, "Shifting the Laffer Rate in Developing Coun-
  tries: Evidence from Randomized Tax Rates in the DRC," 2020. Mimeo. 6, 31
Bertrand, Marianne, Dean Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jonathan Zinman, "What's
  Advertising Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit Marketing Field Experiment*," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 02 2010, 125 (1), 263­306. 29, 46
Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson, "Taxation and Development," in Alan J Auerbach, Raj Chetty,
  Martin Feldstein, and Emmanuel Saez, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 5 2013. 5
  , Anders Jensen, and Torsten Persson, "Norms, Enforcement, and Tax Evasion," Working Paper 25575,
  National Bureau of Economic Research February 2019. 13
Best, Michael, Anne Brockmeyer, Henrik Kleven, Johannes Spinnewijn, and Mazhar Waseem, "Production
  vs Revenue Efficiency with Low Tax Compliance: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan," Journal of
  Political Economy, 2015, 123 (6), 1311­1355. 5
  , Francois Gerard, Evan Kresch, and Joana Naritomi, "Greener on the Other Side? Spatial Discontinu-
  ities in Property Tax Rates and their Effects on Tax Morale," 2020. Working Paper. 6, 31
Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston, "Consumption Inequality and Partial Insurance,"
  American Economic Review, December 2008, 98 (5), 1887­1921. 25
Bradbury, Katharine L., Christopher J. Mayer, and Karl E. Case, "Property tax limits, local fiscal behavior,
  and property values: evidence from Massachusetts under Proposition 212," Journal of Public Economics,
  2001, 80 (2), 287 ­ 311. 12


                                                    32
Brockmeyer, Anne and Marco Hernandez, "Taxation, Information and Withholding: Evidence from Costa
  Rica," 2019. Working Paper. 20
  , Spencer Smith, Marco Hernandez, and Stewart Kettle, "Casting a Wider Tax Net: Experimental
  Evidence from Costa Rica," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2019, 11 (3), 55­87. 5
Brueckner, Jan K., "A test for allocative efficiency in the local public sector," Journal of Public Economics,
  1982, 19 (3), 311 ­ 331. 12
Bugni, Federico A and Ivan A Canay, "Testing Continuity of a Density via g-order statistics in the Re-
  gression Discontinuity Design," Journal of Econometrics, 2020. 18, 61
Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory, and Patrick Kline, "Assessing the Incidence and Efficiency of a Prominent
  Place Based Policy," American Economic Review, April 2013, 103 (2), 897­947. 8
Cabral, Marika and Caroline Hoxby, "The Hated Property Tax: Salience, Tax Rates, and Tax Revolts,"
  Working Paper 18514, National Bureau of Economic Research November 2012. 6
Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D Cattaneo, and Rocio Titiunik, "Robust nonparametric confidence intervals
  for regression-discontinuity designs," Econometrica, 2014, 82 (6), 2295­2326. 19, 61
Caplin, Andrew, Fear as a Policy Instrument, Russell Sage, 2003. 7, 47
Card, David and Brian P. McCall, "Is Workers' Compensation Covering Uninsured Medical Costs? Evi-
  dence from the "Monday Effect"," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1996, 49 (4), 690­706. 26
Carpio, Lucia Del, "Are the Neighbors Cheating? Evidence from Social Norm Experiment on Property
  Taxes in Peru," 2014. Mimeo. 24
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg, Fernando Ferreira, and Jesse Rothstein, "The Value of School Facility Invest-
  ments: Evidence from a Dynamic Regression Discontinuity Design*," The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 02 2010, 125 (1), 215­261. 12, 28
Chamberlain, Gary, "Chapter 22 Panel data," in "in," Vol. 2 of Handbook of Econometrics, Elsevier, 1984,
  pp. 1247 ­ 1318. 90
Chetty, Raj, "Consumption Commitments, Unemployment Durations, and Local Risk Aversion," Working
  Paper 10211, National Bureau of Economic Research January 2004. 12, 27, 28
  , "A general formula for the optimal level of social insurance," Journal of Public Economics, 2006, 90,
  1879­1901. 9
  , "Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural and Reduced-Form Methods,"
  Annual Review of Economics, 2009, 1 (1), 451­488. 29
   and Adam Looney, "Consumption smoothing and the welfare consequences of social insurance in de-
  veloping economies," Journal of Public Economics, December 2006, 90 (12), 2351­2356. 28
   and Amy Finkelstein, "Chapter 3 - Social Insurance: Connecting Theory to Data," in Alan J. Auerbach,
  Raj Chetty, Martin Feldstein, and Emmanuel Saez, eds., handbook of public economics, vol. 5, Vol. 5 of
  Handbook of Public Economics, Elsevier, 2013, pp. 111 ­ 193. 11
Chirico, Michael, Robert Inman, Charles Loeffler, John MacDonald, and Holger Sieg, "Deterring Property
  Tax Delinquency in Philadelphia: An Experimental Evaluation of Nudge Strategies," National Tax
  Journal, 2019, 72 (3), 479­506. 6
Clausing, Kimberly A., "Corporate tax revenues in OECD countries," International Tax and Public Fi-
  nance, 2007, 14(2), 115â133. 90
Deaton, Angus, "Saving and Liquidity Constraints," Econometrica, 1991, 59 (5), 1221­1248. 11
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, Leora Klapper, Singer Dorothee, Saniya Ansar, and Jake Hess, "The Global Findex
  Database: Measuring Financial Inclusion and the Fintech Revolution," Technical Report, World Bank
  2017. 5
Devereux, Michael, "Developments in the Taxation of Corporate Profit in the OECD Since 1965: Rates,
  Bases, and Revenues," Oxford University Centre of Business Taxation Working Paper No. 07/04, 2007.
  90
Duflo, Esther, "Richard T. Ely Lecture: The Economist as Plumber," American Economic Review, May
  2017, 107 (5), 1­26. 5, 31


                                                     33
Dusek, Libor, Nicolas Pardo, and Christian Traxler, "Salience, Incentives, and Timely Compliance: Evi-
  dence from Speeding Tickets," 2020. Working Paper. 6
Fang, Hanming and Dan Silverman, "On the compassion of time-limited welfare programs," Journal of
  Public Economics, 2004, 88 (7), 1445 ­ 1470. 83
Gadenne, Lucie, "Tax me, but spend wisely? Sources of public finance and government accountability,"
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2017, pp. 274­314. 12
Glaeser, Edward L., "Paternalism and Psychology," University of Chicago Law Review, 2006, 73 (1), 133­
  156. 7, 47
Gonzalez-Navarro, Marco and Climent Quintana-Domeque, "Paving Streets for the Poor: Experimental
  Analysis of Infrastructure Effects," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2016, 98 (2), 254­267. 12
Grembi, Veronica, Tommaso Nannicini, and Ugo Troiano, "Do fiscal rules matter?," American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 2016, pp. 1­30. 19
Gruber, Jonathan, "The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance," The American
  Economic Review, 1997, 87 (1), 192­205. 25, 27
Haughwout, Andrew, Robert Inman, Steven Craig, and Thomas Luce, "Local revenue hills: evidence from
  four US cities," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2004, 86 (2), 570­585. 91
Hendren, Nathaniel, "The Policy Elasticity," Tax Policy and the Economy, 2016, 30 (1), 51­89. 9
Hotz, V. Joseph and Robert A. Miller, "Conditional Choice Probabilities and the Estimation of Dynamic
  Models," The Review of Economic Studies, 1993, 60 (3), 497­529. 83
Howard, Troup and Carlos Avenancio-Leon, "The Assessment Gap: Racial Inequalities in Property Taxa-
  tion," 2019. Mimeo. 14
INEGI, "Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos y Gastosde los Hogares," 2019. 25
International Monetary Fund, "World Revenue Longitudinal Data," 2019. 38
Jack, William and Tavneet Suri, "Risk Sharing and Transactions Costs: Evidence from Kenya's Mobile
  Money Revolution," American Economic Review, January 2014, 104 (1), 183­223. 5
Kawano, Laura and Joel Slemrod, "How do corporate tax bases change when corporate tax rates change?
  With implications for the tax rate elasticity of corporate tax revenues," International Tax and Public
  Finance, 2015, 23(3), 401â433. 90
Keen, Michael and Joel Slemrod, "Optimal Tax Administration," Journal of Public Economics, July 2017,
  152, 133­142. 2, 5, 7, 10, 29
Kessler, Ryan, "Does Punishment Compel Payment? Driverâs License Suspensions and Fine Delinquency,"
  2020. Working Paper. 6
Khan, Adnan Q., Asim I Khwaja, and Benjamin A. Olken, "Tax farming redux: Experimental evidence
  on performance pay for tax collectors," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (1), 219­271. 6
  ,    , and    , "Making Moves Matter: Experimental Evidence on Incentivizing Bureaucrats through
  Performance-Based Postings," American Economic Review, January 2019, 109 (1), 237­70. 6
Kroft, Kory and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, "Should Unemployment Insurance Vary with the Unemployment
  Rate? Theory and Evidence," The Review of Economic Studies, 02 2016, 83 (3), 1092­1124. 25, 27
Lalive, Rafael, "How do extended benefits affect unemployment duration? A regression discontinuity
  approach," Journal of econometrics, 2008, 142 (2), 785­806. 19
Lemieux, Thomas and Kevin Milligan, "Incentive effects of social assistance: A regression discontinuity
  approach," Journal of Econometrics, 2008, 142 (2), 807­828. 19
Loewenstein, George and Ted O'Donoghue, "" We can do this the easy way or the hard way": Negative
  emotions, self-regulation, and the law," The University of Chicago Law Review, 2006, 73 (1), 183­206.
  7, 47
McCrary, Justin, "Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design: A density
  test," Journal of Econometrics, 2008, 142 (2), 698­714. 18, 63
Meiselman, Ben S., "Ghostbusting in Detroit: Evidence on nonfilers from a controlled field experiment,"
  Journal of Public Economics, 2018, 158, 180 ­ 193. 5


                                                  34
Morduch, Jonathan, "Income Smoothing and Consumption Smoothing," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
   September 1995, 9 (3), 103­114. 5
    and Dean Karlan, "Access to Finance," Handbook of Development Economics, 06 2009, 5. 5
Mullainathan, Sendhil, Joshua Schwartzstein, and William J. Congdon, "A Reduced-Form Approach to
   Behavioral Public Finance," Annual Review of Economics, 2012, 4 (1), 511­540. 46
Naritomi, Joana, "Consumers as Tax Auditors," American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (9), 3031­72. 6
Okunogbe, Oyebola, "State Capacity and Taxation: The Role of Detection and Enforcement Capacity on
   Property Tax Compliance in Liberia," 2019. Mimeo. 6, 23, 31
Perez-Truglia, Ricardo and Ugo Troiano, "Shaming tax delinquents," Journal of Public Economics, 2018,
   167, 120 ­ 137. 6
Pomeranz, Dina, "No Taxation without Information: Deterrence and Self-Enforcement in the Value Added
   Tax," American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (8), 2539­2569. 6
    and José Vila-Belda, "Taking State-Capacity Research to the Field: Insights from Collaborations with
   Tax Authorities," Annual Review of Economics, 2019, 11 (1), 755­781. 5
Silva, Joao Santos and Silvana Tenreyro, "The Log of Gravity," The Review of Economics and Statistics,
   2006, 88 (4), 641­658. 20
Singh, Divya, "Do Property Tax Incentives for New Construction Spur Gentrification? Evidence from New
   York City," 2020. Working Paper. 75
Singhal, Monica and Erzo Luttmer, "Tax Morale," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2014, 28 (4), 149­
   168. 29
Slemrod, Joel, "Buenas notches: lines and notches in tax system design," eJTR, 2013, 11, 259. 82
   , "Tax Compliance and Enforcement," NBER Working Paper 24799, 2018. 6
    and Christian Gillitzer, Tax Systems, MIT Press, 2013. Zeuthen Lecture Series. 5, 31
    and Paul Organ, "Collateral sanctions: the IRSâ passport revocation policy," 2020. Work in Progress.
   6
    and Shlomo Yitzhaki, "Integrating Expenditure and Tax Decisions:The Marginal Cost of Funds and
   the Marginal Benefit of Projects," National Tax Journal, June 2001, 54 (2), 189­202. 9
Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos and Owen Zidar, "Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax Cuts? A Local
   Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (9), 2582­
   2624. 90
    and , "The structure of state corporate taxation and its impact on state tax revenues and economic
   activity," Journal of Public Economics, 2018, 167, 158 ­ 176. 90
    and Philippe Wingender, "Estimating the Incidence of Government Spending," December 2014. Mimeo.
   28
Townsend, Robert M., "Consumption Insurance: An Evaluation of Risk-Bearing Systems in Low-Income
   Economies," Journal of Economic Perspectives, September 1995, 9 (3), 83­102. 5
Train, Kenneth, Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation 2009. 84
Versprille, Allyson, "Growing Collection Woes May Haunt IRS Years After Pandemic Ends," Bloomberg,
   May 2020. 6
Weigel, Jonathan, "The Participation Dividend of Taxation: How Citizens in Congo Engage More with
   the State When it Tries to Tax Them," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2020, Forthcoming. 6, 23
Wong, Francis, "Mad as Hell: Property Taxes and Financial Distress," Working Paper 2020. 6
World Bank, "World Development Indicators," 2019. 38




                                                  35
Tables

                             Table 1: The Effect of Tax Rates on Tax Payment
                                A. Regression Discontinuity                        B. Difference-in-Differences
                     Mean Tax Payment Payment Compliance Mean Tax Payment Payment Compliance
                       Rate   Amount   in Full  Share      Rate   Amount   in Full  Share
                        (1)     (2)      (3)     (4)        (5)     (6)      (7)     (8)
                                                I. Estimates for the 2009-2010 Treatment
Level Effect          9.127***     .584**    -5.483***       -3.208      8.319***     .677***   -3.772***     -1.963***
                       (.059)      (.240)     (2.122)       (2.043)       (.000)       (.099)     (.623)       (.527) )
Mean at Baseline       50.112       5.836      36.626       47.881        50.112       5.836      36.626        47.881
(Treated)
Relative Effect         .182         .100       -.150         -.067        .166         .116       -.103         -041
                       (.001)       (.041)     (.058)        (.043)       (.000)       (.017)     (.017)        (.011)
Implied Elasticity                    .55       -.822         -.368                     .697       -.617         -.244
                                    (.226)     (.318)        (.234)                    (.101)     (.104)        (.067)
                                                II. Estimates for the 2010-2011 Treatment
Level Effect       12.147*** .575***         -6.433***     -4.939***    11.011*** .800***       -5.226***     -3.323***
                     (.031)   (.131)          (1.523)       (1.296)       (.000)   (.095)         (.526)        (.475)
Mean at Baseline 47.461       4.734            35.072        47.478       47.461   4.734          35.072        47.478
(Treated)
Relative Effect       .256     .121             -.183         -.104        .232         .169       -.149         -.070
                     (.000)   (.027)           (.043)        (.027)       (.000)       (.017)     (.017)        (.011)
Implied Elasticity             .475             -.717         -.407                     .728       -.642         -.300
                              (.108)           (.170)        (.107)                    (.085)     (.064)        (.043)
                                               III. Estimates for the 2011-2012 Treatment
Level Effect       18.002*** .452*** -10.949*** -6.228***               16.465*** .644*** -11.391*** -8.169***
                     (.024)   (.085)   (1.387)   (1.185)                  (.000)   (.095)   (.532)     (.449)
Mean at Baseline     41.06    3.287    37.969     44.885                  41.06    3.287    37.969     44.885
(Treated)
Relative Effect       .438     .137      -.288     -.138                   .401         .196       -.300         -.182
                     (.000)   (.025)    (.036)    (.026)                  (.000)       (.029)     (.014)        (.010)
Implied Elasticity             .314      -.658     -.316                                .489       -.747         -.455
                              (.059)    (.083)    (.060)                               (.073)     (.035)        (.025)

Notes: This table reports results from the RD and DiD estimations discussed in Section 4. Each year, properties
in a specific value band are treated with a large tax rate increase. The treated value bands are I, H, and G in
the years 2010, 2011, and 2012, respectively. In the RD, we compare these properties to properties just below the
lower threshold of the treated value band. The estimating equation is Yi,t =  + Ti + f (V        ^i ) + g (V
                                                                                                           ^i )Ti + i,t ,
        ^
where Vi denotes the distance between the value of property i and the lower limit of the treated band, Ti indicates
properties in the treated band, and f and g are third-order polynomial functions. Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered at the postcode level. In the DiD, we compare treated properties to properties in
value bands K and L. The estimating equation is Yit =  + DDit  + i + t + it , where DDit indicates treated
properties in post-reform years and t and i denote year and property fixed effects. We estimate this equation in
levels and transform the point estimates into relative effects, scaling them by the treatment group mean in the last
pre-reform year. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the property level. The number
of {treated properties, control properties} in the RD is {6763, 11101} in 2010, {11039, 17055} in 2011, and {16890,
31948} in 2012; in the DiD (which uses a balanced sample) it is {5747, 6510} in 2010, {9661, 6510} in 2011, and
{15227, 6510} in 2012. Outcomes: payment amount is in MXN thousands, full payment is in percentage points,
compliance share is tax payment over liability X 100. Figures 3­6 present the RD and DiD estimations graphically.
Appendices D and E present various identification and robustness tests. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.


                                                           36
      Table 2: The Effect of Enforcement Letters on Tax Payment ­ Experimental Estimates

       1: Letter Content            2: Sender Position             3: Male Sender             4: Female Sender
     Sanctions       Public       Fiscal Compliance               Male        Neutral         Female      Neutral
                     Good        Attorney  Officer
                                            Outcome A: Any Payment
      9.364*** 4.858***           7.598***      6.624***         7.038*** 8.15***          6.772*** 6.477***
        (.29)      (.274)          (.284)         (.281)          (.332)      (.337)        (.329)      (.329)
              .000                           .000                        .002                      .390
                                  Outcome B: Payment Amount (MX Pesos)
     54.226*** 16.051*** 42.416*** 27.861*** 39.707*** 45.124*** 29.025*** 26.698***
      (2.593)    (2.297)  (2.496)     (2.407) (2.979)    (2.942)  (2.807)    (2.811)
             .000                 .000               .089                .422
Notes: This table evaluates the effect of enforcement letters, as discussed in Section 5, on payment of outstanding
tax debt, contrasting the different treatments summarized in Figure G.1. Each of Columns (1)-(4) and each
panel corresponds to one regression. We estimate Yi =  + 1 T 1i + 2 T 2i + i , where Yi is the outcome for
property i evaluated 40 days after all letters were sent,  is a constant, T 1i and T 2i are dummies indicating the
two mutually exclusive treatments (i.e., the sanctions treatment and the public goods treatment), and i is the
error term. The outcome is any payment in Panel A and the payment amount in Panel B. The outcomes are
cumulative over time for each property. The bottom line of each panel reports the p-values from a Wald test of
significant differences between each pair of treatment estimates. Figure 7 presents accompanying non-parametric
evidence for the effect of the sanctions treatment and public goods treatment. Since the treatment and control
groups exhibit slightly different trends prior to the intervention, as shown in Figure G.2, we display the data and
run our estimations on detrended data. To do so, we estimate the following regression on the pre-intervention
data: Yigt = µg · t + i + t + igt , where t indicates days and g treatment groups. We then subtract the
trend µg · t from each treatment group. In all estimations, weekends are excluded from the sample. Payment
amounts are winsorized at the 99th percentile. Standard errors in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity
and are clustered at the property level. Table G.2 shows that the results are robust to including property charac-
teristics as controls and estimating the treatment effects via difference-in-differences. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.



    Table 3: The Effect of Property Taxes on Consumption ­ Instrumental Variable Estimates
                                           (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)
log(Pay)                                  -.006                 -.024                  .002                   -.012
                                         (.052)                (.055)                 (.051)                 (.053)
log(Pay) × log(pc income)                                     .066 ***                                      .046 **
                                                               (.024)                                        (.023)
log(Pay) × Lack of credit                                                           -.041 ***              -.035 ***
                                                                                      (.007)                 (.006)
log(pc income)                          .815 ***              .435 ***              .782 ***                .52 ***
                                         (.035)                 (.13)                 (.032)                 (.129)
Notes: This table reports the second-stage results from the IV estimation discussed in Section 6.2. N=2,649.
All regressions include delegación fixed effects and year dummies. Bootstrapped standard errors based on 1,000
replications are in parentheses. The outcome is log(pc consumption). Log(pc income) is centered at the mean. The
first-stage results are shown in Table J.1. Robustness tests using alternative instruments are shown in Tables J.2
and J.3. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.




                                                            37
                                                    Table 4: Parameters for Policy Simulation
                                                         A. Welfare Effects of Enforcement
                                       M V P F                                      Pay
                                                                                     (Ht/)                                  Pay
                                                                                                                            t                        N Pay
                             Pay
                     v (g ) -t                       1-N Pay
                     u (c) Pay
                                       -        ~)N Pay Pay
                                             (1-z
                                                                                    {16, 54}                       {-0.24, -0.46}               {0.60, 0.75}
                             (Ht/)                       (Ht/)-1



                                                         B. Welfare Effects of Tax Increases
                                       M V P Ft                                       c                                                               Pay
                                                                                                                                                      t
                              v (g )          1- cPay
                              u (c)
                                       -          ~)Pay
                                             1+(1-z
                                                                            {-0.01, -0.056}                             {1, 3}               {-0.24, -0.46}
                                                    t

Notes: This table displays the parameters that we use for the policy simulations: empirically estimated parameters
(blue) and the calibrated or calculated parameters (red). We describe in Section 7 where the estimates come from.


Figures

  Figure 1: Ratio of Tax Revenue to GDP in                                              Figure 2: Variation in Tax Rates over Time
   High-Income vs Lower-Income Countries                                               and across Cadastral Value Bands, 2008­2012
       20




                --
                ·
                                                                                                .8




                --
       8




                                                                                                      .6
  Revenue/GDP




                                                                                          Mean Tax Rate
           6




                                                                                             .4
    4  2




                                                                                                .2
       0




                                                                                                0




                       CIT             VAT             PIT           Property Tax
                                                                                                           A   B    C   D    E      F     G    H     I  J   K    L     M   N
                               High Income vs Low Income                                                                           Cadastral Value Band
                               High Income vs Low + Lower Middle Income
                               High Income vs Low + All Middle Income                                                       2008              2009              2010
                                                                                                                            2011              2012

Notes: This figure shows the ratio of tax revenue as a
share of GDP in high-income versus lower-income coun-                                 Notes: This figure, discussed in the introduction, shows
tries, as discussed in the introduction, for corporate in-                            the mean tax rate in percentage points by cadastral
come tax (CIT), value-added tax (VAT), personal in-                                   value band and year. We construct this figure using
come tax (PIT), and property taxes in 2017. The data                                  administrative tax bills.
are from the International Monetary Fund (2019) World
Revenue Data and the World Bank (2019) World De-
velopment Indicators. The country income classification
follows that of the World Bank Atlas methodology.




                                                                                     38
     Figure 3: The Effect of Tax Rates on Tax Payment ­ Regression Discontinuity Estimates

                              A. Mean Tax Rate                       B. Payment Amount
                                      I. Estimates for the 2009­2010 Treatment




                                                                                       1.5
          4 6 8 10 12




                                                                         MXN thousands
           Basis points




                                                                           .5    1
                2




                                                                                 0
                            2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6                                          2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6
                            Cadastral Value (MXN millions)                                     Cadastral Value (MXN millions)
                          RD = 9.127 (0.059), N=17864 properties                             RD = 0.584 (0.240), N=17864 properties

                                          II. Estimates for the 2010­2011 Treatment
                15




                                                                                       1
                                                                         MXN thousands
          Basis points
                  10




                                                                                 .5
           5




                                                                           0     -.5
                0




                          1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2 2.1 2.2                                          1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2 2.1 2.2
                             Cadastral Value (MXN millions)                                     Cadastral Value (MXN millions)
                          RD = 12.147 (0.031), N=28094 properties                            RD = 0.575 (0.131), N=28094 properties

                                          III. Estimates for the 2011­2012 Treatment
                20




                                                                                       1
                                                                         MXN thousands
          5 10 15
          Basis points




                                                                           0     .5
                                                                                 -.5
                0




                          1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9                                        1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9
                             Cadastral Value (MXN millions)                                     Cadastral Value (MXN millions)
                          RD = 18.002 (0.024), N=48838 properties                            RD = 0.452 (0.085), N=48838 properties


Notes: These graphs implement the RD estimation from Section 4.1. The red dots represent the mean outcome in
equally spaced cadastral value bins. The solid blue lines (gray areas) depict a fitted third-order polynomial (the
corresponding 95 percent confidence intervals). The vertical black lines mark the thresholds between the control and
treatment bands. Properties to the right of the threshold are treated with a tax rate increase. We use the band
below as the counterfactual since properties in the band above the treated band are treated in the previous year. The
treated value bands are I, H and G in the years 2010, 2011 and 2012, respectively. The notes display the estimate
for  from Yi,t =  + Ti + f (V     ^i ) + g (V
                                            ^i )Ti + i,t , where V
                                                                 ^i denotes the distance between the value of property
i and the lower limit of the treated band, Ti indicates properties in the treated band, and f and g are third-order
polynomial functions. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the postcode level. Table 1
summarizes the estimates and implied elasticities. Table D.2 shows the robustness to local linear regressions with
optimal bandwidth. Figure D.2 shows the robustness to varying bandwidths and degrees of polynomial.

                                                                    39
      Figure 4: The Effect of Tax Rates on Compliance ­ Regression Discontinuity Estimates

                                 A. Full Payment Dummy                        B. Compliance Share
                            5                 I. Estimates for the 2009­2010 Treatment




                                                                                                   2
          Percentage points




                                                                                 Percentage points
                                                                                            0
                     0




                                                                                      -2
              -5




                                                                                -4
       -10




                                  2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6                                              2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6
                                  Cadastral Value (MXN millions)                                         Cadastral Value (MXN millions)
                                RD = -5.483 (2.122), N=17864 properties                                RD = -3.208 (2.043), N=17864 properties

                                                  II. Estimates for the 2010­2011 Treatment
                            5




                                                                                -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2
          Percentage points




                                                                                  Percentage points
       -10    -5     0




                                1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2 2.1 2.2                                              1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2 2.1 2.2
                                   Cadastral Value (MXN millions)                                         Cadastral Value (MXN millions)
                                RD = -6.433 (1.523), N=28094 properties                                RD = -4.939 (1.296), N=28094 properties

                                                  III. Estimates for the 2011­2012 Treatment
                                                                                -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2
                            0
          Percentage points




                                                                                   Percentage points
       -15 -10      -5




                                1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9                                            1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9
                                   Cadastral Value (MXN millions)                                         Cadastral Value (MXN millions)
                                RD = -10.949 (1.387), N=48838 properties                               RD = -6.228 (1.185), N=48838 properties


Notes: This figure is identical to Figure 3 but displays the results for different outcomes: a dummy indicating that
taxpayers paid their liability fully and on time and the compliance share, defined as the tax payment divided by the
liability.




                                                                           40
      Figure 5: The Effect of Tax Rates on Tax Payment ­ Difference-in-Difference Estimates

                                           A. Mean Tax Rate                     B. Payment Amount
                                                  I. Estimates for the 2009­2010 Treatment
             1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4




                                                                                    1.1 1.2 1.3
                                          Treatment                                                        Treatment
                                          Control                                                          Control
            Normalized Scale




                                                                              Normalized Scale
                                                                               1       .9
                      1




                                   2008       2009      2010   2011   2012                          2008       2009    2010   2011   2012
                                                        Year                                                           Year
             DD = .166 (.000), N=12257 properties per year                     DD = .116 (.017), N=12257 properties per year

                                                      II. Estimates for the 2010­2011 Treatment
             1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4




                                                                                    1.1 1.2 1.3
                                          Treatment                                                        Treatment
                                          Control                                                          Control
            Normalized Scale




                                                                              Normalized Scale
                                                                               1
                      1




                                                                                       .9




                                   2008       2009      2010   2011   2012                          2008       2009    2010   2011   2012
                                                        Year                                                           Year
             DD = .232 (.000), N=16172 properties per year                     DD = .169 (.020), N=16172 properties per year

                                                      III. Estimates for the 2011­2012 Treatment
                             1.6




                                                                              .95 1 1.05 1.1 1.15




                                          Treatment                                                        Treatment
                                          Control                                                          Control
            Normalized Scale




                                                                                 Normalized Scale
               1.2    1.4
                      1




                                   2008       2009      2010   2011   2012                          2008       2009    2010   2011   2012
                                                        Year                                                           Year
             DD = .401 (000), N=21735 properties per year                      DD = .196 (.029), N=21735 properties per year


Notes: These graphs implement the DiD estimation from Section 4.2. Treatment and control group outcomes are
normalized by their pre-reform mean. The vertical black lines mark the treatment timing. The notes display the
estimate for  from Yit =  + DDit  + i + t + it , where DDit indicates treated properties in post-reform years
and t and i denote year and property fixed effects. We estimate this equation in levels and transform the point
estimates into relative effects, scaling them by the treatment group mean in the last pre-reform year. Standard errors
are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the property level. The treated value bands are I, H and G in the
years 2010, 2011 and 2012, respectively. The control group is composed of properties in bands K and L. Table 1
summarizes the estimates and implied elasticities. Appendix E presents various robustness tests.




                                                                         41
       Figure 6: The Effect of Tax Rates on Compliance ­ Difference-in-Difference Estimates

                                A. Full Payment Dummy                        B. Compliance Share
       .8 .85 .9 .95 1 1.05                  I. Estimates for the 2009­2010 Treatment




                                                                         .85 .9 .95 1
          Normalized Scale




                                                                         Normalized Scale
                                     Treatment                                                         Treatment
                                     Control                                                           Control




                                                                                   .8
                              2008       2009    2010   2011    2012                            2008       2009    2010   2011   2012
                                                 Year                                                              Year
        DD = -.103 (.017), N=12257 properties per year                    DD = -.041 (.011), N=12257 properties per year

                                                 II. Estimates for the 2010­2011 Treatment


                                                                         .85 .9 .95 1 1.05
                        1.1
       Normalized Scale




                                                                         Normalized Scale
          .9      1




                                     Treatment                                                         Treatment
                                     Control                                                           Control
                                                                                   .8
                 .8




                              2008       2009    2010   2011    2012                            2008       2009    2010   2011   2012
                                                 Year                                                              Year
        DD = -.149 (.015), N=16172 properties per year                    DD = -.070 (.010), N=16172 properties per year

                                                 III. Estimates for the 2011­2012 Treatment
                        1.1




                                                                                          1.1
       Normalized Scale




                                                                         Normalized Scale
                    1




                                                                                      1
              .9




                                                                               .9
        .8




                                                                          .8




                                     Treatment                                                         Treatment
                                     Control                                                           Control
                 .7




                                                                                   .7




                              2008       2009    2010   2011    2012                            2008       2009    2010   2011   2012
                                                 Year                                                              Year
        DD = -.300 (.014), N=21735 properties per year                    DD = -.182 (.010), N=21735 properties per year


Notes: This figure is identical to Figure 5 but displays the results for different outcomes: a dummy indicating that
taxpayers paid their liability fully and on time and the compliance share, defined as the tax payment divided by the
liability.




                                                                    42
                                                 Figure 7: The Effect of Enforcement Letters on Tax Payment

                                              A. Any Payment                                                                     B. Cumulative Payments (Any Amount)
                        1.5




                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                    Sanctions Treatment: 9.36 (0.29)
                                                                                                                                                                    Public Goods Treatment: 4.86 (0.27)
  Share of Properties




                                                                                                          Share of Properties
                                                                                                                                15
                        1




                                                                                                                                10
                        .5




                                                                                                                                5
                        0




                                                                                                                                0
                              -40           July 28th August 11th      20           40              60                               -40           July 28th August 11th      20           40             60
                                                       Days to Intervention                                                                                   Days to Intervention

                                    Sanctions Treatment                Public Goods Treatment                                              Sanctions Treatment                Public Goods Treatment
                                    Control Group            Sanctions Treatment: 0.08 (0.04)                                              Control Group


                                    C. Cumulative Payment Amount                                                                     D. Cumulative Share of Liability Paid


                                                                                                                                20
                                                             Sanctions Treatment: 54.23 (2.59)
                        100




                                                                                                                                                                      Sanctions Treatment: 8.61 (0.27)
                                                             Public Goods Treatment: 16.05 (2.30)                                                                     Public Goods Treatment: 4.74 (0.26)
                        80




                                                                                                          Share of Debt Paid
                                                                                                                                15
  MXN $
                        60




                                                                                                                                10
                        40




                                                                                                                                5
                        20
                        0




                                                                                                                                0




                              -40           July 28th August 11th      20           40              60                               -40           July 28th August 11th      20           40             60
                                                       Days to Intervention                                                                                   Days to Intervention

                                    Sanctions Treatment                Public Goods Treatment                                              Sanctions Treatment                Public Goods Treatment
                                    Control Group                                                                                          Control Group


Notes: This figure displays taxpayers' response to enforcement letters, as discussed in Section 5. Panel A shows the
share of properties for which a payment was made on any given day around the time of the enforcement intervention.
Panel B shows the cumulative share of properties for which a payment was made, Panel C shows the average
cumulative payment amount, and Panel D displays the share of the outstanding liability paid. We consider payments
made between July and November 2014 against outstanding debt for the period from bimester 4 of 2009 to bimester
3 of 2014. The period during which the letters were sent--July 28 to August 11, 2014--is represented by the vertical
lines. Panels B­D display the point estimates 1 and 2 from the OLS regression Yi =  + 1 T 1i + 2 T 2i + i , where
Yi is the outcome for property i evaluated 40 days after all letters were sent and T 1i and T 2i are dummies for the
sanctions treatment and the public goods treatment, respectively. Since the treatment and control groups exhibit
slightly different trends prior to the intervention, as shown in Figure G.2, we display here and run our estimations on
detrended data. To do that, we run the following regression on the pre-intervention data: Yigt = µg · t + i + t + igt ,
where t indicates days and g treatment groups. We then subtract the trend µg · t from each treatment group. This is
reasonable because the pre-intervention trend is indeed almost perfectly linear and the control group trend continues
linearly after the intervention. In all estimations, weekends are excluded from the sample. Payment amounts are
winzorized at the 99th percentile. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and are clustered at the property
level. Table 2 presents regression estimates evaluating all treatment arms of the intervention, and Table G.2 shows
the robustness of these results to controlling for property characteristics in the estimation and to estimation via
difference-in-difference.




                                                                                                     43
                                                                       Figure 8: The Effect of Tax Rates on Tax Payment Modality

                                                                                              Regression-Kink-Style Analysis of Tax Rate Effect
                                              A. Any Payment                                              B. Payment All at Once                                                                                                C. Payment in Installments




                                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .05 .1 .15 .2




                                                                                                                                                                            .4 .5 .6 .7




                                                                         .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
                                                                                                   20 40 60 80 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Share of households




                                                                                                                                                                          Share of households
                                                                                                                                                                                                0 20 40 60 80 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                        Share of households
                                                                                                                                                                                                Mean rate (basis points)




                                                                                                  Mean rate (basis points)
                                                                                                                                                                          .3




        Mean rate (basis points)
                                                                                                             0




       0 20 40 60 80 100
                                                                        .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O
                                   A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O                                                                A B C D E F G H I J K L MN O                                                                       Cadastral value band
                                          Cadastral value band                                                                         Cadastral value band
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mean tax rate
                                       Mean tax rate     Any payment                                                                  Mean tax rate     Pay All at Once                                                                     All installments on time


       Difference-in-Difference Estimates of Tax Rate Increase Effect on Payment in Installments, Conditional on a Payment Being Made
                    D. 2010 Reform                              E. 2011 Reform                              F. 2012 Reform




44
                                                                                                                              1.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.1 1.2




                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1




                       1 1.1 1.2
                                                                                                                .9
                                                                                                                                                                                                            .9




                   .9
                  Normalized Scale
                                                                                                             Normalized Scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Normalized Scale




                                            Treatment                                                                                      Treatment                                                                                   Treatment
                                            Control                                                                                        Control                                                                                     Control




                               .8
                                                                                                                         .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .8




                                     2008       2009    2010   2011     2012                                                        2008       2009    2010     2011      2012                                                  2008       2009     2010       2011    2012
                                                        Year                                                                                           Year                                                                                         Year
                    DD = 0.109 (0.020), N=5345 properties per year                                            DD = 0.104 (0.016), N=7175 properties per year                                                DD = 0.322 (0.018), N=9393 properties per year


     Notes: These graphs examine the effect of tax rates on payment modality, as discussed in Section 6.1. Panels A­C display the mean tax rate and households'
     payment modality choice by cadastral value bands. In all panels, the blue squares indicate the mean tax rate. In addition, Panel A shows the share of
     households that made any payment towards their tax liability, regardless of the payment modality. For households that made a payment, Panel B shows the
     share that paid their liability in full all at once (as opposed to attempting to pay in installments). For households that attempted to pay in installments,
     Panel C displays the share that made all six installment payments on time, hence remaining compliant (as opposed to households that paid only partially or
     late). Panels D­F are identical to Figures 5 and 6, with the sample restricted to taxpayers that register a payment (including partial payments) every year.
     The outcome is a dummy indicating whether the taxpayer paid in installments as opposed to paying all at once.
                                                                                                                      Figure 9: Policy Analysis

                                                                                                                         A. Optimal Tax Rate
                                                                      A1. MVPF                                                                                                        A2. Optimal Tax Rate
  Marginal Value of Public Funds




                                                                                                                                                 50 100 150 200 250
                                   2




                                                                                                                                                 Optimal Tax Rate
                                   1
                                   0
                                   -1




                                                                                                                                                          0
                                              1                1.5                 2                2.5                                 3                             1                      1.5                 2                2.5              3
                                                                     Marginal Value of Public Goods                                                                                                Marginal Value of Public Goods
                                                                                  v'/u'                                                                                                                         v'/u'

                                                  (1) Baseline (Low Values)                       (2) Plus Liquidity Constraints                                              (1) Baseline (Low Values)               (2) Plus Liquidity Constraints
                                                  (3) Plus High                                   (4) Plus High t                                                             (3) Plus High                           (4) Plus High t


                                                                                                                       B. Optimal Enforcement
                                                                      B1. MVPF                                                             B2. Equilibrium Enforcement
             Marginal Value of Public Funds
                                 .01 .02




                                                                                                                                                                .9
                                                                                                                                                    Compliance Rate
                                                                                                                                                            .7  .8
                           0




                                                                                                                                                      .6
              -.02 -.01




                                                                                                                                                                .5




                                              1                1.5                 2                2.5                                 3                                 1                   1.5                 2                2.5             3
                                                                     Marginal Value of Public Goods                                                                                                 Marginal Value of Public Goods
                                                                                  v'/u'                                                                                                                          v'/u'

                                                       (1) Baseline (Low Values)                                  (2) plus High                                                    (1) Baseline (Low Values)                  (2) Plus High 
                                                       (3) plus High t                                            (4) plus High N                                                  (3) Plus High t


                                                                                              C. Desirability of Taxes over Enforcement
                                                                                                                                    Min                Pooled                      Max
                                                                                   Taxes Over Enforcement
                                                                                                        6




                                                                                                                                    t=-.46             t=-.29                      t=-.24
                                                                                        Desirability of

                                                                                  -2   0     2      4




                                                                                                            -.6            -.5           -.4          -.3                              -.2               -.1
                                                                                                                                        Tax Elasticity: t

                                                                                                                    (1) Baseline (Low Values)                                 (2) Plus High C
                                                                                                                    (3) Plus High                                             (4) Plus High N



Notes: This figure displays results from the optimal policy analysis discussed in Section 7. Panel A plots the
M V P Ft and the welfare-maximizing tax rate. The optimal tax rate is top-coded at 250 basis points. Panel B plots
the M V P F and the optimal compliance rate. The horizontal solid line in Panel A2 represents the observed average
tax rate between 2008 and 2012, while the dashed line represents the max tax rate in the same period. In Panel
B2, the horizontal line represents the observed average compliance rate between 2008 and 2012. Panel C plots the
welfare impact of a balanced-budget policy that increases taxes and reduces enforcement, as in Equation 5. The
dashed lines represent estimates of Pay
                                     t   from Table 1.




                                                                                                                                            45
                            Online Appendix: Not for Publication
This appendix contains additional information and analyses. Appendix A provides additional model
results. Appendix B includes additional contextual information on property taxes in Mexico City.
Appendix C presents summary statistics on the data that we use. We present additional details
for the regression discontinuity analysis in Appendix D, for the difference-in-difference analysis in
Appendix E, for the real response estimations in Appendix F, for the field experiment in Appendix
G, for the analysis of liquidity constraints in Appendix H, for the analysis of payment modality and
timing in Appendix I, for the instrumental variable estimation in Appendix J, and for the calculation
of the revenue-maximizing rate in Appendix K.


A       Model Appendix
This section expands on Section 1 by presenting additional derivations and results.

A.1      Approximating Marginal Utility
For a given individual, we approximate marginal utility with a first-order Taylor expansion:

                                u (c)  u (¯       c) × (c - c
                                          c) + u (¯                 c)[1 -  × c],
                                                            ¯) = u (¯

where c is the percentage change in consumption (i.e., c  0) and  = - uu (¯       c)¯
                                                                                 (¯c)
                                                                                     c
                                                                                        is the coefficient
of relative risk aversion and captures the curvature of utility.
    We now approximate the average marginal utility. Letting c      ¯Pay
                                                                 ¯= c 0 0
                                                                         Pay
                                                                              ¯Pay
                                                                             +cs s
                                                                                      Pay
                                                                                           be the average
consumption across the two types of households, we express the average marginal utility as:
                     Pay   Pay    Pay
       Pay
       s   u (cPay
               s ) + 0 u (c0 )  0 [u (¯          c)(cPay
                                         c) + u (¯   0   -c
                                                          ¯)] + sPay
                                                                                 c)(cPay
                                                                         c) + u (¯
                                                                     [u (¯           s   -c
                                                                                          ¯)]
                                                Pay Pay    Pay Pay
                               = u (¯       c)(0 c0 + s cs - c
                                    c) + u (¯                         ¯)
                                              Pay   Pay    Pay
                                    c)[1 -  (0,c c0 + s,c
                               = u (¯                          cPay
                                                                 s )],

                       Pay
      Pay           c
                    ¯0 0
where 0 ,c =    c  Pay
                ¯0 0 +¯     Pay
                        cs  s
                                  is the consumption share of liquidity-constrained households. Assuming
cPay
 0     = cPay
          s , then
                     Pay
                     0 ,c   =   Pay
                                0   .

A.2      Measuring m ()
One drawback of Equation 3 is that we do not directly observe the welfare cost of additional enforce-
ment, m (). Building on previous approaches (e.g., Bertrand et al., 2010; Mullainathan et al., 2012;
Allcott and Taubinsky, 2015), we express m () as the utility cost of a tax with the same impact on
N Pay . First, note that because N Pay = Pr(V Pay > V Delinquent + i ), it follows that

                                             N Pay      N Pay
                                                   = -              .
                                             V Pay     V Delinquent




                                                       46
Let t be a tax increase such that the combined effect of the tax and the marginal enforcement
action leaves N Pay unaffected. We then have:

                                PayN Pay V Pay         N Pay V Delinquent
                      0 = dN     =             t +
                                   V Pay t          V Delinquent 
                             Pay     Pay       Delinquent
                          N        V         V
                        =                t -              .
                          V Pay    t            
                               >0                        =0

Because the first term is non-zero, the second term being equal to zero implies that:
                                      V Delinquent
                                                          -m ()     m ()
                              t =       V Pay
                                                     =            =        .
                                          t
                                                          -u (c)H   u (c)H

Because this joint tax and enforcement change is such that N Pay is unaffected, we can write:

                                              N Pay N Pay
                                          0 = t      +
                                                 t      
                                                   Pay
                                            m () t       Pay
                                       0 =             + 
                                           u (c)H t      
                                                         Pay
                                                 Ht     
                                    m () = u (c)             ,
                                                        -Pay
                                                          t

where the second line substitutes for t and transforms the expression into terms of elasticities and
the third line solves for m (). This expression shows that we can measure m () as a multiple of
marginal utility that depends on the tax payment per household relative to the money spent on
               Ht                                                                        Pay
enforcement,   
                    , and the relative effects of taxes and enforcement on compliance,   
                                                                                       -Pay
                                                                                             .
                                                                                          t
                                                                                     Pay
    This expression also shows that the welfare cost of enforcement is increasing in  . This makes
sense. If a given enforcement action has a large effect on payment, the equivalent tax increase would
have to be greater to result in the same effect on compliance. However, while a larger value of
Pay
     implies that enforcement raises more revenue, it also implies that enforcement is relatively less
attractive from a welfare perspective.
    We can then re-express M V P F as:

                                 v (g ) -Pay
                                           t             1 - N Pay
                     M V P F =                -                         .
                                 u (c) Pay
                                        (Ht/)        ~)N Pay Pay
                                                (1 - z        (Ht/) - 1

   Similarly, the optimal rate of compliance is:
                                                              Pay   v (g )
                                                     1-    Pay
                                                               t
                                        Pay                  (Ht/) u (c)
                                       N    =                                .
                                                     1-   (1 - z~)Pay
                                                                  t
                                                                      v (g )
                                                                      u (c)

   It is worth pointing out that our approach to measuring m () relies on the assumption that our
enforcement treatment takes the form of a psychological tax (e.g., as in Caplin, 2003; Loewenstein
and O'Donoghue, 2006; Glaeser, 2006). In addition to the case of the psychological tax, Allcott


                                                          47
and Kessler (2019) consider that nudges may provide information that impacts decision-making of
households, as well as the case where nudges provide a moral subsidy. Since taxpayers received
six reminder bills prior to receiving the enforcement message, it is unlikely that the enforcement
message provided any new information about the tax liability. Alternatively, the message may
be interpreted as providing information that may impact beliefs about z       ~. However, since stronger
enforcement actions apply only to a small subset of delinquent taxpayers, it is unlikely that the
treatment improved beliefs about z ~. In fact, even if taxpayers updated their beliefs, they might have
updated to a z~ that was higher than its actual value. If this were the case, household responses to the
enforcement letter would carry further welfare losses arising from acting sub-optimally based on these
erroneous beliefs. Accounting for this possibility would further reduce the desirability of enforcement
messages as a policy tool. Finally, while other types of nudges may activate a "warm glow" effect
from paying taxes, even our public goods treatment was primarily an enforcement message. For this
reason, we do not believe that the enforcement actions that we study are likely to generate a moral
subsidy.
    Finally, we explore the robustness of our conclusion that welfare can be improved by relying
more on tax rate increases and less on enforcement messages in Figure A.2. This figure shows that
multiplying m() by 87%, 66%, and 50% leaves this conclusion unaffected, indicating that this result
is robust to reasonable perturbations in the measurement of m().

A.3    Comparing M V P F and M V P Ft
We now consider the welfare effect of increasing taxes and reducing enforcement while keeping gov-
ernment expenditure constant. The welfare impact of this policy experiment is given by:

                                                             d
                                       dW = Wt + W ·                     .
                                                             dt   g =0

From the government budget constraint, we have that:

                                  d                HN (1 + (1 - z ~)Pay
                                                                     t )
                                              =-    tHN          Pay     .
                                  dt   g =0          
                                                        (1 - ~
                                                             z )     - 1

From Equations 1 and 3, we can write:

                                                           ~)Pay
                        Wt = M V P Ft × u (c) HN (1 + (1 - z t )             and
                                                           tHN
                       W = M V P F × m ()                           ~)Pay
                                                               (1 - z  -1 .
                                                            
Combining these four expressions, we then have that:

                                                                               m ()
                                       ~)Pay
               dW = u (c) HN (1 + (1 - z t ) × M V P Ft - M V P F  ×                 .
                                                                               u (c)




                                                      48
                                  m ()        Ht     Pay
Recalling from above that         u (c)
                                          =   
                                                      
                                                     -Pay
                                                            , we have:
                                                      t


                                                                          Ht     Pay
                                                                                  
                                  dW  M V P Ft - M V P F ×                            .
                                                                                 -Pay
                                                                                  t

We use this expression to plot Panel C of Figure 9. Figure A.2 explores the robustness of this
calculation by multiplying the last expression in this equation by 83%, 66%, and 50%.

A.4       Government Provision of Liquidity
Assume now that the government allows households that pay property taxes to borrow up to the
amount of the property taxes at interest rate r.68 We can interpret this rate of return as incorpo-
rating a risk adjustment for the possibility that households do not pay back the loan. Because the
government can eventually seize the asset, this collateral implies that this adjustment is low.
     The provision of liquidity to constrained taxpayers lowers the welfare cost of taxation since con-
sumption would be less affected. Specifically, the change in consumption for constrained households
          c                                             c     c     c
is now t,l  × t, where it is plausible to assume that t,l  t,s   < t, 0 . Therefore, when the government
provides liquidity, M V P Ft is greater, since the effect on consumption is smaller. The provision of
liquidity to constrained taxpayers also means that enforcement becomes relatively less desirable since
liquidity increases the value of M V P Ft .
     The assumption that the government charges a risk-adjusted interest rate implies that the gov-
ernment's budget constraint is not affected by providing liquidity. Departing from this assumption,
it is also possible to study the optimal provision of liquidity. As in Andreoni (1992), the government
may have incentives to act as a "loan shark." The government's budget constraint is now:

                        g + a() = tHN pay + zH (1 - N pay ) + ( - r) × lPay N pay tH,

where the last term is the revenue from charging interest  on the taxes of the share of taxpayers
lPay who obtain a loan from the government.
                     dV Pay                              dVlDelinquent
   This implies        d
                              = -u (cPay )HlPay and           d
                                                                         = 0. The effect of increasing  on welfare is
then:

                                                   N Pay                                    N Pay lPay pay
-N Pay lPay u (cPay
                l   )H +v (g )× (t - z )H                + lPay N pay tH + ( - r) × tH lPay      +    N                 .
                                                                                                   

The MVPF for  is then:
                                                                     Pay
                                          v (g )                (1 - l,  cPay
                                                                          l, )
                          M V P F =              -   t-z Pay
                                                                                               .
                                          u (¯
                                             c)
                                                     lPay      + t + ( - r) × t[Pay
                                                                                    +  ]
                                                                                       l




The optimal value of  solves this expression when set equal to zero. From this expression, it follows
that the government might set  > r and therefore act as a loan shark if the value of providing public
goods through loans exceeds the welfare cost of raising revenue in this way.


  68
       We assume that only households that pay property taxes and have no savings may decide to take out a loan.

                                                               49
      Figure A.1: N Equates the Marginal Cost (MC) and Benefit (MB) From Enforcement

                                                  A: N > N : MC of Enforcement Exceeds MB
                                                                                     N   N

                  Marginal Cost and Benefit
                             10




                                              0                                                1
                                                                Compliance Rate: N

                                                         (1) MC (High )       (2) MB (High )


                                                           B: Effect of Lowering 
                                                                               N         N
                  Marginal Cost and Benefit
                  0          1




                                              0                                                1
                                                                Compliance Rate: N

                                                         (1) MC (High )       (2) MB (High )
                                                         (3) MC (Low )        (4) MB (Low )


Notes: This figure plots the marginal cost and benefit of enforcement as well as the implied N . The
marginal cost of enforcement (plotted in blue) is given by (1 - N ) m   ()
                                                                      v (g )
                                                                              + 1, which includes the private
and public costs of enforcement. The MC of enforcement is a decreasing function of N and equals
1 when N = 1 (this is because we assume a() = , so that a            
                                                                      ()
                                                                             = 1). The marginal benefit of
                                              ~) Ht
enforcement (plotted in red) is given by (1 - z   
                                                     Pay
                                                         N, which  starts    at the origin and increases with
N . In Panel A, the MC equals the MB at N . This figure assumes that the observed compliance
rate N < N . At the observed compliance rate N , the MC of enforcement exceeds the MB, such
that welfare would be increased by lowering . Panel B shows the effect of lowering . For lower
values of , the term m () is smaller, resulting in a flatter MC curve (shown with the dashed line).
For lower values of , the elasticity Pay
                                         is higher (i.e., initial enforcement efforts are more effective),
resulting in a steeper MB curve (shown with the dashed line). In Panel B, MB equals MC at the
new N , which is lower than N in Panel A.




                                                                     50
                         Figure A.2: Robustness of Desirability of Taxes over Enforcement
                                                           Min           Pooled    Max




                                       6
                                                           t=-.46        t=-.29    t=-.24


                  Taxes Over Enforcement
                       Desirability of

                 -2    0     2      4




                                           -.6       -.5        -.4          -.3     -.2         -.1
                                                               Tax Elasticity: t

                                            (1) Baseline (High  & C)        (2) Base Plus m()83%
                                            (3) Base Plus m()66%            (4) Base Plus m()50%

Notes: This figure displays results from the optimal policy analysis discussed in Section 7. The figure plots the
welfare impact of a balanced-budget policy that increases taxes and reduces enforcement, as in Equation 5. The
dashed lines represent estimates of Pay  t    from Table 1. The baseline scenario assumes that  = 1, c = -0.056,
 Ht      = 54 , and N Pay
                          = 0 . 60 . The   remaining lines discount the welfare cost of enforcement by multiplying m()
by 83 percent, 66 percent, and 50 percent, which mechanically increases the relative desirability of enforcement as
a policy tool. Nonetheless, at our pooled estimate of t , this balanced-budget policy continues to raise welfare even
when we discount m() by close to 50 percent.




                                                                    51
                                        B       Context Appendix

                                  Table B.1: Consumer Debt in Mexico City
             Variable                                                        Mean
                                                                              (1)
             Credit take-up
                  Informal                                                    .345
                  Formal                                                      .302
                  Both                                                        .084
                  None                                                        .437
             Informal borrower shares by type of lender (not exclusive)
                  Pawnshop                                                    .135
                  Friends                                                      .32
                  Family                                                      .729
                  Other                                                       .013
             Reasons for informality
                  Voluntary                                                   .578
                  Non-eligibility (lack of access)                            .288
                  Initial costs                                               .125
                  Other                                                       .009
             Formal borrower shares by credit source (not exclusive)
                  Credit card                                                 .834
                  Bank loan                                                   .113
                  Mortgage                                                    .189
                  Car/Other                                                   .079
             Number of mortgages (liquidity constraints)
                  One                                                          1
                  Two or more                                                  0
             Use of formal credit
                  Paying a bill                                               .161
                  Other                                                       .839
             Observations                                                      877

Notes: The table examines consumer debt in Mexico City in 2018, using data from the National Financial Inclusion
Survey (Encuesta Nacional de Inclusión Financiera, ENIF). This is discussed in the Introduction.




                                                             52
                                         Table B.2: Tax Schedule, 2009

             Band          Cadastral   Cadastral            Lump-Sum           Tax Rate on       Percent
                         Value Lower Value Upper             Liability         Excess from     Abatement
                         Limit (MXN) Limit (MXN)             (MXN)             Lower Limit     on Liability
                                                                                (percent)
                               (1)              (2)                 (3)             (4)            (5)
               A              0.11          162,740.82              32               0              0
               B           162,740.83       325,481.16              37               0              0
               C           325,481.17       650,963.56              45               0              0
               D           650,963.57       976,444.70              55               0              0
               E           976,444.71     1,301,927.10            737.28         0.09542           65
               F          1,301,927.11     1,627,408.26          1,047.86        0.11091           45
               G          1,627,408.27     1,952,889.39          1,408.85        0.11461           30
               H          1,952,889.40     2,278,371.81          1,781.88        0.12522           20
               I          2,278,371.82    2,603,852.96           2,189.45        0.13097           15
               J          2,603,852.97     2,929,335.38          2,615.73        0.13478           10
               K          2,929,335.39    3,254,816.51           3,054.42        0.13892            0
               L         3,254,816.52      3,580,297.67          3,506.58         0.1427            0
               M          3,580,297.68    3,906,090.04           3,971.04        0.15075            0
               N          3,906,090.05    11,718,268.85          4,462.17        0.16278            0
               O         11,718,268.86    24,663,843.29         17,178.84        0.16286            0
               P         24,663,843.30                          38,262.00        0.16902            0
Notes: This table presents an example of the annual tax schedule discussed in Section 2.2, focusing on the year 2009.


                                Table B.3: Abatements on Gross Tax Liability
         Band            2008            2009            2010           2011            2012         2013
                          (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)          (6)
           G              30              30              30             30              20           20
           H              20              20              20              0               0            0
           I              15              15               0              0               0            0
           J              10               0               0              0               0            0
Notes: This table displays the abatement rates discussed in Section 2.2.


                         Table B.4: Early-Bird Discounts and Payment Deadlines
        Year         Super Early Bird               Early Bird                        Reference Rates
                    Deadline   Discount         Deadline   Discount         Central      Treasury Mortgages
                                                                             Bank          Bonds
                      (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)          (5)            (6)        (7)
        2008        Jan 31         7%           Feb 28           4%          7.5%          7.42%      12.22%
        2009        Jan 31         8%           Feb 28           4%         8.25%          7.59%      12.78%
        2010        Jan 31         5%           Feb 28           0%          4.5%          4.49%      12.79%
        2011        Jan 10         7%           Jan 31           3%          4.5%          4.14%      12.22%
        2012        Jan 17         7%           Jan 31           4%          4.5%          4.27%      12.53%
        2013        Jan 31         7%           Feb 28           6%          4.5%          4.15%      12.13%
Notes: This table displays the early-bird discount schedules discussed in Section 2.3 and Appendix I. Discounts are
applied to the annual tax liability. All interest rates are annualized.

                                                          53
                                   Table B.5: Home Ownership in Mexico

                                            Panel A: Renting vs Owning
                                                 Homeowners             Renters       Others         P value
                                                    (1)                   (2)          (3)             (4)
      Share of the population                       62.1                 14.2          23.6
      Average Monthly Labor Income (MXN)            3966.1            5394.7           3785.7         0.017
                                                   (263.893)        (473.894)        (363.832)
      Number of Rooms                                 2.2                 1.7           1.8           0.000
                                                    (.048)              (.075)        (.064)
      Number of Household Members                      4                  3.5           3.7           0.127
                                                    (.092)              (.166)        (.141)
      Age Head of Household                          55.5                  37           44.8          0.000
                                                    (.748)              (1.466)       (1.348)


                                     Panel B: Homeowner Characteristics
        Home Financing       Current Mortgage      Pays Property           Property Tax          Own a Second
                                                        Tax              Payment Amount             Home
               (1)                  (2)                 (3)                     (4)                  (5)
               14.3                 9.9                 56.6                   300.3                 5.4
             (1.627)              (1.392)             (2.306)                (20.009)              (1.051)


                                             Panel C: Home Financing
                             Gender                                     Income Quintiles
        Total           Male      Female       Poorest          2nd           3rd          4th        Richest
         (1)             (2)        (3)           (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)
         4.3             4.8        3.9           0.0           2.3           8.0          5.0          6.1
       (0.643)         (1.080)    (0.785)       (0.00)        (1.171)       (1.877)      (1.558)      (1.510)

Notes: The table examines home ownership in Mexico, as discussed in Section 2.3. Panels A and B displays summary
statistics of Mexican households by ownership status, based on the 2014 ENVI (Encuesta Nacional de Vivienda ) from
the National Institute of Statistics. In Panel A, the home status "Others" includes loaned properties and properties
under litigation. The p-values in Panel A evaluate the differences between homeowners and renters. In Panel B,
"Home Financing" indicates the share of owners who have received any kind of loan to finance their home purchase.
Panel C displays the share of households with a mortgage in the country and its demographic correlates, based on
data from the 2017 World Bank Findex database. Standard errors are in parentheses. The difference in the share
of observations with a mortgage in Panels B and C is driven by differences in the sample. Panels A and B are for
Mexico City, while Panel C is for the whole country.




                                                         54
                                                                                   Figure B.1: Property Taxes in Mexico City

                                             A: Property Tax Revenue                                                B: Cadastral Values and Property Prices
                   11000




                                                                                                                                                                         40000
                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                 Average commercial value in MXN per m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Miguel Hidalgo
                              10000




                                                                                                                                                                         30000
     Revenues in MXN millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cuajimalpa De Morelos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Alvaro Obregon




                                                                                                                                                                         20000
                   9000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Benito Juarez
                                                                                                                                                                                                               La Magdalena Contreras Coyoacan    Cuauhtemoc

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tlalpan
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Xochimilco    Iztacalco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Venustiano Carranza




                                                                                                                                                                         10000
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Gustavo A Madero
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Iztapalapa           Azcapotzalco
         8000




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Tlahuac

                                                                                                                                                                                         Milpa Alta




                                                                                                                                                                         0
                   7000




                                                                                                                                                                                 0                    5000                    10000              15000              20000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Average cadastral value in MXN per m
                   6000




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Delegacion                   Fitted values
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                      2006         2008              2010                 2012           2014                                                                    Commercial = Cadastral * 1.264 (0.238) , R =0.669
                                                                     Year



                       C: Tax Payment as Share of Income                                                        D: Year-on-Year Growth in Tax Payment Amounts


                                                                                                                                 80
                   2
     Percent of Household Income




                                                                                                                                 60
                          1.5




                                                                                                                       Density
                                                                                                                                 40
           1




                                                                                                                                 20
                   .5




                                                                                                                                 0




                                       I     II   III      IV    V            VI    VII     VIII    IX    X                                                               -.2                                0                             .2                             .4
                                                                     Decile                                                                                                                           Year on Year Growth Rate of Payments

                                                          2008              2010             2012                                                                                             2009                   2010                  2011                  2012



Notes: These figures show key facts about property taxes in Mexico City and are discussed in Sections 2.1 and 2.2.
Panel A shows the total property tax revenue by year for Mexico City in nominal terms from government records. Panel
B shows the correlation between average cadastral and commercial property values at the delegación level. Average
commercial prices are obtained from propiedades.com, one of the largest real estate websites in Mexico. Prices were
retrieved on the June 4, 2020, and are discounted for inflation using INEGI's inflation calculator. Cadastral values
are from the administrative data. Panel C plots the property tax payment reported in the ENIGH household survey
(Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los Hogares ) as a share of total household income, conditional on property
tax payment being non-zero. Each line corresponds to a different survey round. Panel D displays the year-on-year
                                            t -P ayt-1
growth rate of property tax payments, P ay  P ayt-1    . The sample is restricted to taxpayers who made a payment in
both year t and year t - 1. The figure shows that there is no anchoring of tax payments at the previous year's liability
or tax payment amount, as liabilities are inflation-adjusted each year.




                                                                                                                  55
              Figure B.2: Relevance and External Validity of the Mexico (City) Context

                                                                                     A: Tax Administration Capacity around the World


                A1: Comprehensive Audit Rate                                                                                                                                                                    A2: CIT Audit Rate
                                                                   13




                                                                                                                                                                                                    60
                 Number of Audits per 100 CIT Registered Taxpayers




                                                                                                                                                  Number of Audits per 100 CIT Registered Taxpayers

                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                      1.8




                                                                                                                                                                               1.8
                                    (Log Scale)




                                                                                                                                                                      (Log Scale)
                                         .22




                                                                                                   Mexico




                                                                                                                                                                    .22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mexico
                            .03




                                                                                                                                                        .03
                                                   .003




                                                                                                                                                                                                .003
                                                                        1.4K   3K             8.7K          21.6K          61.7K   105K                                                                  1.4K      3K             8.7K          21.6K          61.7K   105K
                                                                                    GDP Per Capita (Nominal USD) (Log Scale)                                                                                            GDP Per Capita (Nominal USD) (Log Scale)




                                                                               B: Household Liquidity Constraints around the World


         B1: Share of Adults with a Bank Account B2: Share of Adults with a Credit Card                                                                                   80
                                  100




                                                                                                                                                                             60
                                        80




                                                                                                                                                  Credit Card Ownership (15+%)
                 Account Ownership (15+%)




                                                                                                                                                                   40
                               60




                                                                                                                     Mexico City
                                                                                                                                                          20
                      40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mexico City
                                                                                                            Mexico
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mexico
                                  20




                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                          -20
                                  0




                                                                          6                8                       10               12                                                                     6                   8                       10               12
                                                                                          Log Per Capita GDP, 2017                                                                                                            Log Per Capita GDP, 2017




          B3: Share of Adults with a Formal Loan                                                                                                B4: Share of Adults Able to Cover
                                                                                                                                               an Emergency Expense from Savings
                                  80




                                                                                                                                                  Able to Raise Emergency Funds from savings (15+%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                80
                                       60
                 Formal Borrowing (15+%)




                                                                                                                                                                                   60
                            40




                                                                                                                                                                       40




                                                                                                                     Mexico City
                 20




                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mexico
                                                                                                            Mexico
                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                          6                8                       10               12                                                                     6                   8                       10               12
                                                                                          Log Per Capita GDP, 2017                                                                                                            Log Per Capita GDP, 2017




Notes: As discussed in the introduction, this figure shows the correlation between measures of government tax adminis-
tration capacity and household liquidity constraints with GDP per capita and the levels of these indicators for Mexico,
as well as for Mexico City where available. The data for Panels A1 and A2 are from the 2016 Revenue Administration
Fiscal Information Tool (RA-FIT). The audit rate consists of the number of audits by each type conducted by the tax
authority divided by the number of CIT-registered taxpayers. The data for Panels B1­B4 are from the 2017 World
Bank Findex database for all countries and from the 2018 National Financial Inclusion Survey for Mexico City. Panel
B4 displays the share of adults who can cover an emergency (an unexpected expense approximately equivalent to 500
USD) from personal savings (formal or informal). This statistic is not available for Mexico City only.




                                                                                                                                          56
                                         Figure B.3: Property Tax Bill




Notes: This figure displays a typical property tax bill sent to homeowners, as discussed in Section 2.3.




                                                          57
                               Figure B.4: Distribution of Treated Properties across Neighborhoods in Mexico City

                        A: Neighborhood Density of Treated Properties                 B: Distribution of Treated Properties




                                                             C: Count of Treated Properties




58
     Notes: Panel A shows the density of treated properties within neighborhoods in Mexico City. The density is the number of treated properties in a given
     neighborhood divided by the total number of properties in the neighborhood. Panel B shows the distribution of treated properties across neighborhoods.
     For each neighborhood, we show the ratio between the number of treated properties in this neighborhood and the total number of treated properties in
     the city. Panel C shows the number of treated properties in each neighborhood. These maps are discussed in Section 2.2.
                                               C            Data Appendix

                                             Table C.1: Summary Statistics
                                             Panel A: Property Characteristics
                                          2008               2009             2010               2011                 2012
                                           (1)                (2)              (3)                (4)                  (5)
         Property Value (MXN)          585,320            617,487           613,493           609,478               605,346
                                     (1,121,680)        (1,185,320)       (1,180,471)       (1,174,999)           (1,169,283)
         Yearly Liability (MXN)          1,457              1,540            1,630              1,704                 1,788
                                       (10,097)           (10,671)         (11,214)           (11,607)              (11,985)
         Mean Tax Rate × 100             .1112              .1114            .1198              .1259                 .1323
                                        (.1243)            (.1245)          (.1349)            (.1427)               (.1532)

                                             Panel B: Payment Characteristics
                                                    2008         2009          2010          2011           2012
                  Payment (current MXN)             680           698          729            709            686
                                                   (4078)       (4126)        (4439)        (4703)         (4563)
                  Compliance share                  .628          .61          .591          .538            .488
                                                   (.931)       (.711)        (.776)         (.62)         (1.149)
                  Payment type
                    Zero payment                    .275         .276          .307          .366           .432
                                                   (.446)       (.447)        (.461)        (.482)         (.495)
                    Partial payment                 .172         .174          .174          .136           .097
                                                   (.377)       (.379)        (.379)        (.343)         (.296)
                    Early Full Payment              .413         .432          .416          .455           .461
                                                   (.492)       (.495)        (.493)        (.498)         (.498)
                    Non-Early Full Payment          .141         .118          .103          .043            .01
                                                   (.348)       (.323)        (.304)        (.204)          (.1)

                                                   Panel C: Penalties and Fees
                                                                              2008                                   2009
                                                                      Mean             Median             Mean              Median
                                                                        (1)             (2)                 (3)              (4)
  Late Payment Dummy (before due date 2)                              .086                                 .085
    Inflation-Adjusted Liability (dummy)                               .065                                .053
    Inflation-Adjusted/Original Liability                             1.299             1.222             1.164             1.193
  Late Payment (after due date 2, within 2 years)                     .065                                 .053
    Penalty Dummy                                                      .005                                  0
    Surcharge Dummy                                                    .065                                .053
    Seizure Dummy                                                      .001                                  0
    Penalty/Liability                                                  .838               1                .226              .101
    Surcharge/Liability                                                .183             .145              .154               .147
    Seizure/Liability                                                  .019               0                  0                 0
    Total/Liability                                                   1.299             1.222             1.164             1.193
  Delinquent Taxpayer Dummy                                            .247                                .252

Notes: Panel A reports summary statistics for 1,420,259 properties with an average land area of 126 (SE=381) square
meters and an average construction area of 126 (SE=161) square meters. Panel B reports summary statistics on
payments. Panel C reports summary statistics on penalties and fees from the administrative tax data discussed in
Section 3.




                                                                  59
                                Figure C.1: Distribution of Property Characteristics by Value Band
                                                           A. Properties                                                                                                        B. Cadastral Value
                    40




                                                                                                                                                   30
                                             37.4                                                                                                                             27.8




                                      31.5
                    30




                                                                                                                                                   20
               Percentage




                                                                                                                                          Percentage
                                                                                                                                                                                     16.2
                  20




                                                                                                                                                                       12.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10.8
                                                    12.7




                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                                                                                            9.3
                    10




                                                                                                                                                                                                  5.6
                                6.0
                                                           5.1                                                                                                                                          3.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.8
                                                                 2.4                                                                                                                                                2.0    1.7                            1.7
                                                                                                                                                                 1.2                                                             1.5   1.3   1.2
                                                                       1.3   0.8                                  1.1                                                                                                                                           1.0
                                                                                   0.5    0.4   0.3   0.2   0.2          0.1   0.0
                    0




                                                                                                                                                   0
                                A     B      C      D      E     F     G     H     I      J     K     L     M     N      O     P                                 A     B      C      D      E     F     G     H     I      J     K     L     M     N      O     P



                                                           C. Liabilities                                                                                                                   D. Revenues
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   30.4
                    40




                                                                                                                                                   30
                                                                                                                  34.0
                    30




                                                                                                                                                   20
               Percentage




                                                                                                                                          Percentage
                  20




                                                                                                                                                                              9.5
                                                                                                                                                   10




                                                                                                                                                                                            7.1
                    10




                                                                                                                                                                                                  6.6
                                                                                                                                                                       5.8                              6.1
                                             6.6                                                                                                                                                              5.3
                                                           6.1   6.2                                                     6.3                                                                                                                              4.6
                                                                       5.4                                                                                                           4.2                            4.3    4.2
                                                                             5.1                                                                                                                                                 3.7
                                      4.5                                                 4.2                                                                                                                                          3.3   3.1
                                                                                   4.0          3.7                            3.8
                                                                                                      3.3   3.2
                                                    2.7
                                                                                                                                                                 0.8                                                                                            1.0
                                0.7
                    0




                                                                                                                                                   0




                                A     B      C      D      E     F     G     H     I      J     K     L     M     N      O     P                                 A     B      C      D      E     F     G     H     I      J     K     L     M     N      O     P




Notes: This figure shows the distribution of property characteristics by cadastral value band, as discussed in Section
3, for the balanced panel of residential properties in Mexico City whose cadastral value did not change between 2009
and 2012.


                                                           Figure C.2: Outstanding Property Tax Debt
                                                    A. All Properties                   B. Experiment Sample
                   .4




                                                                                                                                                       .6
            Outstanding Debt




                                                                                                                                                          .5
                                                                                                                                            Outstanding Debt
                       .35




                                                                                                                                                   .4
              .3




                                                                                                                                          .3
                   .25




                                                                                                                                                       .2




                               2008                  2009                    2010                     2011                     2012                            2008             2010               2012             2014               2016               2018
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Year
                                                                             Year
                                                                                                                                                                                            2008                          2009                     2010
                                                     2008                                2009                            2010                                                               2011                          2012



Notes: This figure shows how the share of each year's unpaid tax liability evolves over time. This is referenced in
Section 7. Panel A includes all taxpayers with outstanding tax debt. Panel B restricts the sample to taxpayers
targeted in the enforcement intervention.




                                                                                                                                     60
                          D          Regression Discontinuity Appendix

                Table D.1: Identification Check for Regression Discontinuity Estimation
                                           Band I (2010)            Band H (2011)            Band G (2012)
                                                (1)                      (2)                      (3)
                     +       -
     P-value (H0 : fValue = fValue )           .444                     .828                     .752
     q                                          138                      190                      250
     N (left)                                  1647                     2237                     3076
     N (right)                                 1059                     2109                     3501
     Total N                                   2706                     4346                     6577
     Effective N (left)                         74                       97                       122
     Effective N (right)                        64                       93                       128
Notes: This table reports results from the RD validity test proposed by Bugni and Canay (2020), as discussed in
Section 4.1. This test examines the continuity of the running variable at the cut-off, an implication of the assumption
of no manipulation. In particular, the fraction of units under treatment and control should be similar on both sides.
The test statistic exploits the fact that under the null, the number of treated units out of the q observations closest
                                                                                               1
to the cut-off is approximately distributed as a binomial with sample size q and probability 2   . The paper proposes a
data-dependent rule for q , the number of "effective" observations near the cut-off.


 Table D.2: Robustness of Regression Discontinuity Estimation ­ Using Local Linear Regressions
                                   with Optimal Bandwidth
                                           Mean Tax Rate         Payment        Payment in Full    Compliance
                                           (basis points)     Amount (MXN         (percentage      Share × 100
                                                                thousands)           points)
                                                  (1)                 (2)               (3)              (4)
                                                          I. Estimates for the 2009-2010 treatment
       T                                      8.923 ***             .61 *           -8.426 **          -2.471
                                                (.105)             (.323)            (3.606)          (2.641)
       Properties                               17864              17864              17864            17864
       Mean at Baseline (treated band)          50.112             5.836              36.626          47.881
       Implied Elasticity                                            .587             -1.292             -.29
                                                                   (.311)             (.553)            (.31)
                                                         II. Estimates for the 2012-2011 treatment
       T                                     12.109 ***          .667 ***            -5.8 **           -3.019
                                                (.033)              (.16)            (2.573)          (2.032)
       Properties                               28094              28094              28094            28094
       Mean at Baseline (treated band)          47.461             4.734              35.072          47.478
       Implied Elasticity                                            .552              -.648            -.249
                                                                   (.133)             (.288)           (.168)
       P-value (H0 :   2011   =   2010 )                             .918              .302             .908
                                                        III. Estimates for the 2011-2012 treatment
       T                                     17.958 ***          .644 ***          -9.615 ***        -3.833 *
                                                (.018)             (.134)            (1.567)          (2.051)
       Properties                               48838              48838              48838            48838
       Mean at Baseline (treated band)           41.06             3.287              37.969          44.885
       Implied Elasticity                                            .448              -.579            -.195
                                                                   (.093)             (.094)           (.104)
       P-value (H0 :   2012   =   2011 )                              .52              .819             .785
       P-value (H0 :   2012   =   2010 )                             .668              .204             .772

Notes: This table is similar to Table 1, Panel A, but uses local linear regressions with optimal bandwidth as in Calonico
et al. 2014. The estimates are statistically indistinguishable from the results of the preferred specification.

                                                            61
   Table D.3: Robustness of Regression Discontinuity Estimation ­ Differences-in-Discontinuities
                                           Estimates
                                          Mean Tax Rate          Payment        Payment in Full    Compliance
                                          (basis points)      Amount (MXN         (percentage      Share × 100
                                                                thousands)           points)
                                                  (1)                 (2)               (3)               (4)
                                                          I. Estimates for the 2009-2010 treatment
  1                                           8.23 ***           1.019 ***         -5.377 ***          1.521
                                                (.05)               (.183)           (1.695)          (1.399)
  Properties                                   17864                17864             17864            17864
  Years of Data                                    4                   4                 4                 4
  Adjusted R-Squared                             .318                .005              .002             .001
  Mean at Baseline (treated band)              50.112               5.836             36.626          47.881
  Implied Elasticity                                                1.063              -.894             .193
                                                                   (.191)             (.282)           (.178)
  P-value (H0 : 0 = 1 )                          .000                .000              .000              .915
                                                         II. Estimates for the 2010-2011 treatment
  1                                           9.71 ***            .445 ***          -2.568 **       -3.584 ***
                                               (.066)                (.12)           (1.248)          (1.081)
  Properties                                   28094                28094             28094            28094
  Years of Data                                    4                   4                 4                 4
  Adjusted R-Squared                              .31                .005              .003             .002
  Mean at Baseline (treated band)              47.461               4.734             35.072          47.478
  Implied Elasticity                                                 .459              -.358            -.369
                                                                   (.124)             (.174)           (.111)
  P-value (H0 : 0 = 1 )                          .000                .000              .009              .013
                                                        III. Estimates for the 2011-2012 treatment
  1                                          20.017 ***          .503 ***         -11.621 ***       -7.285 ***
                                               (.038)               (.071)              (1)            (.932)
  Properties                                   48838                48838             48838            48838
  Years of Data                                    4                   4                 4                 4
  Adjusted R-Squared                             .934                .006              .003             .002
  Mean at Baseline (treated band)               41.06               3.287             37.969          44.885
  Implied Elasticity                                                 .314              -.628            -.333
                                                                   (.045)             (.054)           (.043)
  P-value (H0 : 0 = 1 )                          .000                .000              .000              .000
Notes: This table shows, as discussed in Section 4.1, the effect of the tax rate changes driven by the abatement
removal, in excess of the effect of the smaller year-on-year tax rate changes, given by 1 in the estimating equation
Yi,t = 0 + 0 Ti + f0 (V ^i ) + g0 (V
                                   ^i )Ti + [1 + 1 Ti + f1 (V
                                                            ^i ) + g1 (V
                                                                       ^i )Ti ]Dt + i,t , where Dt is an indicator for the time
period when the abatement is removed. The results of this estimation are very similar to our main estimates in Table
1, Panel A.




                                                              62
                                                                                   Figure D.1: Identification Tests for Regression Discontinuity Estimation

                   A. McCrary Density Test B: Year of Construction        C. Land Area                                                                                                                                                          D. Construction Area
                                               I. Estimates for the 2009­2010 treatment




                                                                                                                           1985




                                   20
                                                                                                                        1984




                                   15
                                                                                                                    1983
                                                                                                                   Year
                                                                                                                 1982




                                   10
                                                                                                                                                                            350 400 450
                                                                                                                                                                           Square meters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Square meters




                                                                                                              1981




                     Density Estimate
                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                 300
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       320 340 360 380 400 420




                                                                                                           1980




                                   0
                                                                                                                                    2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6                                2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6                                             2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6
                                         2.22       2.24        2.26        2.28         2.3        2.32                            Cadastral Value (MXN millions)                           Cadastral Value (MXN millions)                                        Cadastral Value (MXN millions)
                                                      Cadastral Value (MXN Millions)
                                         Discontinuity Estimate (Log Difference in Height): -.067 (.118)                          RD = 0.586 (1.011), N=17864 properties                   RD = -9.723 (25.228), N=17864 properties                              RD = 17.264 (9.939), N=17864 properties


                                                                                                                                  II. Estimates for the 2010­2011 Treatment




                                   30
                                   20
                                                                                                                   Year
                                                                                                                                                                             300 350 400
                                                                                                                                                                           Square meters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Square meters




                                   10
                     Density Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                 250
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       300 320 340 360 380 400




                                                                                                           19811982198319841985




                                   0
                                                                                                                                  1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2 2.1 2.2                                1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2 2.1 2.2                                             1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2 2.1 2.2
                                         1.9        1.92        1.94        1.96        1.98         2                               Cadastral Value (MXN millions)                           Cadastral Value (MXN millions)                                        Cadastral Value (MXN millions)




63
                                                      Cadastral Value (MXN Millions)
                                         Discontinuity Estimate (Log Difference in Height): -.037 (.097)                          RD = 0.929 (1.155), N=28094 properties                   RD = 10.241 (19.452), N=28094 properties                              RD = 5.858 (7.970), N=28094 properties


                                                                                                                                  III. Estimates for the 2011­2012 Treatment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     350




                                    15
                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           300




                                                                                                                    Year
                                                                                                                                                                            250 300 350
                                                                                                                                                                           Square meters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Square meters




                                    5
                     Density Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                 200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  250




                                                                                                           19811982198319841985




                                    0
                                                                                                                                  1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9                              1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9                                           1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9
                                         1.58       1.6         1.62        1.64        1.66        1.68                             Cadastral Value (MXN millions)                           Cadastral Value (MXN millions)                                        Cadastral Value (MXN millions)
                                                      Cadastral Value (MXN Millions)
                                         Discontinuity Estimate (Log Difference in Height): -.067 (.08)                           RD = 0.130 (0.752), N=48838 properties                   RD = -32.811 (11.696), N=48838 properties                             RD = 2.051 (4.968), N=48838 properties



     Notes: The panels in Column (A) display the density of properties by cadastral value around the lower threshold of bands I, H and G, which were treated
     with large tax rate increases. We test for a discontinuity in the density at the threshold, as proposed by McCrary 2008. In Columns (B)­(D), we test for
     discontinuities in property characteristics around the treatment thresholds and find no significant differences. The graphs are constructed as in Figures 3
     and 4. These results are discussed in Section 4.1.
                   Figure D.2: Robustness of Regression Discontinuity Estimates by Bandwidth and Degree of Polynomial

                                A. Polynomial of Degree 1 B. Polynomial of Degree 2 C. Polynomial of Degree 3
                                                  I. Estimates for the 2009­2010 Treatment




                                                                            1.5




                                  1
                                                                                                                       1 1.5




                                                                            1
                                                                                                                       .5




                                                                            .5




                                  .5
                                                                                                                       0




                                                                            0




                                  0
                                                                                                                       -1 -.5




                                                                            -.5
                                       .1      .2      .3     .4       .5         .1      .2      .3     .4       .5            .1      .2      .3     .4       .5
                                            Bandwidth (MXN millions)                   Bandwidth (MXN millions)                      Bandwidth (MXN millions)


                                                               II. Estimates for the 2010­2011 Treatment




                                  1
                                                                                                                       2




                                                                            1.5




                                  .8
                                                                                                                       1.5




                                                                            1




                                  .6
                                                                                                                       1




                                  .4
                                                                            .5
                                                                                                                       .5




                                  .2
                                  0
                                                                            0
                                                                                                                       0
                                       .1      .2      .3     .4       .5         .1      .2      .3     .4       .5            .1      .2      .3     .4       .5




64
                                            Bandwidth (MXN millions)                   Bandwidth (MXN millions)                      Bandwidth (MXN millions)


                                                               III. Estimates for the 2011­2012 Treatment




                                  .8
                                                                            1
                                                                                                                       1.5




                                                                            .8




                                  .6
                                                                                                                       1




                                                                            .6




                                  .4
                                                                            .4
                                                                                                                       .5




                                  .2
                                                                            .2




                                  0
                                                                            0
                                                                                                                       0




                                       .1      .2      .3     .4       .5         .1      .2      .3     .4       .5            .1      .2      .3     .4       .5
                                            Bandwidth (MXN millions)                   Bandwidth (MXN millions)                      Bandwidth (MXN millions)


     Notes: This figure documents the robustness of our RD estimations, as discussed in Section 4.1 and displayed in Figures 3. We focus on the payment
     amount as outcome. Each panel plots the point estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals of the treatment effect for different bandwidth values
     between 0.1 and 0.5 million MXN in 0.02 million increments (horizontal axis). Each row reports results for the different treatments, and each column
     presents the estimates for a different polynomial in cadastral value.
     Table D.4: The Effect of Tax Rates on Tax Payment ­ Regression Discontinuity Estimates
                       Robustness to Dropping Taxpayers with Exemptions
                                           Mean tax rate       Payment       Payment in full Compliance
                                           (basis points) amount (MXN (percentage             share × 100
                                                              thousands)         points)
                                                 (1)                (2)              (3)             (4)
                                                          I. Estimates for the 2010 treatment
           T                                 9.115 ***           .592 **        -4.916 **         -2.836
                                               (.066)             (.259)          (2.33)         (2.184)
           Properties                          15190              15190           15190           15190
           Adjusted R-squared                    .98               .008            .003             .001
           Mean at baseline (treated band)     50.109             5.635           39.227          46.239
           Implied elasticity                                      .577            -.689           -.337
                                                                  (.252)          (.327)           (.26)
           Implied Semi-elasticity                                 .012            -.014           -.007
                                                                  (.005)          (.007)          (.005)
                                                         II. Estimates for the 2011 treatment
           T                                12.141 ***          .679 ***        -6.18 ***       -3.268 **
                                               (.035)             (.133)         (1.717)         (1.298)
           Properties                          23882              23882           23882           23882
           Adjusted R-squared                   .993               .017             .003            .001
           Mean at baseline (treated band)     47.473             4.546           37.465          45.552
           Implied elasticity                                      .584            -.645           -.281
                                                                  (.114)          (.179)          (.111)
           Implied Semi-elasticity                                 .012            -.014           -.006
                                                                  (.002)          (.004)          (.002)
           P-value (H0 : 2011 = 2010 )                             .981             .906            .841
                                                        III. Estimates for the 2012 treatment
           T                                17.998 ***          .571 ***       -10.469 ***     -6.001 ***
                                               (.028)             (.092)         (1.535)         (1.295)
           Properties                          41040              41040           41040           41040
           Adjusted R-squared                   .996               .027             .008            .003
           Mean at baseline (treated band)     41.073             3.367           40.627           46.04
           Implied elasticity                                      .387            -.588           -.297
                                                                  (.062)          (.086)          (.064)
           Implied Semi-elasticity                                 .009            -.014           -.007
                                                                  (.002)          (.002)          (.002)
           P-value (H0 : 2012 = 2011 )                             .131             .775            .895
           P-value (H0 : 2012 = 2010 )                             .465             .765            .882

Notes: This table is similar to Table 1, Panel A, but excludes taxpayers who ever received a subsidy or exemption. It
demonstrates the robustness of the RD results to dropping these taxpayers.




                                                         65
                                                         E            DiD Appendix

                               Figure E.1: The Effect of Tax Rates on Appeals

                                                                   A. 2009­2010 Treatment




                                                         .2
                                       Normalized Number of

                                                   .15
                                             Appeals
                                             .1
                                                                          Treatment
                                       .05                                Control

                                                                   2008      2009          2010   2011   2012
                                                                                           Year
                                        DD = 0.968 (0.097), N=5345 properties per year

                                                                   B. 2010­2011 Treatment
                                                              .2
                                         Normalized Number of

                                                        .15
                                                Appeals
                                            .05   .1




                                                                          Treatment
                                                                          Control
                                       0




                                                                   2008      2009          2010   2011   2012
                                                                                           Year
                                        DD = 0.823 (0.069), N=7175 properties per year

                                                                   C. 2011­2012 Treatment
                                        Normalized Number of

                                       0 .05 .1 .15 .2
                                              Appeals




                                                                          Treatment
                                                                          Control

                                                                   2008      2009          2010   2011   2012
                                                                                           Year
                                        DD = 1.288 (0.057), N=9393 properties per year


Notes: This figure is identical to Figure 5, but the outcome variable is a dummy capturing whether the property owner
appealed against the property tax liability. We restrict the sample to taxpayers making a payment every year, as we
observe the appeals for these taxpayers only. Hardly any of the appeals result in a change in the tax liability (footnote
27). When calculating the DiD estimates displayed under the graphs, we take into account the first post-reform year
only, as the graphical evidence suggests that the increase in appeals is primarily limited to the first post-reform year.
Among taxpayers in the treatment group (in the restricted sample of taxpayers making a payment each year), the
share filing an appeal is 14.46 percent in 2009, 12.76 percent in 2010 and 11.96 percent in 2011. These results are
discussed in Section 4.2.




                                                                                      66
    Table E.1: The Effect of Tax Rates on Tax Payment ­ Differences-in-Differences Estimates
                       Robustness to Using One Post-Reform Period Only

                                       Mean tax rate         Payment        Payment in full    Compliance
                                                              amount                             share
                                            (1)                  (2)                (3)           (4)
                                                        I. Estimates for the 2010 treatment
   DD                                    .171 ***            .110 ***          -.136 ***        -.034 ***
                                          (.000)               (.018)            (.019)           (.012)
   Adjusted R-squared                      .996                 .014               .006             .002
   Properties (treatment)                  5747                 5747              5747             5747
   Properties (control)                    6510                 6510              6510             6510
   Implied elasticity                                           .643              -.794            -.200
                                                               (.106)            (.113)            (.07)
                                                       II. Estimates for the 2011 treatment
   DD                                    .236 ***            .163 ***          -.178 ***        -.063 ***
                                          (.000)               (.022)            (.017)           (.011)
   Adjusted R-squared                      .993                 .008               .006             .009
   Properties (treatment)                  9661                 9661              9661             9661
   Properties (control)                    6511                 6511              6511             6511
   Implied elasticity                                           .690              -.753            -.267
                                                               (.092)            (.071)           (.047)
   P-value (H0 :   2011   =   2010 )                            .777               .812             .279
                                                       III. Estimates for the 2012 treatment
   DD                                    .401 ***            .196 ***          -.300 ***        -.182 ***
                                          (.000)               (.029)            (.014)           (.010)
   Adjusted R-squared                       .994                .003               .016             .038
   Properties (treatment)                  15227               15227             15227            15227
   Properties (control)                     6508                6508              6508             6508
   Implied elasticity                                           .489              -.747            -.455
                                                               (.073)            (.035)           (.025)
   P-value (H0 :   2012   =   2011 )                            .016               .021             .000
   P-value (H0 :   2012   =   2010 )                            .023               .048             .000
Notes: This table is similar to Table 1, Panel B, but uses one post-reform period only for each reform episode.
This confirms the robustness of our main DiD estimates, in which we use between one and three post-reform years,
depending on the reform. These results are discussed in Section 4.2.




                                                          67
     Table E.2: The Effect of Tax Rates on Tax Payment ­ Differences-in-Differences Estimates
                               Robustness to Different Control Bands
                               Mean Tax Rate        Payment amount       Payment in full   Compliance share
                               (basis points)      (MXN thousands)
                                     (1)                   (2)                  (3)               (4)
                                                 I. Estimates for the 2009-2010 treatment
            K and L                  .166                 .116                -.103             -.041
                                    (.000)               (.017)              (.017)            (.011)
            E and F                  .255                 .169                -.029             -.001
                                    (.000)               (.010)              (.013)            (.009)
            M and N                  .275                 .163                 .001              .024
                                    (.000)               (.010)              (.013)            (.009)
            K,L,E,F,M and N          .268                 .165                -.018               .01
                                    (.000)               (.010)              (.013)            (.009)
                                                 II. Estimates for the 2010-2011 treatment
            K and L                  .232                 .169                -.149              -.07
                                    (.000)                (.02)              (.015)            (.010)
            E and F                  .331                 .175                -.073             -.038
                                    (.000)               (.008)              (.010)            (.007)
            M and N                  .355                 .166                -.021             .018
                                    (.000)               (.008)              (.010)            (.007)
            K,L,E,F,M and N          .347                  .17                -.049             -.008
                                    (.000)               (.008)              (.010)            (.007)
                                                III. Estimates for the 2011-2012 treatment
            K and L                  .401                 .196                  -.3             -.182
                                    (.000)               (.029)              (.014)            (.010)
            E and F                  .517                  .16                -.216             -.145
                                    (.000)               (.009)              (.009)            (.007)
            M and N                  .545                 .138                -.161             -.087
                                    (.000)               (.009)              (.009)            (.007)
            K,L,E,F,M and N          .536                 .151                -.189             -.114
                                    (.000)               (.009)              (.009)            (.006)

Notes: This table is similar to Table 1, Panel B, but displays the point estimates from the DiD estimation using
alternative value bands as control groups. In each panel, the first line reproduces our preferred estimates from Table
1, using properties in bands K and L as the control group. The remaining lines display estimates using alternative
control groups. Using band J as a control group is not an option, as properties in this band were treated in 2008­2009.
The table shows that our preferred specification yields results similar to those of the alternative specifications but
slightly less optimistic about the tax rate increases. In our preferred specification, tax payments increase a bit less
and compliance falls a bit more than in alternative specifications. Yet we still conclude that tax rate increases
are welfare improving. Choosing a different specification would only strengthen this conclusion. These results are
discussed in Section 4.2.




                                                          68
                 Figure E.2: Parallel Trends with Different Control Groups ­ 2009­2010 Treatment

                                A. Bands K and L                                                    B. Bands E and F                                                    C. Bands M and N

                                                                                                    I. Mean Tax Rate
         1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4




                                                                             1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4




                                                                                                                                                  1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
        Normalized Scale




                                                                            Normalized Scale




                                                                                                                                                 Normalized Scale
                                                                                      1
                  1




                                                                                                                                                           1
                               2008     2009      2010     2011      2012                          2008     2009       2010     2011      2012                          2008      2009     2010     2011      2012
                                                  Year                                                                 Year                                                                Year
                                      Treatment   Control Band K and L                                    Treatment    Control Band E and F                                    Treatment   Control Band N and M



                                                                                                   II. Payment Amount
        .95 1 1.051.11.151.2




                                                                            .95 1 1.051.11.151.2




                                                                                                                                                 .95 1 1.051.11.151.2
           Normalized Scale




                                                                               Normalized Scale




                                                                                                                                                    Normalized Scale
                               2008     2009      2010     2011      2012                          2008     2009       2010     2011      2012                          2008      2009     2010     2011      2012
                                                  Year                                                                 Year                                                                Year
                                      Treatment   Control Band K and L                                    Treatment    Control Band E and F                                    Treatment   Control Band N and M



                                                                                                   III. Payment in Full
        .85 .9 .95 1 1.05




                                                                                                                                                 .85 .9 .95 1 1.05
                                                                                              1
          Normalized Scale




                                                                              Normalized Scale




                                                                                                                                                   Normalized Scale
                                                                            .85  .9    .95




                               2008     2009      2010     2011      2012                          2008     2009       2010     2011      2012                          2008      2009     2010     2011      2012
                                                  Year                                                                 Year                                                                Year
                                      Treatment   Control Band K and L                                    Treatment    Control Band E and F                                    Treatment   Control Band N and M



                                                                                            IV. Compliance Share
                                                                            .8 .85 .9 .95 1 1.05
         .85 .9 .95 1




                                                                                                                                                  .85 .9 .95 1
        Normalized Scale




                                                                              Normalized Scale




                                                                                                                                                 Normalized Scale
                  .8




                                                                                                                                                           .8




                               2008     2009      2010     2011      2012                          2008     2009       2010     2011      2012                          2008      2009     2010     2011      2012
                                                  Year                                                                 Year                                                                Year
                                      Treatment   Control Band K and L                                    Treatment    Control Band E and F                                    Treatment   Control Band N and M



Notes: This figure is similar to Figures 5 and 6 but considers two alternative control groups: bands E and F Column
(B)), and bands M and N (Column (C)). Using band J as a control group is not an option, as properties in this band
were treated in 2008­2009. Column (A) reproduces the preferred specification in which bands K and L are the control
group. The treated band in this figure contains properties in band I, as the figure focuses on the 2009­2010 reform, in
which properties in band I were treated with a quasi-exogenous tax rate increase. Figures E.3 and E.4 show similar
graphs, focusing on the 2010­2011 and the 2011­2012 reforms, respectively. The corresponding DiD estimates for all
reform episodes are displayed in Table E.2. These results are discussed in Section 4.2.




                                                                                                                      69
                   Figure E.3: Parallel Trends with Different Control Groups ­ 2010­2011 Treatment

                                   A. Bands K and L                                                       B. Bands E and F                                                       C. Bands M and N

                                                                                                          I. Mean Tax Rate
          1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4




                                                                                 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4




                                                                                                                                                         1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
        Normalized Scale




                                                                               Normalized Scale




                                                                                                                                                       Normalized Scale
                                                                                          1
                   1




                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                  2008     2009      2010     2011      2012                             2008     2009       2010     2011      2012                             2008      2009     2010     2011      2012
                                                     Year                                                                    Year                                                                   Year
                                         Treatment   Control Band K and L                                       Treatment    Control Band E and F                                       Treatment   Control Band N and M



                                                                                                         II. Payment Amount
        .95 1 1.05 1.1 1.15 1.2




                                                                               .95 1 1.05 1.1 1.15 1.2




                                                                                                                                                       .95 1 1.05 1.1 1.15 1.2
           Normalized Scale




                                                                                  Normalized Scale




                                                                                                                                                          Normalized Scale
                                  2008     2009      2010     2011      2012                             2008     2009       2010     2011      2012                             2008      2009     2010     2011      2012
                                                     Year                                                                    Year                                                                   Year
                                         Treatment   Control Band K and L                                       Treatment    Control Band E and F                                       Treatment   Control Band N and M



                                                                                                         III. Payment in Full
        .85 .9 .95 1 1.05




                                                                               .85 .9 .95 1 1.05




                                                                                                                                                       .85 .9 .95 1 1.05
          Normalized Scale




                                                                                 Normalized Scale




                                                                                                                                                         Normalized Scale




                                  2008     2009      2010     2011      2012                             2008     2009       2010     2011      2012                             2008      2009     2010     2011      2012
                                                     Year                                                                    Year                                                                   Year
                                         Treatment   Control Band K and L                                       Treatment    Control Band E and F                                       Treatment   Control Band N and M



                                                                                                  IV. Compliance Share
        .8 .85 .9 .95 1 1.05




                                                                               .8 .85 .9 .95 1 1.05




                                                                                                                                                       .8 .85 .9 .95 1 1.05
          Normalized Scale




                                                                                 Normalized Scale




                                                                                                                                                         Normalized Scale




                                  2008     2009      2010     2011      2012                             2008     2009       2010     2011      2012                             2008      2009     2010     2011      2012
                                                     Year                                                                    Year                                                                   Year
                                         Treatment   Control Band K and L                                       Treatment    Control Band E and F                                       Treatment   Control Band N and M



Notes: This figure is identical to Figure E.2 but focuses on the 2010­2011 reform, in which properties in band H were
treated with a quasi-exogenous tax rate increase. The treatment group in this figure thus contains properties in band
H. The corresponding DiD estimates are displayed in Table E.2.




                                                                                                                            70
                 Figure E.4: Parallel Trends with Different Control Groups ­ 2011­2012 Treatment

                               A. Bands K and L                                                 B. Bands E and F                                                 C. Bands M and N

                                                                                                I. Mean Tax Rate
            1.2 1.4 1.6




                                                                               1.2 1.4 1.6




                                                                                                                                                 1.2 1.4 1.6
         Normalized Scale




                                                                            Normalized Scale




                                                                                                                                              Normalized Scale
        1




                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                             1
                              2008     2009      2010     2011      2012                       2008     2009       2010     2011      2012                       2008      2009     2010     2011      2012
                                                 Year                                                              Year                                                             Year
                                     Treatment   Control Band K and L                                 Treatment    Control Band E and F                                 Treatment   Control Band N and M



                                                                                               II. Payment Amount
        .95 1 1.05 1.1 1.15




                                                                             1 1.05 1.1 1.15




                                                                                                                                               1 1.05 1.1 1.15
           Normalized Scale




                                                                           Normalized Scale




                                                                                                                                             Normalized Scale
                                                                                   .95




                                                                                                                                                     .95
                              2008     2009      2010     2011      2012                       2008     2009       2010     2011      2012                       2008      2009     2010     2011      2012
                                                 Year                                                              Year                                                             Year
                                     Treatment   Control Band K and L                                 Treatment    Control Band E and F                                 Treatment   Control Band N and M



                                                                                               III. Payment in Full
                    1 1.1




                                                                                       1 1.1




                                                                                                                                                         1 1.1
        Normalized Scale




                                                                           Normalized Scale




                                                                                                                                             Normalized Scale
          .8 .9




                                                                             .8 .9




                                                                                                                                               .8 .9
                 .7




                                                                                   .7




                                                                                                                                                     .7




                              2008     2009      2010     2011      2012                       2008     2009       2010     2011      2012                       2008      2009     2010     2011      2012
                                                 Year                                                              Year                                                             Year
                                     Treatment   Control Band K and L                                 Treatment    Control Band E and F                                 Treatment   Control Band N and M



                                                                                         IV. Compliance Share
                    1 1.1




                                                                                       1 1.1




                                                                                                                                                         1 1.1
        Normalized Scale




                                                                           Normalized Scale




                                                                                                                                             Normalized Scale
          .8 .9




                                                                             .8 .9




                                                                                                                                               .8 .9
                 .7




                                                                                   .7




                                                                                                                                                     .7




                              2008     2009      2010     2011      2012                       2008     2009       2010     2011      2012                       2008      2009     2010     2011      2012
                                                 Year                                                              Year                                                             Year
                                     Treatment   Control Band K and L                                 Treatment    Control Band E and F                                 Treatment   Control Band N and M



Notes: This figure is identical to Figure E.2 but focuses on the 2011­2012 reform, in which properties in band G were
treated with a quasi-exogenous tax rate increase. The treatment group in this figure thus contains properties in band
G. The corresponding DiD estimates are displayed in Table E.2.




                                                                                                                  71
     Table E.3: The Effect of Tax Rates on Tax Payment ­ Differences-in-Differences Estimates
                       Robustness to Dropping Taxpayers with Exemptions
                                                Mean tax rate         Payment        Payment in full    Compliance
                                                                        amount                            share
                                                     (1)                   (2)                (3)          (4)
                                                                  I. Estimates for the 2010 treatment
            DD                                    .167 ***             .084 ***          -.093 ***       -.048 ***
                                                   (.000)                (.019)            (.018)          (.012)
            Adjusted R-squared                      .998                  .011               .005            .004
            Properties (treatment)                  4854                  4854              4854            4854
            Properties (control)                    5530                  5530              5530            5530
            Implied elasticity                                            .502              -.558           -.289
                                                                         (.112)            (.107)          (.074)
            Implied Semi-elasticity                                        .01              -.011           -.006
                                                                         (.002)            (.002)          (.001)
                                                                 II. Estimates for the 2011 treatment
            DD                                    .232 ***             .107 ***          -.142 ***       -.077 ***
                                                   (.000)                (.021)            (.015)          (.011)
            Adjusted R-squared                      .995                  .012               .004            .008
            Properties (treatment)                  8194                  8194              8194            8194
            Properties (control)                    5531                  5531              5531            5531
            Implied elasticity                                            .463              -.611           -.332
                                                                         (.092)            (.066)          (.047)
            Implied Semi-elasticity                                        .01              -.013           -.007
                                                                         (.002)            (.001)          (.001)
            P-value (H0 :   2011   =   2010 )                             .489               .331            .393
                                                                III. Estimates for the 2012 treatment
            DD                                    .401 ***              .14 ***          -.282 ***       -.16 ***
                                                   (.000)                (.031)            (.015)         (.011)
            Adjusted R-squared                       .993                 .009               .013           .019
            Properties (treatment)                  12928                12928             12928           12928
            Properties (control)                     5528                 5528              5528           5528
            Implied elasticity                                             .35              -.705          -.399
                                                                         (.077)            (.037)         (.027)
            Implied Semi-elasticity                                       .009              -.017           -.01
                                                                         (.002)            (.001)         (.001)
            P-value (H0 :   2012   =   2011 )                             .182               .000           .006
            P-value (H0 :   2012   =   2010 )                             .071               .000           .002

Notes: This table is similar to Table 1, Panel B, but excludes taxpayers who ever received a subsidy or exemption. It
demonstrates the robustness of the DiD results to dropping these taxpayers. These results are discussed in Section 4.2.




                                                                   72
     Table E.4: The Effect of Tax Rates on Tax Payment ­ Differences-in-Differences Estimates
                              Robustness to Different Clustering Levels

                                                                       Standard Error Cluster Level:
                                                Point           Taxpayer       Postal Code     Bootstrap
                                               Estimate                                        Delegacion
                                                   (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)
                                                        I. Estimates for the 2009-2010 treatment
Mean Tax Rate (basis points)                      .166               0               0               0
Payment amount (MXN thousands)                    .116             .017            .015            .01
Payment in full (percentage points)              -.103             .017            .017           .015
Compliance share × 100                           -.041             .011            .011           .008
                                                       II. Estimates for the 2010-2011 treatment
Mean Tax Rate (basis points)                      .232               0               0            .001
Payment amount (MXN thousands)                    .169              .02            .024           .022
Payment in full (percentage points)              -.149             .015            .016            .01
Compliance share × 100                            -.07              .01            .011           .008
                                                       III. Estimates for the 2011-2012 treatment
Mean Tax Rate (basis points)                      .401               0             .001           .001
Payment amount (MXN thousands)                    .196             .029            .029           .039
Payment in full (percentage points)                -.3             .014            .015           .014
Compliance share × 100                           -.182              .01             .01           .011
Notes: This table is similar to Table 1, Panel B. Column (1) displays the point estimates from the DiD estimation.
Columns (2)­(4) display the standard errors at different clustering levels. Column (4) performs a bootstrap where the
16 delegaciones are the resampling clusters.




                                                         73
            Table E.5: Robustness of Tax Rate Elasticity Estimations ­ Panel Regressions

                                            Mean tax rate        Payment     Payment in            Compliance
                                                                 amount          full                share
                                                  (1)              (2)           (3)                  (4)
                                                                   A. Value Band FE
   PE Tax Rate                                                   .694 ***          -.203 ***         -.132 ***
                                                                   (.086)            (.046)            (.045)
   Tax Rate Elasticity                                              .694              -.551             -.292
                                                                   (.086)            (.125)            (.098)
   Mean Tax Rate                                 49.53

   Mean                                                          11301.63             .37               .45
   Cadastral Value Band FE                                         Yes                Yes               Yes
   Year FE                                                         Yes                Yes               Yes
   Band G, H, I * Tax Rate                                          No                No                No
   Observations                                                     80                80                 80
                                                            B. Heteregeneity by treated bands
   PE Tax Rate                                                    .702 **           -.294 **            -.115
                                                                   (.275)            (.146)            (.142)
   PE Treated Bands * Tax Rate                                      -.006             .072              -.014
                                                                   (.205)            (.109)            (.106)
   Tax Rate Elasticity Control Bands                                 .702             -.799             -.254
                                                                   (.275)            (.396)            (.313)
   Tax Rate Elasticity Treated Bands                                 .696             -.604             -.284
                                                                   (.038)            (.055)            (.044)
   Mean Tax Rate                                 49.53

   Mean                                                          11301.63             .37               .45
   Cadastral Value Band FE                                         Yes                Yes               Yes
   Year FE                                                         Yes                Yes               Yes
   Band G, H, I * Tax Rate                                         Yes                Yes               Yes
   Observations                                                     80                 80                80
Notes: This table demonstrates the robustness of the estimates for the elasticity of tax compliance to the tax rate,
displayed in Tables 1. Panel A here displays estimates for Yit = 1 Rit + i + t + it , where Yit is the average outcome
for band i in year t, Rit is the log average tax rate for band i in year t , t and i denote year and value band fixed
effects, and i is the error term. Payment is in logs; the other outcomes are not. The elasticities are calculated as in
Table 1. Standard errors are in parentheses. Panel B is similar to Panel A but includes an interaction between the
tax rate and an indicator for bands G, H and I (the treated bands in the RD and DiD estimations). The elasticity
estimates are very similar to our main RD and DiD estimates. These results are discussed in Section 4.2.




                                                          74
                                  F      Real Response Appendix
A potential concern for tax rate increases is that while they may raise revenue, they may also be
accompanied by a reduction in real estate investment. One possibility is that owners of existing
properties might be less likely to invest in maintaining or upgrading their properties. However,
because the cadastral value of a given property would not be affected by maintenance or upgrades,
raising property tax rates does not disincentivize these forms of investment. Nonetheless, it may be
the case that higher property tax rates can decrease investment in new housing units.
    One way in which developers can respond to tax rate hikes is by using the cadastral value formula
to design houses so that they fall below the threshold of a given value band. To test for this, Panels
A and B of Figure F.1 plot the number of properties built after the 2010 and 2011 tax increases.69
We group properties into small cadastral value bins around the lower threshold of each treated value
band. If the tax rate increase dissuaded developers from building properties in this value band,
we should see a bunching of new properties just below the lower threshold of the treated band.
The graphs show that this is not the case: the number of new properties is weakly decreasing with
property value and is smooth around the threshold of the treated band. That is, we find no evidence
of bunching. To further investigate this type of response, in Panels C and D of Figure F.1, we plot
the percentage change in new properties by bin, relative to the average number of new units in the
previous two years. As in the previous graphs, there is no sign of bunching and no discontinuity at
the threshold of the treated band.
    Building on our analyses in Section 4.2, we also conduct a DiD analysis on the number of new
property developments. To do so, we first rank properties by cadastral value and divide each value
band into 5 sub-bins of equal size. We then construct a count of the number of new properties in
each sub-bin and year. Finally, we estimate a regression similar to Equation 6 where the outcome is
the log number of new properties at the sub-bin­year level. Panel E in Figure F.1 shows the results
of this estimation where we stack the 2010 and 2011 reforms and where we use properties in bands K
and L as controls. This figure shows that we do not find a decrease in the number of new properties
in bands that experience increases in property tax rates.
    Although other studies have found evidence of real responses to property tax changes (e.g., Singh
2020), our results can be rationalized when we consider the context. The quasi-exogenous tax rate
increases that we study apply to a very small range of property values. To determine whether their
future properties would fall into one of the treated bands, property developers need precise knowledge
of the tax code and clarity on the exact features of the property to be constructed. The applicability
of the tax rate changes may be too narrow to warrant such an analysis. In addition, developers may
anticipate future tax rate changes, reducing their responsiveness to recent reforms.
    Overall, we do not find evidence that increases in property tax rates disincentivized the con-
struction of new housing units. Based on these results, we focus the policy analysis in Section 7 on
the roles that compliance, enforcement, and liquidity constraints play in the administration of the
property tax.




  69
       We exclude the 2012 reform because our data end in 2013, which limits the number of new units that we observe.

                                                          75
                               Figure F.1: Absence of a Real Estate Response to Tax Rate Increases

         A: Number of New Properties, Band I                                                             B: Number of New Properties, Band H
            0 50 100 150 200




                                                                                                           0 50 100 150 200
             Number of New




                                                                                                            Number of New
               Properties




                                                                                                              Properties
                                       -.3 -.2 -.1 0          .1 .2 .3                                                                -.3 -.2 -.1 0          .1 .2 .3
                                          Cadastral Value in MXN mio.                                                                    Cadastral Value in MXN mio.
                                             (relative to threshold)                                                                        (relative to threshold)

     C: Growth in Number of Properties, Band I D: Growth in Number of Properties, Band H
            -30-20-10 0 10 20 30




                                                                                                           -30-20-10 0 10 20 30
              (relative to baseline)




                                                                                                             (relative to baseline)
                    % Change




                                                                                                                   % Change


                                       -.3 -.2 -.1 0          .1 .2 .3                                                                -.3 -.2 -.1 0          .1 .2 .3
                                          Cadastral Value in MXN mio.                                                                    Cadastral Value in MXN mio.
                                             (relative to threshold)                                                                        (relative to threshold)

                                                      E: Differences-in-Differences Estimation
                                                          Log(New properties)

                                                                                1
                                                                                .5
                                                                                0
                                                                                -.5




                                                                                      -3     -2    -1      0    1                       2
                                                                                            Periods after treatment

                                                                                           Coefficient    95% conf. int.


Notes: This figure examines the effect of tax rate increases on real estate investment. Panel A plots the number
of new properties constructed around the lower threshold of band I during the post-reform years 2011­2013. We
plot the number of new properties in equally sized cadastral value bins in bands H and I, within a 0.3 million MXN
cadastral value range around the threshold. Panel B is similar but plots the number of new properties in bands
G and H, constructed in the years 2012 and 2013. Panels C and D are similar to Panels A and B, respectively,
but plot the growth rate in new properties. The numerator of the growth rate is the number of new properties
plotted in Panel A (B). The denominator is the yearly average number of properties in the last two (three) pre-
reform years (we use an average to minimize noise). Panel E plots the results of the difference-in-difference estimation
Log (Nbt ) = b + µt +  · T reatb · P ostt + bt , where Nbt is the number of new properties constructed in property value
bin b in year t and b and µt are bin and time fixed effects. Each value band is divided into equally sized bins, and
standard errors are clustered at the bin level. Value bands I, H, and G are treated; value bands J, K and L serve as
controls. The other bands are omitted. The reforms are stacked, so that t is the time relative to reform.




                                                                                                76
G      Experiment Appendix

                      Table G.1: Cadastral Value Distribution of Experiment Sample

                                    All Taxpayers                               Experiment Sample
    Mean                              589,530.8                                      533,087.3
    SE                                 (636.2)                                       (2310.3)
    Min                                  993.7                                        17,178.4
    Max                              11,711,063.3                                   11,670,532.6
    20th Percentile                   229,784.6                                      256,034.0
    50th Percentile                   391,487.2                                      419,170.5
    80th Percentile                   730,281.1                                      678,949.6

Notes: As discussed in Section 5.1, this table compares the cadastral value between the delinquent taxpayers targeted
in the tax compliance intervention and the full population of taxpayers, showing very similar distributions.


                                        Figure G.1: Experiment Design


                                            Enforcement Letters
                                                  80,000


                      Sanctions                                              Public Goods
                      Treatment                                               Treatment
                        40,000                                                  40,000

         Signature:                Signature:                    Signature:                 Signature:
      Fiscal Attorney           Compliance Officer            Fiscal Attorney            Compliance Officer
           20,000                    20,000                        20,000                     20,000


      Male Neutral              Female Neutral                 Male Neutral              Female Neutral
     10,000 10,000              10,000 10,000                 10,000 10,000              10,000 10,000
Notes: This diagram represents the different treatment arms of the enforcement intervention discussed in Section 5, in
which the Ministry of Finance sent letters to encourage payment of outstanding property tax debt. Letter recipients
were selected from a pool of taxpayers who had become delinquent between bimester 4 of 2009 and bimester 3 of
2014. The letters were sent between July 28 and August 11, 2014. A control group of 10,000 delinquent taxpayers
received no letters.




                                                         77
              Table G.2: The Effect of Enforcement Letters on Tax Payment: Robustness
           1: Letter Content         2: Sender Position            3: Male Sender          4: Female Sender
         Sanctions      Public      Fiscal Compliance             Male       Neutral       Female      Neutral
                        Good       Attorney  Officer
                               Panel A: Cross Sectional Regressions with Controls
                                               Panel A1: Any Payment
         9.463*** 4.815***         7.585***      6.637***        7.059***    8.07***      7.039*** 6.308***
          (.312)   (.292)           (.304)          (.3)          (.361)      (.364)       (.357)   (.353)
                                     Panel A2: Payment Amount (MX Pesos)
         39.018*** 9.306***        28.95***      18.961*** 27.041*** 30.98*** 21.843*** 17.169***
           (1.98)   (1.678)         (1.872)       (1.801)    (2.36)   (2.251)  (2.209)   (2.151)
                                   Panel B: Difference in Difference Estimates
                                               Panel B1: Any Payment
         9.591*** 4.975***         7.814***      6.751***        7.173*** 8.455***        7.004*** 6.499***
          (.256)   (.238)           (.249)        (.245)          (.296)   (.302)          (.293)   (.291)
                                     Panel B2: Payment Amount (MX Pesos)
         55.564*** 16.049*** 43.656*** 27.956*** 40.283*** 47.029*** 29.431*** 26.482***
          (2.292)   (1.957)   (2.192)   (2.075)   (2.642)   (2.648)   (2.454)   (2.444)

Notes: This table is similar to Table 2. Each of Columns (1)­(4) and each row displays results from one regression.
Panel A displays estimates from a cross-sectional regression that includes the cadastral value and age of the property
as controls in the estimation. Panel B displays estimates for 5 and 6 from the difference-in-difference specification
Yigt = i + t + 1 T 1i20 + 2 T 2i20 + 3 T 1i40 + 4 T 2i40 + 5 T 1i60 + 6 T 2i60 + igt , where Yigt is the outcome for
property i in treatment group g on day t, i and t are property and day fixed effects, T 1i20 and T 2i20 are treatment
indicators that switch on for the first 20 days after all letters were sent, T 1i40 and T 2i40 are treatment indicators that
switch on between days 20 and 40, and T 1i60 and T 2i60 are treatment indicators that switch on between days 40 and
60.




                                                            78
                                                    Figure G.2: The Effect of Enforcement Letters on Tax Payment

                                                  A. Any Payment                                                                         B. Cumulative Payments (Any Amount)
                        1.5




                                                                                                                                                                            Sanctions Treatment: 11.36 (0.29)




                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                            Public Goods Treatment: 6.47 (0.27)




                                                                                                                  Share of Properties
  Share of Properties




                                                                                                                                        15
                        1




                                                                                                                                        10
                        .5




                                                                                                                                        5
                        0




                                                                                                                                        0
                                  -40           July 28th August 11th      20           40              60                                   -40           July 28th August 11th      20           40             60
                                                           Days to Intervention                                                                                       Days to Intervention

                                        Sanctions Treatment                Public Goods Treatment                                                  Sanctions Treatment                Public Goods Treatment
                                        Control Group            Sanctions Treatment: 0.08 (0.04)                                                  Control Group


                                        C. Cumulative Payment Amount                                                                         D. Cumulative Share of Liability Paid
                                                                 Sanctions Treatment: 72.02 (2.59)
                        100 120




                                                                 Public Goods Treatment: 25.80 (2.30)                                                                         Sanctions Treatment: 10.18 (0.27)
                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                              Public Goods Treatment: 6.05 (0.26)
                                                                                                                  Share of Debt Paid
                                                                                                                                        15
                        80
  MXN $
                        60




                                                                                                                                        10
                        40




                                                                                                                                        5
                        20
                        0




                                                                                                                                        0




                                  -40           July 28th August 11th      20           40              60                                   -40           July 28th August 11th      20           40             60
                                                           Days to Intervention                                                                                       Days to Intervention

                                        Sanctions Treatment                Public Goods Treatment                                                  Sanctions Treatment                Public Goods Treatment
                                        Control Group                                                                                              Control Group


Notes: This figure is identical to Figure 7 except that it displays the raw data before detrending and the estimates
are from a regression run on the non-detrended data. This results in slightly larger treatment effect estimates than
those of our preferred specification.




                                                                                                             79
                           Figure G.3: Translation of Enforcement Letters
Taxpayer name
Taxpayer address

   Sanctions Treatment
                     Avoid major inconvenience and regularize your tax status

                          Invitation Letter for Payment of Property Tax

      According to the registers of the Federal District's Treasury, you have outstanding property
   tax debt for the tax period(s) *****. We would therefore be grateful if you could update your
   tax status within 15 working days of receipt of this letter.
       Delay in property tax payment can be sanctioned with fines and interest costs, and with
   interventions that the fiscal authority conducts to ensure effective tax collection, as per the
   Tax Code, which can lead to the seizure of property.

      Avoid major inconvenience and regularize your tax status.

   Public Goods Treatment
                   With our tax payment, we all contribute to improving our city

                        Invitation Letter for Payment of the Property Tax

       As you know, a large part of the social programs and investments in infrastructure and
   security that the Government of Mexico City implements are financed by property tax revenues.
   Your contribution is therefore very important, and we would be pleased if you could update
   your property tax account as soon as possible and cover the outstanding tax debt for the above
   mentioned building for the tax period(s) ***** within 15 working days upon receipt of this
   letter. We ask you to update your account to avoid incurring surcharges.
      With the revenues obtained from property taxes in your city, we finance the following public
   goods, among others:

      · Food pensions for the elderly;

      · School uniforms and school supplies for children;

      · The operation of health centers and hospitals of the Government of Mexico City;

      · Street lights and sidewalks in your neighborhood.


Boxed: Information about payment and further details on the back
Signature: Name, Title
(For gender-neutral signatures, only the initials of the first name are provided.)


                                                  80
                         H     Liquidity Constraints Appendix
This appendix documents the inability of Mexico City's households to fully insure consumption and
tax payments against idiosyncratic income risk. In general, imperfect or partial income insurance is
taken by the literature as evidence of liquidity and credit constraints (see Attanasio, 1999). To test
for partial income insurance, a usual practice in the literature is to use longitudinal data to regress
household consumption on household income, as follows:

                         log(Consumptionit ) = log(Incomeit ) + i + t +        it ,                  (H.1)

where i represents household fixed effects and t represents time dummies. The inclusion of house-
hold fixed effects and time dummies enables the interpretation of  as the elasticity of consumption
with respect to temporary, idiosyncratic deviations of household income from its mean. A significant
 estimate constitutes evidence of partial income insurance because it indicates that consumption
responds to temporary income shocks.
    The estimation of Equation H.1 is complicated by the fact that our consumption data for Mex-
ico City from the Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los Hogares (ENIGH) is a repeated
cross-sectional survey. Hence, we cannot include household fixed effects in the above regression.
To overcome this limitation, we follow the strategy proposed by Attanasio and Székely (2004) to
test for partial income insurance. In particular, they propose regressing the variance of household
consumption on the variance of household income by year-of-birth×education cohort as follows:

                      varg [log(Consumptionit )] = varg [log(Incomeit )] + g +        gt ,           (H.2)

where g is a cohort-specific fixed effect. Note that the parameter  is the same across specifications
H.1 and H.2 under the assumption that the covariance terms resulting from taking the variances from
both sides of Equation H.1 are constant over time, precisely the assumption made by Attanasio and
Székely (2004). The advantage of this strategy is that we can calculate the cohort-specific variances
of income, consumption, and tax payments from a nationally representative cross-sectional survey
like the ENIGH.
    To estimate Equation H.2, we use data from the 2008, 2010, 2012, and 2014 waves of the ENIGH
for Mexico City. We include households where the year of birth of the head of household is between
1948 and 1982. We classify all households into 48 year-of-birth×age cohorts. In particular, we create
8 five-year age-of-birth categories and 6 education categories, which include no formal education,
primary school, middle school, high school, bachelor's degree, and postgraduate degree.
    Next, we calculate the cohort-level variance of log income and log consumption as well as the
variances of two additional outcomes that capture the extent to which idiosyncratic income risk
affects property tax compliance: the log of one plus the annual property tax payment and a dummy
for positive property tax payments. We then estimate Equation H.2 via OLS both in levels and in
differences for each of the three outcome variables above.
    Table H.1 presents the results from the estimation. Column (1) shows that in response to a
negative yet temporary shock of 1 percent to household income, consumption drops by 0.617 percent,
implying that Mexico City's households are able to insure consumption by only 0.383 percent against
the shock. Column (2) shows the results from estimating the same equation by first differences instead
of including cohort-specific fixed effects in the regression. The first-differences coefficient of 0.556 is
statistically indistinguishable from the 0.617 obtained through the fixed-effects estimation.
    Column (3) shows that households are even less able to insure property tax payments than con-

                                                    81
sumption against income shocks. In particular, a 1 percent temporary income shock reduces the
annual payment amount by 0.787 percent. Once again, estimating the regression by first differ-
ences does not change the result, as the coefficient of 0.915 shown in Column (5) is statistically
indistinguishable from the fixed-effects estimate of 0.787.
   Finally, Column (5) shows that income shocks affect the extensive margin of payment, since a
temporary income reduction of 1 percent decreases the probability of payment by 0.097 percentage
points. Estimating the regression by first differences yields a similar coefficient of 0.12, as shown
in Column (6). Overall, these results confirm the importance of liquidity constraints in explaining
consumer and taxpayer behavior in Mexico City.

    Table H.1: Income Shocks, Consumption, and Property Tax Payment Variability in Mexico City
                      varg [log(Consumptionit )]          varg [log(1+Paymentit )]            varg [1{Paymentit >0} ]
                        Levels         Diffs.               Levels        Diffs.            Levels           Diffs.
                           (1)          (2)                    (3)           (4)               (5)              (6)
varg [log(Incomeit )]  .617 ***      .556 ***              .787 ***     .915 ***           .097 ***         .12 ***
                         (.07)        (.071)                (.166)        (.286)             (.024)          (.022)
Outcome mean              .454         .023                  2.026         -.012              .124            -.008
Group dummies               Y            N                      Y             N                 Y                N
N                          167          115                    167           115               167              115
R2                        .351         .282                   .137          .148              .132             .173
Notes: Standard errors are clustered by bin. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. The total number of bins is 192 (8
year-of-birth categories × 6 education categories × 4 years), but for 25 of these bins, there are no observations in the
ENIGH for Mexico City.



I         Payment Timing Appendix
As we show in Section 1, the interaction between property taxes and liquidity constraints implies
that governments can improve tax administration by providing liquidity. The government of Mexico
City provides liquidity by offering discounts to taxpayers who pay in full before a given deadline.70
In this section, we study how the timing of payments is affected by changes in discounts--through
both deadlines and rates--and use this variation to infer households' value for liquidity.
    Households choose to pay the property tax on a given day by trading off a lower overall tax
payment against the cost of giving up interest-bearing liquid assets and the hassle cost of paying
taxes on a given day. In the absence of a value for liquidity, taxpayers would prefer to pay ahead
of the deadline to avoid uncertain hassle costs and time constraints that might prevent them from
obtaining the discount. If households face liquidity constraints, they may risk missing out on the
discount for the benefit of holding on to liquid assets until immediately before the deadline.
    The government offered up to three types of discounts between 2009 and 2013. Figure I.1 plots
the discount rate and the histogram of property tax revenue for every year. The size of the discounts
and the deadlines varied substantially over the years. These discount deadlines can be interpreted
as time notches in the sense of Slemrod (2013). Figure I.1 shows a clear pattern where taxpayers

     70
     Discounts provide liquidity by effectively lending money to those who do not take up the discount. Assuming the
                                                                                                    d
discount rate is d, households can pay 1 - d today or borrow from the government at the rate of 1-    d . Governments
provide liquidity through several mechanisms, including unemployment insurance schemes or accelerated depreciation
deductions for firms.

                                                          82
respond very strongly to these incentives by bunching payments immediately before the deadline.
This strong response to discounts is consistent with a high value for liquidity.71
     To quantify the value for liquidity, we use this variation to estimate a dynamic model of payment
timing where households trade off discounts, interest income, and the hassle costs of paying the
tax.72 For a given date t in year y , households obtain utility v0 (t, y ) when they pay their taxes.
v0 (t, y ) = t,y + 1 Tax(t, y ), where t,y captures the benefit of paying taxes net of the hassle cost of
paying on day t and where Tax(t, y ) equals one minus the discount applicable on day t and year
y .73 Alternatively, households can choose to delay paying taxes at time t. The value of this choice
is given by v1 (t, y ) = 2 Interesty + EV1 (t + 1, y ), which captures the interest income from delaying
payment and the discounted value function in the next period. Finally, every day households face
idiosyncratic hassle costs of paying taxes that follow a logistic distribution.
     We study the timing of payments by modeling P0 (t, y ) : the probability of paying on any given
day conditional on not having paid yet. Following Hotz and Miller (1993), P0 (t, y ) captures the value
of delaying payment since EV1 (t + 1, y ) = v0 (t + 1, y ) - ln P0 (t + 1, y ) + , where  is Euler's constant.
The relative log-likelihood of paying on any given day is then:

       P0 (t, y )
ln                    = v0 (t, y ) - v1 (t, y ) = v0 (t, y ) - v0 (t + 1, y ) - 2 Interesty -  ln P0 (t + 1, y ) - 
     1 - P0 (t, y )
                      = -1 {Tax(t, y ) -  Tax(t + 1, y )} - 2 Interesty                                             (I.1)
                        - ln P0 (t + 1, y ) + t,y - t+1,y .

The first line follows from the logistic distribution and the expression for EV1 (t + 1, y ) above. The
second line substitutes the definitions of choice value v0 (t, y ). To implement this model, we assume
that the hassle costs t,y have three components: a day-of-the-year effect, t ; a day-of-the-week effect,
t,d ; and a residual component, t,y .74 The identifying assumption of this equation is that conditional
on day-of-the year and day-of-the-week fixed effects, the daily changes in residual time costs, t t,y ,
are unrelated to yearly variation in interest rates or in the size and timing of discounts. This
assumption is plausible since Interesty is set by the broader market and since the policy variation in
Tax(t, y ) features significant changes in the number of deadlines, due dates, and magnitude of the
discounts that are unrelated to daily hassle costs.
     Given the rich variation in discounts, we estimate the parameters of the dynamic discrete choice
model (1 , 2 ,  ) via non-linear least squares, where the fixed effects recover day-of-the-year and
day-of-the-week hassle costs. Figure I.2 plots P0 (t, y ) along with the model fit and shows that this
relatively simple model does a remarkably good job of matching the data patterns. Panel A of Table

   71
      It is worth noting that leading behavioral models are not consistent with these data patterns. First, because
deadlines change across years, the bunching patterns that we observe are not consistent with the salience of specific
dates--e.g., first-of-the-month effects. Second, because the bunching patterns are very pronounced, these patterns
are likely not driven by rational inattention. Finally, one may worry that these patterns are a result of hyperbolic
discounting. Fang and Silverman (2004) develop a model of present-biased preferences to study the effects of time
limits in public policy. A prediction of this model is that present-biased households would likely miss the deadline,
which is inconsistent with the sharp bunching patterns in the data.
   72
      Hassle costs include time spent withdrawing cash and traveling to a payment location. Note that automatic
payments were not allowed and online payments are only now being introduced.
   73
      The problem ends when households pay the tax, so that action 0 constitutes a terminal option.
   74
      Day-of-the-year effects capture holidays that are tied to specific days of the year (e.g., January 6th is the day
of the Three Wise Men). Day-of-the-week fixed effects capture the fact that different days of the week have different
hassle costs (e.g., taxpayers can remit taxes during weekends by paying at convenience stores).

                                                          83
I.1 reports the main estimates from this model. These estimates reveal the importance of liquidity
concerns in a couple of ways. First, we can interpret the discount rate as implying that households
                                                     1
would pay an interest rate of approximately 8%(        - 1) to delay paying property taxes by a single
     75
day.    This very high rate of discounting highlights the value of liquidity. Second, the effect of
changes in taxes is only about 10 (      1
                                         2
                                           ) times larger than changes in interest income. In a world
without liquidity constraints, households would place a much smaller value on short-term interest
relative to the value placed on a permanent discount on their taxes.
    We now use the estimated model to quantify the liquidity value provided by the discounts. Panel
B of Table I.1 shows the gain in consumer surplus relative to a world without discounts.76 Column (2)
shows that taxpayers value discounts at between 3.26 and 10.35 percent of the value of their property
taxes. Comparing these values to the deadlines in Column (3), we find higher values in years with
later deadlines. This makes sense: discounts raise welfare more when they allow households to hold
on to liquid assets longer. Later deadlines also lower the risk of facing a high hassle cost in the
early days of the year. Column (4) lists the realized fiscal cost of the discounts as a percentage
of the property tax. As would be expected, the value of the discounts in Column (2) is positively
related to the fiscal costs. Finally, Column (5) displays the ratio of the value of the discounts to
the fiscal cost (Columns (2) over (4)). This ratio would fall below unity if households incur higher
hassle costs to obtain the discount. Conversely, this ratio would be greater than one if the value
of liquidity exceeds both the additional hassle costs and the fiscal cost to the government. Column
(5) shows that in years where households have a longer time to obtain the discounts, the value of
the discount to households exceeds the fiscal cost of the discount. That is, when deadlines provide
meaningful increases in liquidity, the welfare gains experienced by households exceed the fiscal costs
to the government.
    The results in this section provide further evidence that payments for property taxes interact
with liquidity constraints. This result is evident both in reduced-form patterns that showcase the
sensitivity of the timing of payments to discounts and in the estimates from the dynamic discrete
choice model. Because we find a value for liquidity even among the households that are willing to
pay in full, relaxing liquidity constraints for a broader set of households can lower the welfare cost
of paying property taxes and improve the design of the property tax system.




   75
    While this is a very high rate of discounting, it is also consistent with the very high interest rates charged by
payday lenders in the US.
   76                                                                                                                       1
     Following Train (2009), consumer surplus is given by ln        j =0,1 exp{vj (t = 0, y |{Tax(t, y )}t , Interesty )} × 2 .
We evaluate welfare on the first day of the year (t = 0) given a daily profile of discounts {Tax(t, y )}t . We divide the
log-sum by the coefficient on interest income to interpret this quantity as a monetary measure of consumer surplus.
Finally, we evaluate this expression setting Interesty to the average value in our sample.

                                                              84
                                Table I.1: Dynamic Model of Payment Timing

                                            Panel A. Model Estimates
                                       (1)                (2)                (3)
                                  Tax Coefficient Interest Coefficient Discount Factor
                                        1                  2                  
                      Estimate        0.936***                0.096                0.924***
                                       (0.180)               (0.064)                (0.041)


                                            Panel B. Welfare Estimates
                      (1)        (2)                      (3)           (4)         (5)
                      Year Consumer Surplus            Discount        Fiscal Relative Value
                            From Discounts             Deadlines       Cost of Discounts
                      2009          10.35           Jan 31, Feb 28      7.80          1.33
                      2010           3.92               Jan 31          4.95          0.79
                      2011           3.26           Jan 10, 17, 31      6.53          0.50
                      2012           5.23             Jan 17, 31        6.84          0.77
                      2013           7.76           Jan 31, Feb 28      6.95          1.12
Notes: Panel A reports the parameter estimates from the dynamic discrete choice model presented in this Appendix.
The parameters were estimated by solving Equation I.1 via non-linear least squares. The model parameters reflect
the role of liquidity constraints through the low discount rate and the relatively high utility value of interest income.
The underlying data on payment probabilities are weighted to reflect tax collections per day. Panel B uses the model
estimates to compute the consumer surplus from discounts (as a percentage of tax payment). Discounts have a larger
effect on consumer surplus when taxpayers face longer deadlines and when the discounts are more generous. In these
cases, the value of the discounts is greater than the fiscal cost (also as a percentage of tax payment), showing that the
government can lower the welfare cost of property taxes by providing liquidity to taxpayers.




                                                           85
                           Figure I.1: Taxpayer Response to Super-Early-Bird and Early-Bird Discounts

                      .04                          A. 2009                                                                                                     B. 2010




                                                                                             8




                                                                                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                             7




                                                                                                                                                                                       7
                                                                                                                                          .04
          Revenues/total liabilities




                                                                                                                  Revenues/total liabilities
                             .03




                                                                                              3 4 5 6




                                                                                                                                                                                        3 4 5 6
                                                                                             Discount rate




                                                                                                                                                                                       Discount rate
                                                                                                                                 .03
                   .02




                                                                                                                        .02
           .01




                                                                                             2




                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                  .01
                                                                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                      0




                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                   01-Jan 15-Jan   31-Jan 15-Feb 28-Feb                                                                     01-Jan 15-Jan       31-Jan 15-Feb 28-Feb
                                                     Date                                                                                                         Date

                                                   C. 2011                                                                                                     D. 2012
                      .04




                                                                                             8




                                                                                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                             7




                                                                                                                                                                                       7
                                                                                                                                          .04
          Revenues/total liabilities




                                                                                                                  Revenues/total liabilities
                             .03




                                                                                              3 4 5 6




                                                                                                                                                                                        3 4 5 6
                                                                                             Discount rate




                                                                                                                                                                                       Discount rate
                                                                                                                                 .03
                   .02




                                                                                                                        .02
           .01




                                                                                             2




                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                  .01
                                                                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                      0




                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                   01-Jan 15-Jan   31-Jan 15-Feb 28-Feb                                                                     01-Jan 15-Jan       31-Jan 15-Feb 28-Feb
                                                     Date                                                                                                         Date

                                                                                                     E. 2013
                                                                     .04




                                                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                                                                                       7
                                                         Revenues/total liabilities
                                                                            .03




                                                                                                                                                        3 4 5 6
                                                                                                                                                       Discount rate
                                                          .01     .02




                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                  01-Jan 15-Jan       31-Jan 15-Feb 28-Feb
                                                                                                        Date


Notes: This figure plots the early-bird discount rates and the timing of property tax payments, as discussed in this
appendix. The red line in each panel represents the annual super-early-bird and early-bird discount rates. The blue
dots represent the revenues of the government each day, expressed as a fraction of the total yearly liabilities in Mexico
City.

                                                                                                             86
                                                    Figure I.2: Estimates from Dynamic Model of Payment Timing

                                                          A. 2009                                                                                                                                     B. 2010
                                   1




                                                                                                                       8




                                                                                                                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8
     Conditional Choice Probability,




                                                                                                                                            Conditional Choice Probability,
                                                                                                                       7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7
                                   .8




                                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                                                                                                         3 4 5 6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3 4 5 6
                                                                                                                       Discount Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Discount Rate
               Model Fit




                                                                                                                                                      Model Fit
                                   .6




                                                                                                                                                                          .6
                                   .4




                                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                                                                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                       01-Jan    15-Jan     31-Jan                                 15-Feb       28-Feb                                                        01-Jan      15-Jan                   31-Jan       15-Feb       28-Feb
                                                            Date                                                                                                                                                   Date

                                          Cond Pr(Pay)       Model Fit                                      Discount Rate                                                        Cond Pr(Pay)                       Model Fit            Discount Rate


                                                          C. 2011                                                                                                                                     D. 2012
                                   1




                                                                                                                       8




                                                                                                                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8
     Conditional Choice Probability,




                                                                                                                                            Conditional Choice Probability,
                                                                                                                       7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7
                                   .8




                                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                                                                                                         3 4 5 6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3 4 5 6
                                                                                                                       Discount Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Discount Rate
               Model Fit




                                                                                                                                                      Model Fit
                                   .6




                                                                                                                                                                          .6
                                   .4




                                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                                                                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                       01-Jan    15-Jan     31-Jan                                 15-Feb       28-Feb                                                        01-Jan      15-Jan                   31-Jan       15-Feb       28-Feb
                                                            Date                                                                                                                                                   Date

                                          Cond Pr(Pay)       Model Fit                                      Discount Rate                                                        Cond Pr(Pay)                       Model Fit            Discount Rate


                                                                                                                          E. 2013
                                                                                              1




                                                                                                                                                                                                   8
                                                                Conditional Choice Probability,




                                                                                                                                                                                                   7
                                                                                              .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                     3 4 5 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Discount Rate
                                                                          Model Fit
                                                                                              .6
                                                                                              .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                              .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                              0




                                                                                                  01-Jan      15-Jan                   31-Jan                                  15-Feb       28-Feb
                                                                                                                                       Date

                                                                                                     Cond Pr(Pay)                       Model Fit                                       Discount Rate



Notes: This figure displays estimates from the dynamic discrete choice model of payment timing presented in this
appendix. The red lines display P0 (t, y ): the probability of paying taxes on any given day conditional on not having
paid. These probabilities are weighted to reflect tax collections per day. The blue lines display the corresponding
model fit from the dynamic discrete choice model. The black lines display tax obligations net of discounts.



                                                                                                                                       87
                           J     Instrumental Variable Appendix
           J.1    Construction of the Instrument for Property Tax Payments:
                                    Additional Details
Because the 2010 and 2012 waves of the ENIGH do not measure construction and land area, we use
the 2008 wave, which includes these data along with the other variables in the 2010 and 2012 waves,
to assign a value of Zit to a given property. Specifically, we use a multinomial logit to estimate
the probability that a property with a given number of rooms belongs to a given land-construction-
age-municipality-year bin using the 2008 data. Using these predicted probabilities, we compute the
expectation of the average change in tax liability for each property in the ENIGH.

                         Table J.1: The Effect of Property Taxes on Consumption
                      First-Stage IV Regressions ­ Predicting Property Tax Payment
                                                     (1)                    (2)                    (3)
     Z                                            .473 ***                                     .299 ***
                                                   (.074)                                        (.084)
     ~
     Z                                                                   -.741 ***             -.469 ***
                                                                           (.094)                (.115)
     F-statistic (excluded instruments)            40.61                   61.62                 14.66
     p-value (excluded instruments)                 .000                    .000                  .000
Notes: This table reports the first-stage results from the IV estimation discussed in Section 6.2. The second-stage
results are reported in Table 3. N=2,649. All regressions include delegación fixed effects and year dummies. Boot-
strapped standard errors based on 1,000 replications are in parentheses. The outcome is log property tax payment. The
instruments Z and Z ~ are the constructed predicted change in the property tax liability and the predicted probability
that a household's property is part of the treated cadastral value band in 2010 (band I), respectively.


                        Table J.2: The Effect of Property Taxes on Consumption
                         Second-Stage Regressions with Alternative Instrument
                                           (1)                   (2)                 (3)             (4)
     log(Pay)                             -.028                 -.049               -.021           -.038
                                          (.05)                (.053)              (.049)          (.052)
     log(Pay) × log(pc income)                               .098 ***                             .075 **
                                                               (.037)                              (.037)
     log(Pay) × Lack of credit                                                    -.05 ***       -.041 ***
                                                                                    (.008)         (.007)
     log(pc income)                    .829 ***                  .262              .79 ***          .36 *
                                         (.033)                 (.205)              (.031)         (.206)
                                                                                                   ~it : the predicted
Notes: This table is identical to Table 3 but reports results from using an alternative instrument Z
probability that a household's property is part of the treated cadastral value band in 2010 (band I). The results are
qualitatively and quantitatively very similar to those in Table 3.




                                                           88
                        Table J.3: The Effect of Property Taxes on Consumption
                           Second-Stage Regressions with Both Instruments
                                          (1)                 (2)                (3)                  (4)
     log(Pay)                            -.021                -.03              -.011                -.018
                                        (.049)               (.05)             (.048)               (.049)
     log(Pay) × log(pc income)                            .063 ***                                  .043 *
                                                            (.023)                                  (.023)
     log(Pay) × Lack of credit                                               -.042 ***            -.035 ***
                                                                               (.007)               (.006)
     log(pc income)                    .824 ***           .455 ***           .789 ***             .544 ***
                                         (.033)            (.127)               (.03)               (.127)
                                                                                   ~ to predict property tax payment.
Notes: This table is identical to Tables 3 and J.2 but uses both instruments Z and Z
The results are qualitatively and quantitatively very similar to those in Table 3.



                       Table J.4: Partial Effect of Tax Payment on Consumption
                       Evaluated at Different Income­Credit Access Combinations
                                                                    (1)          (2)          (3)
                                                                     Z            ~
                                                                                  Z          Z& Z~
                Log-Income (25th pctile), Credit Access            -.038        -.085        -.043
                                                                  (.056)       (.062)       (.053)
                                                               [-.11,.036] [-.181,-.006] [-.111,.026]

                Log-Income (25th pctile), No Credit Access        -.073       -.119 *       -.078
                                                                 (.059)        (.063)      (.055)
                                                              [-.149,.001] [-.214,-.04] [-.15,-.006]

                Log-Income (median), Credit Access                -.013         -.064         -.019
                                                                 (.051)        (.057)        (.048)
                                                              [-.079,.054]   [-.14,.01]   [-.086,.044]

                Log-Income (median), No Credit Access             -.048       -.097 *       -.055
                                                                 (.055)        (.059)      (.051)
                                                              [-.125,.023] [-.173,-.02] [-.128,.018]

                Log-Income (75th pctile), Credit Access           .016         -.036        .008
                                                                 (.049)       (.053)       (.047)
                                                              [-.049,.074] [-.101,.034] [-.052,.072]

                Log-Income (75th pctile), No Credit Access        -.019        -.069       -.027
                                                                 (.053)       (.055)       (.05)
                                                              [-.093,.043] [-.139,.002] [-.09,.044]
Notes: This table reports the partial effects of tax payment on consumption, estimated with the IV strategy discussed
in Section 6.2 and reported in Table 3, evaluated at different income quartile and credit access combinations.
Bootstrapped standard errors based on 1,000 replications are in parentheses, and 90 percent bootstrap confidence
intervals are in brackets.




                                                         89
K      Revenue-Maximizing Tax Rates
In this appendix, we assume that the government's single aim is to maximize tax revenue, and we
use the different tax changes analyzed in Section 4 to estimate the revenue-maximizing tax rate. Our
empirical results from Section 4 show that larger tax increases imply smaller revenue elasticities and
that tax increases have a significant effect on the fraction of delinquent taxpayers. These results raise
the possibility that further tax increases may have small or even null effects on revenue. To evaluate
this possibility, we use our empirical estimates to characterize the degree to which current tax rates
are close to the revenue-maximizing tax rate.
    Building on the corporate tax literature (Clausing, 2007; Devereux, 2007; Kawano and Slemrod,
2015; Suárez Serrato and Zidar, 2018), we estimate a quadratic relation between taxes and revenue:

                                             ln Revt = 1 t + 2 (t )2 .

Revenue is a concave parabola of taxes when 1 > 0 and 2 < 0. Intuitively, 1 > 0 implies that
introducing a small tax raises revenue, and 2 < 0 implies that the marginal impact on revenue
(1 + 22 t ) is smaller for higher tax rates. At the revenue-maximizing rate, the marginal impact of
a tax increase is zero, which implies that revenue is maximized by   = -  1
                                                                         22
                                                                            . Key empirical questions
are then whether 2 < 0 and whether large values of 2 imply small values of   .
    To connect this framework to our results, write the effect of a tax change on revenue as:
                                              ln Revt
                                                                = 1 + 22 t .
                                               t
                                           Semi-Elasticity: t

This expression implies that we can estimate 1 and 2 from multiple estimates of the revenue semi-
elasticity at different values of t .77 Let ^ = [^
                                                 2010 , ^2011 , ^2012 ] be the vector of semi-elasticities from
the three tax changes, and define the matrix W = [1t , 2t ]. Using a simple application of classical
minimum distance (CMD), we estimate 1 and 2 as a linear combination of the semi-elasticities:
[^1 , ^2 ] = (W W )-1 (W    ^).78 We then use these estimates to test whether 2 < 0 and to study the
implied revenue-maximizing rates   .
     The elasticity and semi-elasticity estimates resulting from our estimations discussed Section 4
are displayed in Table K.1. Applying the method discussed above, we obtain estimates of 2 =
1.64(SE = 2.34) when using the regression discontinuity estimates of            ^ and 2 = 3.29(SE = 0.74)
                                                                       79
when using the difference-in-difference estimates (Table K.2). The result that both estimates of 2
are positive implies that current property tax rates are significantly below the revenue-maximizing
rate. This result is driven by the fact that our semi-elasticity estimates are not decreasing in t . As
Tables K.1 shows, we estimate larger semi-elasticities for larger values of t .
   77
      One potential concern is that the three tax changes estimate effects from households in different parts of the
home value distribution, leading to different elasticities. This is not the case. The thresholds for the three reforms
were approximately 2.275, 1.95, and 1.625 million MXN. The three elasticities are based on comparable properties
that are 325 thousand MXN--about 16 thousand USD--apart.
   78
      See Chamberlain (1984) for a guide to CMD and Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) for a recent application.
   79
      While we can reject the null hypothesis that 2 < 0 with a p-value < 0.001 when we use the DiD estimates, we
cannot reject this hypothesis when we use the RD estimates. See Table K.2 for details. Importantly, this result is
not driven by a lack of statistical precision. Estimates of 1 and 2 yield precisely estimated revenue semi-elasticities
at the average tax rate of 0.010(SE = 0.002, t - stat = 5.29) for the regression discontinuity case and 0.012(SE =
0.001, t - stat = 19.78) for the difference-in-difference case.

                                                           90
    While the point estimates for 2 are positive, we also consider how uncertainty in these estimates
affects our policy analysis. To explore the role of uncertainty, we simulate 10,000 values of 1 and
2 based on their joint distribution and characterize the resulting distribution of   . This exercise
shows that 80 percent of the time, the revenue-maximizing rate is greater than 159 basis points. We
also find that 90 percent of the simulated values yield estimates of   above 73 basis points and that
only 5 percent of the estimates are below 61 basis points.80 Given that the highest tax rate in the
three reforms was 50 basis points, these results show that the government can raise the property tax
rate by 20­50 percent with a very limited risk of going beyond the revenue-maximizing rate.
    The policy takeaway from this analysis is that rigorous empirical evidence from recent tax in-
creases shows that current tax rates are significantly below the revenue-maximizing tax rate.81
    While the government may be able to collect additional tax revenue by taxing property at rates
below   , the welfare costs from increasing tax rates or tightening enforcement may exceed the
value that taxpayers obtain from using the additional revenue to provide public goods. For this
reason, it is possible that the optimal tax rate may fall significantly below the revenue-maximizing
rate. In addition, the revenue-maximizing analysis does not provide any guidance as to whether the
government should rely on tax rate increases or enforcement actions to collect revenue. In Section
7 of the paper, we implement the welfare-maximizing model from Section 1 that incorporates these
important insights.

           Table K.1: The Effect of Tax Rates on Tax Payment ­ Semi-Elasticity Estimates
                                   A. Regression Discontinuity                  B. Difference-in-Differences
                              Payment     Payment in Compliance            Payment      Payment in Compliance
                              Amount           Full           Share        Amount            Full         Share
                                 (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                   I. Estimates for the 2009-2010 Treatment
   Implied Elasticity            .55          -.822            -.368         .697           -.617          -.244
                               (.226)        (.318)           (.234)        (.101)         (.104)         (.067)
   Implied Semi-Elasticity      .011          -.016            -.007         .014           -.012          -.005
                               (.005)        (.006)           (.005)        (.002)         (.002)         (.001)
                                                  II. Estimates for the 2010-2011 Treatment
   Implied Elasticity           .475          -.717            -.407         .728           -.642          -.300
                               (.108)        (.170)           (.107)        (.085)         (.064)         (.043)
   Implied Semi-Elasticity       .01          -.015            -.009         .015           -.014          -.006
                               (.002)        (.004)           (.002)        (.022)         (.001)         (.001)
                                                 III. Estimates for the 2011-2012 Treatment
   Implied Elasticity           .314          -.658            -.316         .489           -.747          -.455
                               (.059)        (.083)           (.060)        (.073)         (.035)         (.025)
   Implied Semi-Elasticity      .008          -.016            -.008         .012           -.018          -.011
                               (.001)        (.002)           (.001)        (.002)         (.001)        (-001)
Notes: This table reports the semi-elasticity estimates implied by our regression discontinuity and difference-in-
difference estimations, for which the estimates are reported in Table 1.




   80
      These simulations are based on our regression discontinuity results. The difference-in-difference estimates imply
larger revenue-maximizing rates in all cases.
   81
      Our findings contrast with the results of Haughwout et al. (2004), who find that in three of four major US cities,
property tax rates are close to the peak of the Laffer curve.

                                                          91
        Table K.2: Classical Minimum Distance Estimates of Revenue-Maximizing Tax Rates

                                                         (1)           (2)
                                                     RD Estimates DiD Estimates
                           1                              -0.005          -0.019
                                                         (0.020)           (0.007)

                           2                             1.640            3.293
                                                        (2.347)           (0.738)
                           Mean Semi-Elasticity         0.010             0.012
                                                        (0.002)           (0.001)
                           20th Percentile of           158.968           250.000
                           10th Percentile of            73.431           250.000
                           5th Percentile of             61.521           250.000
                           Standard errors in parentheses.
                           
                             p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
Notes: This table reports results for the classical minimum distance estimates of revenue-maximizing tax rates.
Column (1) uses estimates from the RD estimation to estimate 1 and 2 , while Column (2) uses estimates from the
DiD estimation. In both cases, we find that 2 > 0, indicating that current tax rates are substantially below the
revenue-maximizing rates. For both cases, we report the mean semi-elasticity by evaluating the revenue curve at the
average tax rate. Finally, the last panel reports estimates of revenue-maximizing tax rates   from 10,000 simulated
values of 1 and 2 . We compute   in each simulation and report the percentiles of this distribution. We top-code
  at 250 basis points when 2 > 0.




                                                        92
