                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  PANDEMICS, INCENTIVES, AND ECONOMIC POLICY:
                               A DYNAMIC MODEL

                                        Roberto Chang
                                       Humberto Martínez
                                        Andrés Velasco

                                      Working Paper 28636
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28636


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




We thank Drew Harris and seminar participants at Rutgers University for useful comments. Any
additional suggestions will be greatly appreciated. This project started while Chang was serving
as BP Centennial Professor at LSE, whose hospitality he acknowledges with thanks. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Roberto Chang, Humberto Martínez, and Andrés Velasco. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Pandemics, Incentives, and Economic Policy: A Dynamic Model
Roberto Chang, Humberto Martínez, and Andrés Velasco
NBER Working Paper No. 28636
April 2021
JEL No. E6,F4,H3,I3

                                          ABSTRACT

The advent of a pandemic is an exogenous shock, but the dynamics of contagion are very much
endogenous --and depend on choices that individuals make in response to incentives. In such an
episode, economic policy can make a difference not just by alleviating economic losses but also
via incentives that affect the trajectory of the pandemic itself. We develop this idea in a dynamic
equilibrium model of an economy subject to a pandemic. Just as in conventional SIR models,
infection rates depend on how much time people spend at home versus working outside the home.
But in our model, whether to go out to work is a decision made by individuals who trade off
higher pay from working outside the home today versus a higher risk of infection and expected
future economic and health-related losses. As a result, pandemic dynamics depend on factors that
have no relevance in conventional models. In particular, expectations and forward-looking
behavior are crucial and can result in multiplicity of equilibria with different levels of economic
activity, infection, and deaths. The analysis yields novel policy lessons. For example, incentives
embedded in a fiscal package resembling the U.S. CARES Act can result in two waves of
infection.

Roberto Chang                                    Andrés Velasco
Rutgers University                               School of Public Policy
Department of Economics                          London School of Economics
75 Hamilton Street                               and Political Science
New Brunswick, NJ 08901                          Houghton Street
and NBER                                         London WC2A 2AE
chang@econ.rutgers.edu                           United Kingdom
                                                 and CEPR
Humberto Martínez                                A.Velasco1@lse.ac.uk
Rutgers University
Department of Economics
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
hm409@economics.rutgers.edu




Computer codes are available at https://github.com/totuma87/Chang_Martinez_Velasco_2021
1     Introduction

The Covid-19 pandemic has stimulated an avalanche of research from economists. Almost all
this research treats the pandemic as an exogenous shock and then analyzes policy proposals
to alleviate its consequences. But while the initial appearance of the virus may have been
exogenous, its speed of propagation is not. The dynamics of the pandemic are the result of
human decisions, and hence depend on economic policies.
    Think of health policy directives such as lockdowns, stay-at-home guidelines, and social
distancing rules. Their e¢ cacy depends on the decisions of individuals who weigh the perceived
costs against the bene...ts of compliance. A person who cannot work from home may be foregoing
income by complying with a lockdown. But by staying home and reducing the chances of
contagion that person also makes it more likely that she will be healthy and in a position to go
to work when the economy opens up again. In turn these choices depend on a host of economic
variables, including the size of foregone wages, the extent of government aid for those who stay
at home, or expectations of the speed of the post-lockdown economic recovery.
    In this paper we develop a dynamic model of the interaction between individual decisions
and the speed of virus transmission, emphasizing the key role of economic incentives and the
implications for policy. We extend the model of Chang and Velasco (2020), which assumed two
periods, to an in...nite time horizon. Aside from the obvious gain in realism, this change also
makes the model easily comparable to the conventional Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR)
model of pandemics.
    Just in SIR models, infection rates depend on human behavior. But here, unlike SIR
models, behavior reects the rational responses of individuals to incentives they face. Those
incentives are given not only by the "technology" of infection but also by several ...nancial
costs associated with the pandemic. The interactions among virus transmission, incentives,
and behavior have multiple and important implications. Incentives built into economic policy
can a¤ect the dynamics of virus infection. And while SIR models are purely backward-looking,
expectations and forward-looking behavior are crucial in our model.

                                               1
   Our model features a population that normally works outside the home. Normality is
interrupted by the appearance of a contagious virus. Infected individuals can become sick,
in whose case they must stay in a "hospital" where lucky ones recover and unlucky ones die.
People not showing symptoms of the virus choose whether to go to work or stay at home. The
probability of infection is greater at work than at home, but staying at home is costly in terms
of lost income. Hence agents decide between outside work and staying home on the basis of
a "double relative": the current payo¤ from outside work relative to home income, compared
against the expected future value of remaining asymptomatic relative to the cost of becoming
ill with the virus.
   In evaluating the double relative, individuals take into account the evolving probabilities
of infection at home and at work. In turn, infection probabilities depend on the numbers of
agents in each location. So there is a mutual interaction between location decisions and the
evolution of the pandemic. In equilibrium, work-stay-home decisions and infection probabilities
are simultaneously determined.
   We are able to derive several analytical results. The model is highly nonlinear and time-
dependent, however, so that resulting dynamics are generally complex and depend on paramet-
ers. To derive additional insights we simulate equilibrium paths numerically with parameters
calibrated to match U.S. data.
   For our benchmark calibrations, the model yields a pattern of infection with the hump shape
characteristic of a pandemic. But because our model takes into account individual decisions
and the corresponding incentives, equilibrium dynamics depend on fundamentals that would
have no bearing in other models. For instance, increased risk aversion induces agents to spend
more time at home during the pandemic, reducing infection rates and the prevalence illness and
deaths. In the same vein, changes in the technology of infection a¤ect equilibrium outcomes not
only directly but also via the induced changes in individual behavior. For example, higher values
for the parameter that determines contagion directly raise the speed of transmission. But, to
avoid contagion individuals are more inclined to stay at home, which acts as an o¤setting force.


                                               2
   More importantly for our discussion, changes in economic variables, which would not have
an impact in SIR models, matter for the decisions of individuals and for the dynamics of virus
transmission of our model. For instance, the relative rewards of staying at home versus outside
work turn out to be key for dynamics. And those rewards, of course, can be a¤ected by economic
policies.
   To emphasize this point, we examine the implications of a ...scal policy package similar to
the U.S. 2020 CARES Act. We feed into the model an increase in unemployment bene...ts
which virtually eliminates the di¤erence between market income and home income, but only
for a limited time period. In our model, such a policy causes the pandemic to come in two
waves, consistent with the observed evolution of Covid-19 in the US.
   The intuition is clear. While they last, unemployment bene...ts enacted by a policy such as
the CARES Act reduce the relative payo¤ of working outside the home. These incentives prompt
a change in behavior which helps limit contagion, contributing to a reduction in infections after
an initial peak. However, the expiration of the CARES Act means that the payo¤ of outside
work relative to staying home jumps back to its usual level. In response to the changed incentives
individuals return to working outside the home, helping start a second wave of the pandemic.
   Our model predicts that in the absence of the CARES Act the U.S. would have experienced a
single peaked pandemic. That would also be the outcome if individual locations were exogenous,
as in the SIR type of models. Furthermore, our analysis underscores that the parts of the
CARES Act that matter for the evolution of the pandemic were those that a¤ect individual
incentives and decision-making. In contrast, provisions in the Act that do not change incentives
have no impact on dynamics. This is the case, for example, of cash transfers to households
regardless of whether they stay home or not, which in our model have no impact on relative
payo¤s and hence no e¤ect on equilibria.
   Our model is built on ...rst principles, so that the analysis of several policies and their
incentive e¤ects is straightforward. As an illustration, "social distancing"can be thought of as a
policy that reduces the number of contacts people have when they go to work. In our model, this


                                                3
policy has an ambiguous impact on behavior and contagion. Conditional on people'
                                                                               s choices,
fewer contacts outside the home reduce current and future infection probabilities. These changes
have two opposite e¤ects on individual incentives. A lower infection risk directly increases the
relative payo¤ of working outside the home. But if future infection risks are lower as well, the
opportunity cost of getting infected today and missing out on a brighter future can also go up,
shifting incentives in favor of staying at home. So what is crucial for individual maximization
is not the absolute value of infection rates but the "double relative" we explained earlier.
In our calibrations, social distancing policies do have an ambiguous impact: depending on
parameter values, the requirement that people stay socially distanced can increase the share of
the population going to work for one set of parameter values, and reduce it for another.
   The model incorporates an externality: individuals base their choices of location on their
own probabilities of contagion, but fail to take into account the impact of those choices on the
economy-wide dynamics of contagion. We contrast the decentralized outcome to the solution
of the social planning problem in our model, one in which the social objective is the discounted
expected welfare of the di¤erent groups, each weighted by their population size.
   With the benchmark calibration, the planning solution at ...rst restricts time outside the
home drastically, and then allows agents to return to outside work gradually. The solution
resembles a "lockdown"and stands in contrast to the decentralized equilibrium, in which people
are fully working outside the home. The social-planning policy reduces infection but does not
eliminate it completely.
   Beyond comparing optimal versus decentralized outcomes, we ask: what is an individual'
                                                                                        s
best response if the implements the optimal lockdown? For an individual who believes that
others will comply with the lockdown, implying lower infection risk and weaker incentives to
stay at home, the best response is to return to work full time. This suggests the optimal policy
is politically very di¢ cult to implement. Without compulsory enforcement or an economic
policy that reduces the ...nancial advantage of working outside the home, lockdown compliance




                                               4
will be, at best, short-lived.1
       Finally, we analyze the possibility of multiple equilibria. Animal spirits can be crucial in
a pandemic. For some parametrizations, a SIR-type equilibrium, with agents fully working
outside the home and high rates of infection and death, coexists with another equilibrium in
which precautionary behavior leads to less time outside the home, lower infection rates, and
fewer deaths. In the precautionary equilibrium individual decision makers reduce their time
working outside the home not because they face high infection rates if they go to work today,
but because they expect the pandemic to subside enough over time so that the future value
of not being infected is high. Multiple equilibria reect the importance of forward-looking
behavior, in sharp contrast to SIR models, which are only backwards-looking.
       The existence of multiple equilibria implies that policy can be highly e¤ective if government
credibly acts as a coordinating device. If a SIR-type equilibrium coexists with a precautionary
equilibrium, an appropriately tailored directive to limit non-essential time outside the home
not only eliminates the bad equilibrium, but also is politically costless: in the surviving pre-
cautionary equilibrium, decision-makers ...nd it individually optimal to follow the directive. In
the same way, economic incentive policies can in principle act as coordinating mechanisms.
       This paper is a contribution to the literature, motivated by the Covid-19 pandemic, that
has attempted to blend models from economics and from epidemiology. The dominant epidemi-
ological models of virus transmission are variants of the SIR model developed about a century
ago (the earliest published version seems to be Kermack and McKendrick 1927). The paper by
Weiss (2013) is an excellent presentation of the basic technical details of the model. Weiss also
discusses how the SIR model provides the theoretical underpinning for stay-at-home directives,
social distancing, and other public health policy responses to a pandemic. In the SIR model,
such policies are the only game in town, because individuals act mechanically, with incentives
playing no role. By contrast, our analysis highlights how policies, including economic policies,
   1
    These results are consistent with Levy-Yeyati et al (2020) who empirically show that lockdown compliance
declines with time, and is lower in countries with stricter quarantines, lower incomes and higher levels of labor
precariousness



                                                       5
can shape incentives and individual behavior in a pandemic, which in turn a¤ects the dynamics
of virus transmission.
      Much like the epidemiological literature, the recent economics literature related to Covid 19
has largely ignored the role of economic behavior and incentives in determining the trajectory
of the pandemic.2 There are exceptions, however, to which our paper is related. A number
of studies, including Garibaldi, Moen, and Pissarides (2020), Rachel (2020), and Toxvaerd
(2021), develop extensions of the SIR model in which each individual chooses a degree of social
distancing, or something similar, which indirectly determines exposure to the virus. In turn,
aggregate choices a¤ect the SIR equations and the dynamics of infection. Because individual
choices depend on perceived infection probabilities, these models also feature the kind of mutual
interaction between individual decision-making and virus dynamics emphasized in our paper.
      In these models and ours, externalities drive a wedge between the decentralized equilibrium
and the social planning outcome. In existing contributions, the focus has been to characterize
di¤erences between these two potential outcomes, and to derive suggestions for lockdowns
and other public health measures. By contrast, we emphasize the impact of economic policy
incentives and of policy interventions such as the CARES Act.
      In addition, we build the model from fundamental assumptions about technology, contacts,
and infection technology, in a way that allows for a consistent analysis of policy questions and
makes extensions easy to accommodate. Consider an example: several models in this group
assume that infected individuals interact freely and knowingly with susceptible people. But if
infection is observable, wouldn'
                               t susceptible agents simply avoid interacting with sick agents?.
In our model, by contrast, we assume that people who become sick are sent to a hospital for
treatment, so that contagion arises only from asymptomatic people who do not know they have
been infected.
      Eichenbaum, Rebelo, and Trabandt (2020) and Jones, Phillipon, and Venkateswaran (2020)
develop dynamic models that postulate SIR-type equations, which depend on economic activit-
  2
    Brodeur, Gray, Islam, and Jabeen Bhuiyan (2020) survey the economic literature as of June 2020. Since
then, however, there have been many signi...cant contributions.


                                                   6
ies such as consumption and hours worked. As in our paper, individual agents understand that
their consumption and labor supply choices have implications for their exposure to contagion,
so market incentives such as wages matter for the dynamics of infection. But our paper di¤ers
from Eichenbaum et al. and Jones et al. in several respects, some of which are signi...cant for
policy analysis. For example, both Eichenbaum et al. and Jones et al. assume that contagion
increases with the levels of aggregate consumption. An implication is that raising consumption
taxes during a pandemic would reduce infections, which would amount to an argument in favor
of such a policy. In contrast, consumption taxes, because they wash out in the double relat-
ive, have no impact on individual choices in our model, and therefore no e¤ects on contagion
dynamics.
      Whether these di¤erences are important hinges on the speci...c objectives of the distinct
papers. The main focus of Eichenbaum et al. and Jones et al. is on describing and quantifying
dynamic implications. Given such a focus, there is no big loss in treating the link between
consumption and infection rates as a reduced form. For policy analysis, on the other hand, the
details of such a link are crucial, which is one of the reasons why we have placed special care
in deriving SIR-type equations from ...rst principles.
      Our analysis of how ...scal policy a¤ects the dynamics of a pandemic via incentives, and how
...scal policy can be a factor underlying multiple waves of infection, is new in the literature.
Moreover, and to the best of our knowledge, we know of no model of a pandemic in which the
interaction between economic incentives and forward-looking behavior can result in multiple
equilibria. In turn, those di¤erent equilibria have very di¤erent implications for contagion
dynamics and the associated policy implications.3
      The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the economic environment
in normal times. Section 3 describes the impact of a virus, emphasizing the interplay between
individual decisions and infection rates, and de...ning equilibrium. Section 4 proposes a numer-
ical calibration of the model and investigates model dynamics. We discuss the implications
  3
      Multiple equilibria may emerge in SIR-type models of equilibrium social distancing. See Chen (2012).



                                                       7
of a ...scal package similar to the CARES Act in section 5. Social distancing is the focus of
section 6 and the social planning problem is focus of the section 7, where we also compare this
outcome with the decentralized equilibrium of the model. Multiple equilibria and the role of
forward-looking behavior are discussed in section 8, while section 9 closes with conclusions and
suggestions for further research.



2         A Basic Economy

Time is discrete and indexed by t = 0; 1; 2::::The economy is populated by a continuum of
agents. The size of the population is normalized to one.
        People in this economy transit between three locations which we shall call home, outside,
and hospital. As in Chang and Velasco (2020), transitions between locations depend partly on
individual decisions, reecting agents'perceptions of costs and bene...ts, including the possibility
of infection.
        There is only one ...nal good. Each agent outside her home in period t receives an amount
wt : We can think of wt as a wage or the amount of output that the agent produces working
outside, and more generally a reward from market participation. Likewise, agents at home
or in the hospital receive an amount of goods et : This can be thought of output from home
production, or a subsidy from the government.4 For now, we simply assume that wt and et ,
t = 0; 1; 2::: are exogenously given, known sequences, with wt > et           0:
        Agents consume their incomes in every period. In particular, we rule out borrowing or lend-
ing. This is in spirit of simplicity, but allowing for borrowing and lending may be a substantial
extension.
        In this economy, normal life is quite easy. Since wt > et ; agents spend every day working
outside, and receive utility:
    4
     We can allow the subsidy to di¤er between home and hospital, but here we assume there is no di¤erence,
for simplicity.




                                                    8
                                               X
                                               1
                                                          j
                                       vzt =                  u(wt+j )                            (1)
                                               j =0

where 0 <       < 1 is their subjective discount factor, and u displays constant relative risk
aversion   >0:

                                            c1
                                    u(c) =                     if   6= 1;
                                           1
                                          = log(c) if               =1



3     Pandemic

Things change, however, when, at the beginning of t = 0, a fraction 1        h0 of the population
gets infected with a virus. As we describe below, infected people show no symptoms until the
end of the period. Hence, at the start of t = 0, people do not know if they are infected or not:
they remain vulnerable. The number of vulnerable individuals at the start of any period t will
be denoted by st : Hence s0 = 1:


3.1    Vulnerables and Decision Makers

To describe the model dynamics, consider any period t; with st vulnerable individuals, of which
a fraction (1   ht ) carry the virus. In other words, at the start of period t there are (1   ht )st
asymptomatic individuals, and ht st healthy ones.
    For a benchmark case we select some simple assumptions, similar to those in Chang and
Velasco (2020). An exogenous random fraction q > 0 of the vulnerables is selected and must
go to work outside. One can think of this fraction as "essential" workers.
    Each of the remaining (1   q )st vulnerables decides what fraction of the period to stay home
or outside. In the parlance of Chang and Velasco (2020), this is a group of decision-makers. We
examine their decision problem shortly, but observe for now that a crucial consideration in that
problem is that, in equilibrium, probabilities of infection are di¤erent in di¤erent locations.

                                                      9
                   m                          n
   We denote by    t    (respectively         t)   the probability that a healthy vulnerable gets infected if
she spends a period working outside (resp. at home). Hence a healthy vulnerable that spends
a fraction pt of her day outside gets infected with probability


                                                                   m                     n
                                      t   =    t (pt )        pt   t     + (1     pt )   t



                                                                   m      n
In our model, the infection probabilities                t   =(    t ;    t)    are endogenous, but are taken as given
by individual agents.
   Vulnerables do not know if they are healthy or infected at the beginning of the period
(so each of them assumes that she is healthy with probability ht ). At the end of the period,
however, some infected vulnerables become symptomatic. Let                                   the fraction of infected that
show symptoms. We assume that                 is exogenous and less than one.
   Infected individuals that exhibit symptoms exit the vulnerable population to enter the
                        (1)
hospital. We denote xt+1 the number of vulnerables that are interned in the hospital at the end
of period t:
                               (1)                                  m
                              xt+1 = f(1           ht ) + ht [q     t     + (1     q ) t (pt )]gst                     (2)

   In the preceding, the term in brackets is the fraction of vulnerables that are infected at the
end of period t. That fraction is given by asymptomatic but infected vulnerables, (1                             ht ); plus
the number of healthy vulnerables that get infected during the period.
   Correspondingly, the number of vulnerables next period is


                                                                          (1)
                                                   st+1 = st             xt+1                                          (3)


and the number of healthy vulnerables in t + 1 is:


                                                                    m
                               ht+1 st+1 = ht st 1            [q    t    + (1     q ) t (pt )])                        (4)




                                                              10
3.2    Hospitalization and Recovery

Infected people that show symptoms recover only after spending some period of isolation or
medical care in a hospital. Under our assumptions, people do not recover till they spend time
in the hospital, hence they must show symptoms ...rst. One interesting variation might be to
allow asymptomatic people to recover without going to the hospital.
   An individual in the hospital stays H                 1 periods there, after which she recovers with
probability (1    ) or dies with probability . A recovered person is virus free for ever, and
able to earn the present value of outside wages, de...ned above as vz : On the other hand, we
assume that death involves a utility cost D             0:

   Hence the value of a hospitalized individual in her ...rst day at the hospital is:

                              X
                              H
                                     j 1                     H
                      vht =                u(et+j 1 ) +          [(1      )vz;t+H   D]              (5)
                              j =1


        ( i)                                                                                (1)   (H )
   Let xt denote the number of patients in their ith day in the hospital, and xt = (xt ; :::xt ).
Also, let zt denote the number of recovered people up to and including period t. Then z0 = 0
and


                                                                       (H )
                                        zt+1 = zt + (1             )xt                              (6)

                           (1)
   The law of motion of xt       was given in (2). In turn, by de...nition,


                                      ( i)      (i 1)
                                     xt+1 = xt          ; i = 2; 3; ::::H                           (7)


   Finally, ! t will denote the number of accumulated deaths. Then ! 0 = 0 and


                                                                  (H )
                                             ! t+1 = ! t + xt


   Conditional on fpt g and f t g; the equations de...ned so far determine the evolution of

                                                        11
st ; ht ; xt ; ! t and zt : In fact, as the reader may recognize, the equations are similar to those
of the SIR model of virus transmission. But here fpt g and f t g are not ...xed parameters but
equilibrium objects, determined by the decisions of agents in the model. We turn to this aspect
of the model.


3.3         Individual Decisions

As mentioned, at the beginning of each period t; a fraction q of the vulnerables are exogenously
sent outside. These agents do not have any decision to make. The value of their lifetime utility
from then on, that is, their value function vqt , is easily seen to be:


                                                                          m
                                   vqt = u(wt ) + [ f(1       ht ) + ht   t gvht+1                  (8)
                                                                      m
                                            +(1    f(1    ht ) + ht   t g)vst+1 ]




where vht is the value function at the hospital, and vst is the value function for a vulnerable at
time t; to be de...ned below.
     The right hand side is the utility of the outside wage plus the discounted expected value
of their utility from next period on. For the latter, observe that the probability of being sick
at the end of the period equals the probability of being sick at the beginning of the period,
                                                                                                    m
(1     ht ); plus the probability of starting healthy but infected outside during the period, ht    t :

Also, a fraction        of the sick population at the end of period becomes symptomatic and must
exit to the hospital. Otherwise, the agent remains in the vulnerable population.
     The remaining (1              q )st vulnerables face the more delicate choice of how to distribute
her time in or out of their homes. Crucially, this choice determines not only their current
income but also their infection probabilities. Each agent in this group knows that, if she is
healthy and spends a fraction pt of the period outside, she will get infected with probability
            m                 n
 t   = pt   t   + (1   pt )   t:




                                                         12
   Hence the problem of such decision makers can be written as:


                              vdt = M ax0            pt 1   u(ct ) + f [(1       ht ) + ht t ]vh;t+1                    (9)

                                        +[1          ((1      ht ) + ht t )]vs;t+1 g

                      where ct = pt wt + (1                 pt )et
                                            m                        n
                        and    t   = pt     t   + (1         pt )    t




   The maximand in the RHS reects that, if the individual spends a fraction pt of the period
outside her home, her current income and consumption is ct = pt wt + (1                                pt )et : In addition,
she will be infected at the end of the period with probability (1                           ht ) + ht t ; in whose case
she will become symptomatic with probability                         and enter the hospital next period, receiving
vh;t+1 . Otherwise, she will remain in the vulnerable group, receiving vs;t+1 .
   It is instructive to examine the derivative of the maximand with respect to the choice pt ;
which is
                                                                    m    n
                              u0 (ct )(wt     et )          ht (    t    t )(vst+1     vht+1 )                         (10)

   This is an illuminating expression. The ...rst term is the current gain of a marginal increase
in pt : Such an increase raises current income by the utility value of outside income relative
to home income, wt            et : That gain is compared against the marginal cost associated with
infection risk. What is that risk? By working outside rather than staying home, a vulnerable
individual raises the chance that she is healthy but gets an infection. That increase is captured
          m   n
by ht (   t   t ):   With probability         the individual will then show symptoms and have to enter
a hospital next period, with cost (vst+1                    vht+1 ):
   Hence decisions to work outside or stay at home depend on a "double relative": the current
payo¤ to outside work relative to staying home is compared with the expected discounted value
of future payo¤ of remaining vulnerable versus going to hospital. The choice problem has an
intratemporal and an intertemporal dimension. Crucially, expectations play a crucial role.



                                                               13
      Finally, our assumptions imply that


                                              vst = qvqt + (1    q )vdt                                           (11)


                                                                                                           m         n
      And, of course, the decision problem depends on the probabilities of contagion,                      t   and   t:

This will depend on the "technology" of virus transmission.


3.4      Contagion

We impose SIR-type assumptions, deriving contagion probabilities from basic assumptions
about frequency of meetings and rates of transmission in di¤erent locations. In this way,
one can think about a variety of policies, such as "social distancing", in a useful way.
                                                m
      Each agent outside her home has               close meetings with other agents during a period. A
healthy agent contracts the virus with probability               if she meets an infected person. In turn,
the probability of meeting an infected individual in a given match is equal to the proportion of
healthy agents outside, given by:

                                                [q + (1 q )pt ]ht st + zt
                                        hw
                                         t =                                                                      (12)
                                                 [q + (1 q )pt ]st + zt

taking into account that zt recovered agents have returned to outside work and are healthy.
      It follows that the probability that a healthy vulnerable agent working outside is not infected
in a given meeting is hw
                       t + (1           )(1     hw
                                                 t ) and hence
                                                              5




                                    m                                             m
                                    t   =1       [hw
                                                   t + (1       )(1       hw
                                                                           t )]                                   (13)


      The expression is intuitive. An increase in the proportion of infected people in the market
          m                                                                                                          m
raises    t :   Given hw
                       t ; an increase in the number of meetings,
                                                                                  m
                                                                                      ; leads to an increase in      t :

                                                                                                m
"Social distancing" policies are, presumably, those that attempt to reduce                          : Finally, policies
  5
      Note that CV'
                  s assumption is   =    = 1:



                                                        14
such as mandating the use of face masks may a¤ect the probability of transmission .
     Analogous reasoning implies that


                                        n                                         n
                                        t   =1     [ht + (1         )(1   ht )]                            (14)


          n                                                                                            n       m
where         indicates the number of close meetings at home. It is natural to assume that                 <       :
     This completes the description of the model. Importantly for our purposes, contagion prob-
abilities depend not only on the extent of infection but also on individual decisions, here given by
how vulnerable agents allocate their time between outside work and home. But those decisions,
as we have seen, depend on those same agents'perceptions of contagion probabilities.


3.5       Equilibrium

Equilibrium can be de...ned in a natural way. The de...nition includes the dynamics of infection,
in addition to individual decisions.
     A (perfect foresight) equilibrium involves sequences of population fractions fht ; st ; xt ; zt g;
value functions vst ; vqt ; vdt ; vht ; and vzt ; time allocation decisions pt ; and contagion probabilities
          m     n
 t   =(   t ;   t)   such that:

                                                           (1)             (H )
       Given f t ; pt g, s0 = 1; z0 = 0; and x0                  = ::: = x0       = 0; and a given h0 2 (0; 1);
       fht ; st ; xt ; zt g1
                           t=1 satisfy 4, 3, 7, 2, and 6


       The value functions satisfy 8, 9,11, and 1, 5, given f t ; ht g

       pt attains the max in the RHS of the Bellman equation 9

          m           n
          t   and     t   are given by 13 and 14


     As we have emphasized, our model is similar to existing SIR models, except (crucially) that
pt is endogenous. This similarity allows us to immediately derive some qualitative features of
equilibria, adapting arguments of e.g. Weiss (2013).


                                                            15
   Assume that wt and et are eventually constant. Also, consider a sequence fpt g such that
pt = 1 for all t su¢ ciently large (this will be an equilibrium feature). Then 3 and 2 imply that
fst g is a decreasing sequence bounded below by zero, so it must converge to some limit that
we denote by s1 2 [0; 1]: Likewise, fzt g and f! t g are increasing bounded sequences, so it must
converge to some z 1 ; ! 1 2 [0; 1]: It also follows that fxt g converges to the zero vector, and
that z 1 + ! 1 = 1    s1 :
   Hence, in the long run, the pandemic subsides. But does everybody get infected? Indeed,
this can be the case under some parameter values that imply that z 1 + ! 1 = 1. In such a case,
everyone in the population gets infected, eventually goes to the hospital, and recovers or dies.
   But it is also possible that z 1 + ! 1 < 1 and s1 > 0: To see how, note that if ht and hw
                                                                                           t
                                                        m          n
converge to one, the probabilities of infection         t   and    t   fall to zero. If this convergence is
su¢ ciently fast, infections ...zzle out while there is still a positive mass of vulnerables. This is
a case of "herd immunity".
   More detailed dynamics can be inferred by focusing on the number of new infections in each
period, given by:
                                                        m                          n
                        Nt = st ht f[q + (1   q )pt ]   t   + (1   q )(1    pt )   tg


that is, the number of initially healthy vulnerables at the start of the period, st ht ; times the
probability that each of them is infected during the period. The number of healthy vulnerables
is decreasing, but the probability of infection can increase or decrease. Consequently, Nt can
increase or decrease, although eventually it must converge to zero. In typical SIR models, if
N1 < N0 ; the convergence is monotonic, while if N1 > N0 there must be at least one "peak" in
infections. This depends on the particular parameters of the model.
   At this point, we cannot extract more implications of the model analytically. This is due to
the high nonlinearity and nonstationarity of the model. But we can learn much more from the
model by numerical study of speci...c parametrizations. We turn to these.




                                                  16
4         A Benchmark Case

4.1        Calibration

We assume that each time period of the model represents a day. Consistent with an annual
interest rate of one percent, we set             equal to (1=1:01)1=365 .
        We calibrate the model to the U.S. According to o¢ cial numbers, by the end of the ...rst
week of March, there were about 338 active cases identi...ed in the country.6 However, it is well
known that due to limited testing, the true number of active cases by that time could have been
10 to 25 times larger. Taking this into account, we set the initial fraction of healthy vulnerable
population (s0 h0 ) equal to 1          10 5 .
                         m       n
        Parameters ( ,       ,       ) determine the rate of transmission of the virus outside and at
home. Mossong et al. (2008) conducted a population-based prospective survey of mixing
patterns in eight European countries using a common paper-diary methodology. They ...nd
that, on average, a person in a household of two to three people has between 10.65 and 12.87
daily contacts, of which 23% occur inside the household. Thus, we set the total average number
of daily contacts to 11.7, which is consistent with the average household size in the US,7 that
                                                                              m             n
implies a distribution of contacts between outside and home equal to              = 9 and       = 2:7. We
set the probability of transmission per contact ( ) at 5% that lies in between 4.1% and 6.2%,
which are the probability of transmission per contact with a asymptomatic and a symptomatic,
respectively, estimated by He et al. (2020).
        Recall that   represents the fraction of infected that show symptoms at the end of each
period. This parameter could also be interpret as the probability of showing symptoms. A
joint mission by the World Health Organization and the Chinese government established that,
on average, infected people developed signs and symptoms between 5 and 6 days after infection.8
                                                        1
Consistently with this ...nding, we set            =   5:5
                                                           .
    6
      The CDC - Centers for Disease Control and Protection - see here
    7
      According to the US Census, the average household size is 2.53 people
    8
      See Page 11, Final Report of the mission here



                                                               17
       Related to the virus, there are two additional parameters that need to chosen. The ...rst is
the number of days that a person spends at the hospital (H ). Similar to existing literature on
this matter,9 we assume H is equal to 18, implying that after 18 days at the hospital, a person
recovers or dies. We set the probability of dying ( ) to be 1% which is consistent with Verity
et al. (2020) who estimated that the infection fatality rate in China, with a 95% of con...dence,
is between 0.39% -1.33%.
       For the benchmark scenario, we set the economic parameters of the model as follows. We
normalize w equal to one and choose et = e = 0:38. Thus, in the baseline scenario, the bene...t
of staying at home is 38% of the reward from working outside This number was chosen to
reect that in the pre-pandemic U.S., average national unemployment weekly payment was
$370 compared to the $970 average national weekly salary of potential unemployment bene...ts
recipients.10 Parameter q is the probability that in each period, a vulnerable is selected to work
outside. Following Alvarez et al. (2020), 30% of US GDP is generated by essential sectors,
hence, we set q = 0:3 to capture that this fraction of the economy needs to operate in every
period.
       Finally, a key parameter for the calibration is D that corresponds to the utility loss upon
death. How to calibrate this parameter is controversial. In the model, an obvious cost of death
is the loss of wages. But it is easy to argue that it should include not only foregone earnings but
also physical pain and su¤ering, and perhaps other considerations. Hence, for a benchmark,
we take a pragmatic approach as follows. Kniesner and Viscusi (2019) indicate estimates of
the value of a statistical life (VSL) for the U.S. are close to $10 million ($2017). We take this
number to represent the expected present value of all costs associated with death, including
not only wages, but also the additional costs just mentioned. We express those costs as a daily
quantity, express that quantity as a constant times the daily average wage, and then compute
D as the discounted value of the utility of the resulting constant. In the benchmark calibration,
   9
     See Acemoglu et al. (2020), Eichembaum, Rebello, et al. (2020), Alvarez et al. (2020), and Verity et al.
(2020) for example
  10
     See Five Thirty Eight



                                                     18
we assume that agents have log utility preferences.


4.2      Equilibrium, Incentives, and the SIR Model

Figure 1 displays the predictions of the model during the ...rst 150 days of the pandemic,
assuming logarithmic utility.11 The upper left hand panel shows that all agents spend all of
their time outside their homes, in spite of the fact that the probability of contagion is lower at
home. As a consequence, in this case the model behaves just as if we had assumed that agents
had no choice between working outside and staying home. In other words, the model e¤ectively
becomes a standard SIR model.
      Like in the SIR model, the pandemic results in a peak in infections at about eighty days
from the initial seed. As vulnerables get infected, they transit to the hospital, where they either
recover or die. Eventually the pandemic subsides. This reects that the number of healthy
vulnerables, susceptible to contagion, falls as more people acquire the virus. Also, hospitalized
agents that recover return to work outside, increasing the relative number of healthy people
there. In the long run, about one percent of the population dies.
      Figure 1 con...rms that our model delivers dynamics not unlike the SIR model. At the same
time, however, it may give the misleading impression that, as in the SIR model, incentives are
irrelevant. That this is not the case is illustrated by Figure 2, which compares the SIR model
against ours in the case of a CRRA      equal to ten.
      The case    = 10 is displayed by the red dashed line. As in the SIR model, the rate of
infection starts accelerating about thirty days after the initial seed. Unlike in the SIR model,
and in the case with log utility, the upper left panel of Figure 2 shows that decision making
vulnerables start reducing their time outside, and more so as the infection rate goes up. About
two months into the pandemic, the infection rate peaks, and the fraction of time outside bottoms
at around one half. These two variables interact: since people stay home, the infection rate
peaks at a lower level than in the SIR model. As a consequence, the number of active cases
 11
    Figures are collected at the end of the paper.           Computer   code   is   available   at   ht-
tps://github.com/totuma87/Chang_Martinez_Velasco_2021


                                                19
falls, and the total number of deaths is lower, at eight tenths of one percent of the population,
than in the SIR case (and also the log utility case).
   Of course, the di¤erence between Figures 1 and 2 amounts to an assumption about individual
behavior. The SIR model features no decision making, while our model places it at center
stage. The log utility case shows, however, that allowing for individual decision making is not
su¢ cient by itself to depart from the SIR paradigm. People'
                                                           s responses to incentives must be
strong enough, as in the case        = 10.
   Figure 3 illustrates the role of incentives. The upper left hand panel displays the marginal
value of fully working outside given by the derivative of the objective function in the Bellman
equation, (10), evaluated at pt = 1: As shown, the derivative falls below zero after about thirty
...ve days, expressing that fully working outside is suboptimal, so that decision makers increase
time spent at home.
                                                                                         m   n
   The upper right hand panel of Figure 3 shows the evolution of the term         ht (   t   t )(vst+1

vht+1 ) in 10. As discussed before, this term captures the cost to decision makers of increasing
outside working time pt , due to the impact on infection risk. As the panel shows, it is the evol-
ution of this term which explains the changes in incentives during the course of the pandemic.
                                                                                              m      n
The term, in turn, reects the di¤erential infection risk outside vis a vis home, ht (         t      t );

which is displayed in the lower middle panel. But it also reects the changing relative value of
not being hospitalized,     (vst+1     vht+1 ); displayed in the lower right panel.
   To underscore the crucial role of individual responses to incentives, Figure 4 compares the
original calibration, including log utility, against a case in which the utility cost of death is ten
times larger. In our model, this means that vulnerable decision makers are more prone to stay
home, rather than work outside, in order to reduce their probability of acquiring the virus and,
ultimately, of death. Of course, the utility cost of death is irrelevant in the SIR model.
   The results are intuitive. When people have a bigger fear of death, they choose to stay at
home nearly one hundred percent of their available time as soon as infection rates start going
up. As a consequence, infection rates and the number of active cases are much smaller than in


                                                   20
the SIR case. The number of deaths falls to six tenths of one percent of the population.



5     Application: The CARES Act

5.1     The CARES Act

In the last days of March of 2020, the U.S. Congress reached an agreement to provide a eco-
nomic relief package worth approximately $2 trillion dollars. This package, denominated The
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (or CARES Act) came as a response to
the economic fallout of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States.
    The CARES Act included the extension of unemployment bene...ts. The Federal Pandemic
Unemployment Compensation (FPUC) provided an additional $600 dollars per week to people
for those receiving unemployment bene...ts. Additionally, the Pandemic Emergency Unemploy-
ment Compensation (PEUC) increased by 13 weeks the time window to receive unemployment
bene...ts while the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance (PUA) expanded the eligibility criteria
to self-employed and gig-workers.
    To infer the e¤ects of the CARES Act in our model, we focus on the impact of the Act on
the relative compensation of working in the market versus staying at home. Relative to the
SIR/log utility scenario, all parameters remain the same except for the schedule of the bene...ts
of staying home, which we modify to capture the impact of the CARES Act on unemployment
bene...ts.
    Given that this policy was active between April and July, we assume that the implementation
period starts 30 days after the onset of the pandemic and it lasts for an additional 120 days.
Moreover, during this time frame, et increases from 0.38 to 0.99 capturing, as argued by Ganong
et al. (2020), that the CARES Act increased the replacement rate for 76% of eligible workers
above 100%. That is, most people would earn more from being unemployed than by working
during this period of time. After day 150, et returns to the pre-pandemic value of 0.38.
    Because of the short run nature of the problem at hand, we do not ask how the policy


                                               21
under analysis is to be ...nanced. The CARES Act was ...nanced simply via government debt,
the implications of which remain to be ascertained. In our model, we could easily assume that
the government pays for the et increases by issuing debt that is to be repaid in a time frame
beyond the horizon we are interested in.


5.2    Implications

Figure 5 illustrates the implications of the CARES Act for our model. Upon the imposition
of the CARES Act, vulnerable decision makers choose to stay home for an initial period of
about a month, after which they start returning to working outside gradually. This process
is reversed, however, at about day 130, when outside work participation drops for a couple of
weeks. Finally, at about day 150, decision makers return fully outside.
   This evolution reects the interaction between the dynamics of infection, individual de-
cisions, and the ...nancial incentives implicit in the CARES Act. The key aspect of the Act is
that the ...nancial reward to outside work relative to staying at home becomes tiny for a while.
Then, as soon as the Act is implemented, vulnerable decision makers choose to stay at home.
Note that this transition is quite abrupt, which is consistent with the large increase in the
unemployment rate in the US in April 2020 which, as Robert Hall has emphasized, reected an
increase of layo¤s of workers with jobs rather than job destruction. Also, it is notable that the
transition happens even when the rate of infection outside the home is quite small (see upper
middle panel).
   The fact that decision makers increase slightly their time outside by day 70 is not driven
by the incentives of the CARES Act but by the fact that the probability of infection has fallen
practically to zero at that moment. Consequently, even though the ...nancial bene...t of working
outside is close to zero, the likelihood of getting infected is even lower that staying at home
100% is not optimal.
   Interestingly, there is a ...rst small wave of infection, that makes it look like the virus will
subside by day 100, followed by a second, much bigger wave. Recall that, in the benchmark


                                               22
calibrated model, all infection occurs outside the home since no one stays at home. With the
CARES Act, vulnerable decision makers stay at home initially where number of close contacts
is smaller, and only essential workers (vulnerables that must work outside) are exposed outside.
Hence the ...rst wave is relatively small.
   As that wave subsides, people start returning to work outside, responding to the fall in
the infection rate. These decisions generate a second infection wave. The rise in that wave
induce vulnerable decision makers to again increase their time at home. But then the ...nancial
incentives of the CARES Act expire. The consequence is that vulnerables go back to working
outside full time. This increases the infection rate, which then crests at about day 190. The
number of active cases also increase and peaks at about day 200.
   Hence the model generates a case of multiple waves not unlike what has been seen in the
US. To underscore this fact, Figure 6 displays the model predictions against US data on cases
and deaths. Aside from a time shift, which may reect that the initial seed in the US was
earlier than we are assuming, the dynamics predicted by the model is qualitatively similar to
the observed data. Similarly, Figure 7 compares the model predictions for time spent outside
the home against mobility data, measured by Apple'
                                                 s driving and walking directions. The data
shows that, after an initial drop in 50 percent in mobility, activities outside the home recovered
gradually and by August, outside activity was higher than at the beginning of the pandemic.
Here also our model implications are at least qualitatively consistent with the evidence.
   Figure 8 displays how the incentives embedded in the CARES Act a¤ect the trajectory of
the pandemic. The lower left hand panel displays the evolution of the ...nancial incentive to
work outside, given by u0 (wt )(wt   et ): The CARES Act reduced this incentive to virtually zero
for four months. As a consequence, the marginal value of outside work fell during that period,
as shown in the upper left panel. When the CARES incentive expire, however, the value of
outside work jumps up, prompting vulnerable decision makers to abruptly leave their homes.
This, in turn, caused an increase in infection rates, and a second, bigger wave of the pandemic.
   It bears emphasizing that the part of the CARES Act that matters for the evolution of the


                                                23
pandemic is only that which changes the relative rewards from working outside the home versus
staying home, given by the di¤erence wt      et in our model. In contrast, a policy of transfers to
all agents in the population would have essentially no impact on equilibrium dynamics, since it
would leave wt    et unchanged. So again, our analysis underscores that ...scal policy can have
an impact on the dynamics of a virus, but that impact is determined by the incentive e¤ects
embedded in the policy.



6     Application: Social Distancing

Social distancing and mandatory mask wearing are two policies that are used to limit the
transmission of the virus between people. In our model, social distancing might be captured
                                                                              m
by assuming a lower number of close contacts outside the home (lower              ). Mask usage, in
turn, can be modeled by a lower probability of transmission per contact with an asymptomatic
(lower ).
    In epidemiological models, these policies imply a lower and later peak of active cases and
infection rates due to a slower pace of transmission. Moreover, if the these policies are highly
e¤ective, it is possible that the arrival of a infectious virus never turns into an epidemic or
pandemic.
    In our model, however, the impact of this type of policies is ambiguous, due to their im-
pact on individual incentives. By reducing the probability of infection associated with outside
activities, social distancing and mask wearing have two opposite e¤ects on behavior. On one
hand, by directly reducing current infection risk outside the home, the policies induce agents
to spend more time outside. On the other hand, the policies also result in an expected future
path with lower probabilities of infection, which increases the future value of being vulnerable
relative to being hospitalized, thus raising the expected marginal cost of getting infected today
and reducing incentives to work outside.
    To illustrate, we analyze the e¤ect of social distancing policies in several alternative cases.



                                                24
The implications of mandatory masks are qualitatively not di¤erent from social distancing.
We start by solving the benchmark calibration (log utility) with the e¤ectiveness of social
distancing, given by the number of close contacts outside the home, is set at three levels: 5
                                                                      m
percent, 25 percent, and 50 percent of the benchmark value of             : The main outcomes are
displayed in Figure 9. In the benchmark calibration, social distancing is not su¢ cient to induce
people to reduce outside time, regardless of e¤ectiveness level. On the other hand, by lowering
 m
     , social distancing directly reduces the pace of transmission. The result is a more favorable
virus dynamics, with lower peaks and fewer deaths.
     While Figure 9 shows that social distancing does not induce people to reduce their time
outside, it does change the incentives that vulnerable decision makers face. This is illustrated
in Figure 10. The lower center and right panels of this ...gure show that greater e¤ectiveness
in social distancing implies a lower peak for current net infection risk and, at the same time, a
higher expected marginal cost of infection during the initial phase of the pandemic. These two
e¤ects go in opposite directions, but with the benchmark calibration, the ...rst one dominates
in every case.
     Intuitively, therefore, social distancing might induce decision makers to reduce time outside
if the expected marginal cost of infection were greater. To check this conjecture, we modify
the previous exercise by making the utility cost of death D three times larger than in the
benchmark. As discussed before, a greater D increases the incentive to stay home because it
reduces the value of being hospitalized.
     Figure 11 shows our ...ndings. In this "3D" scenario, people choose to stay more time at
home if social distancing e¤ectiveness is 25 percent. The result is intuitive. If social distancing
is less e¤ective, the incentives e¤ect is not strong enough to induce people to reduce outside
work time. If social distancing is very e¤ective, infection risk is driven to negligible levels.
Relative incentives are displayed in Figure 12.
     This analysis underscores that the decision of going outside or staying at home depends
on the "double relative" rather than on the absolute values of infection probabilities. It is


                                                25
worth noticing that, in the 3D scenario, individual decisionmaking ends up complementing
social distancing. That is, social distancing reduces the severity of the pandemic not only by
lowering transmission rates, but by inducing individuals to stay at home. In particular, with a
25 percent e¤ectiveness, accumulated deaths, which add up to 1% of the initial population in
the benchmark scenario, fall to 0.8% in the 3D scenario.
   That incentives and individual decisionmaking can complement social distancing depends,
however, on the speci...c scenario under analysis. In some cases, incentive e¤ects can o¤set
social distancing. To illustrate this possibility, we examine a case in which the cost of death
is ten times the benchmark. An implication is that, with no social distancing, vulnerables
choose to reduce time working outside. Moreover, we assume that the introduction of the social
distancing policy is unexpected by agents, and occurs at day 40 after the arrival of the virus.
   Figure 13 shows the implications for time working outside, active cases and accumulated
deaths. In this case, the implementation of social distancing induces agents to increase time
working outside. Moreover, the more e¤ective the policy, the greater is the increase of outside
activities.
   Notably, despite driving agents to spend more time at the market, social distancing policies
still manage to produce less severe epidemiological results. Active cases peaks and accumulated
deaths for the three e¢ ciency levels of social distancing are below those in the absence of social
distancing. Thus, in this calibration, agents do not increase their outside activities enough to
raise the transmission of the virus over the no policy state.
   Finally, it is worth mentioning that a basic SIR model would ignore that, after the imple-
mentation of a social distancing policy, agents reevaluate their behavior. By doing so, SIR-type
models would overestimate the e¤ect of such policy on epidemiological results. This is shown
in Figure 14. Given a social distancing policy, the peak of active cases under SIR-type as-
sumptions (dotted lines) would be lower, no matter how e¤ective the policy. This is, of course,
because in our model the e¤ect of social distancing is partly o¤set by a change in individual
behavior: people respond to the policy by spending more time outside, which limits the impact


                                                26
of the policy on the number of active cases (dashed lines). In fact, if social distancing has only
5 percent e¢ ciency, the e¤ect of the policy on equilibrium is minimal.



7     A Social Planning Problem

In any equilibrium of our model, vulnerable decision makers choose pt balancing relative costs
and bene...ts, including those related to the virus and contagion, which individual decision
makers take as given. On the other hand, contagion probabilities depend on the distribution of
people at home and outside, which is determined by pt . As a consequence, there are externality
e¤ects, and the equilibrium outcome may be socially suboptimal.
    To investigate this issue, we consider the case in which, at the beginning of time, the sequence
fpt g is chosen to maximize the expected welfare of the typical vulnerable agent (and, therefore,
of nearly all the agents in this economy). The problem can be written in recursive form. Let
Ut denote period t0 s social utility, so that:

                                                                                    X
                                                                                    H
                                                                                           (i)
         Ut = st [qu(wt ) + (1    q )u(pt wt + (1       pt )et )] + zt u(wt ) + [         xt ]u(et )   Jt D
                                                                                    i=1


                                                            (H )
where, for convenience, we have de...ned Jt = xt              1     as the number of deaths in period t: The
...rst term in the sum in the right hand side is the utility of the st vulnerables, which depends
                                                                 P
                                                                 H
                                                                     (i)
on pt . The other terms gather the utility of zt recovered and      xt hospitalized people, minus
                                                                           i=1
the cost of Jt deaths.
    The value function associated with the planning problem can now be written as V (st ; ht ; zt ; Jt ; xt )
Vt , and the Bellman can be written as


                                    Vt = M ax       t ;pt 2[0;1]   Ut + Vt+1


where we take as the period t choice variables the time allocation decision pt and the probability




                                                       27
of infection of a healthy vulnerable, denoted by                                  t   and given by


                                                                             m                                   n
                                                t   = (q + (1      q )pt )   t    + (1        q )(1       pt )   t                         (15)


together with 12, 13, and 14. Meanwhile, state variables evolve according to rewritten 2, 3, 4,
6, and 7 using 15.
      This way of writing the planning problem is helpful to sheds some light on the discrepan-
cies between equilibrium outcomes and social optima. In particular, one ...nds that the social
marginal value of pt is given by:


                                                                                                            m         n
                              st (1      q )[u0 (ct )(wt    et )         ht (vst+1            vht+1 )](     t         t)    t




where the term                 t   is given by

                                             @ m
                                               t                                  @Vt+1                              @Vt+1 @ht+1     m     n
   t   =       t [(q   + (1        q )pt )       ] + (1     q ) st       ht                     vst+1 +                          (   t     t)
                                             @pt                                  @st+1                              @ht+1 @ t

with       t   denoting the Lagrange multiplier associated with 15
      Comparing the preceding expressions against the corresponding expression for individual
decision makers (equation 10), we see that the term                                       t   captures the externalities involved in
the choice of pt : Individuals ignore that an increase in the time they spend outside, pt ; has a
contemporaneous impact on the probability of infection of healthy vulnerables,                                                  t:   The social
cost of that distortion is given by the ...rst term in the RHS, with the shadow cost of that
increase given by                   t:   The second term in the de...nition of                        t    expresses the dynamic aspect
of the externality. The current choice of pt has an impact on the evolution of the di¤erent
population groups, and in particular it a¤ects the number of healthy vulnerables, st+1 ht+1 :
      The discrepancies between the planning solution and the equilibrium outcome in the bench-
mark case are illustrated in Figure 15.12 The planning solution di¤ers from the equilibrium
 12
      For simplicity, we calibrate M s equal to M



                                                                             28
outcome (which, remember, is also the outcome of the SIR model) in substantial ways. For the
...rst forty days, the planner allows agents to work fully outside, as in the equilibrium model.
But then the planner sets pt to almost zero for about two weeks. After that period, which
resembles observed lockdowns, the planner gradually allows vulnerables to return outside. Full
return to outside work is not observed until after 260 days since the onset of the pandemic.
   Notably, the planning solution reduces outside activities only after 40 days have passed since
the outbreak. In terms of the epidemic, it does so after nearly ...ve percent of the population
has contracted the virus. More than the particular number, this result suggests that it is not
optimal to shutdown outside activity too early.
   Likewise, the planning solution underscores that, after an initial strict lockdown phase, a
rapid return to outside activity is not optimal. The reason is that the share of the population
that remains vulnerable is high and, thus, susceptible to another exponential outbreak of the
virus. A smooth return keeps the economy'
                                        s infection rate on a desired path.
   The epidemiological results of the planning solution imply a peak of about 30% of the
population in active cases, and a number of deaths of about one half of one percent of the
initial population. Hence the planning solution reduces outside activity to control the virus
and improve health results. On the other hand, the planner also accepts some health related
costs and deaths and avoids a full economic shutdown.
   In general, the planning outcome will not be a competitive equilibrium. This means that
a government may experience di¢ culties if it attempts to implement the planning solution,
for example by imposing lockdowns. In such a case, vulnerable decision makers would ...nd it
individually optimal to deviate from the planning solution. Such tensions seem to be present
in practice. In particular, for a sample of 120 countries, Levy-Yeyati and Sartorio (2020) ...nd
that lockdown compliance decreases over time, with a stronger trend in economies with higher
levels of labor precariousness, that is, economies where most jobs cannot be done from home
nor there is a strong safety net.
   Hence, in practice, the individual incentives to deviate from the planning solution will vary


                                               29
over time and across countries. This seems to be consistent with our model. For example, the
Levy-Yeyati and Sartorio concept of labor precariousness might correspond, in our model, to a
greater wedge between w and e, and a greater relative gain from outside work over staying at
home. Intuitively, this would make it more di¢ cult for the government to enforce a lockdown.
To be able to say more, however, we would need to extend the model to allow for imperfect
lockdown enforcement, which is best left for future research.



8       Pandemics and Animal Spirits

Any equilibrium of our model reects the decisions of individuals in response to the environment
they face, including the evolution of the pandemic. But such evolution, as we have seen, depends
on whether decision makers stay at home or work in the market. This interaction implies that
forward looking behavior and expectations can play a crucial role, and in fact they can lead
to multiplicity of equilibria. This is striking, especially when our analysis is compared with
that of SIR models, which are purely backward looking. This section discusses how multiple
equilibria can emerge, and presents examples. We also argue how policy intervention can help
eliminating inferior equilibria, acting as a coordination device.
    To identify conditions under which multiple equilibria are likely, suppose that, for a given
calibration, there is an equilibrium in which pt = 1 for all t: We will refer to that equilibrium
as being of the SIR-type since, as seen in subsection 4.2, it replicates the outcome of a naive
SIR model.
    For the given calibration, we can ask: is there a di¤erent equilibrium? If the answer is yes,
it must be that pt < 1 for at least one t: In other words, there must be at least one period in
which vulnerable decision makers reduce their time outside their homes, presumably because
of fear of infection. For concreteness, we will say that this equilibrium is of the precautionary
type.




                                               30
    Now, since the SIR-type equilibrium is assumed to exist, (10) implies that, for each t;


                               u0 (wt )(wt     et )          ^ t(^m
                                                             h               ^ n )(^
                                                                                   vst+1          v
                                                                                                  ^ht+1 )
                                                                  t           t




where we are using carets to identify endogenous variables in the SIR-type equilibrium (i.e.
^t = 1; all t). In words, this expression says that, in every period, the current utility net gain
p
of spending more time outside home is equal or greater than the expected marginal cost of
infection risk, even if the individual is already fully outside the home.
    Conversely, in a precautionary equilibrium, which we identify with tildes, for any t in which
~t < 1 it must be true that:
p


                               u0 (wt )(wt     et ) <        ~ t(~m
                                                             h               ~ n )(~
                                                                                   vst+1          v
                                                                                                  ~ht+1 )
                                                                  t           t




    If a precautionary equilibrium exists alongside the SIR-type equilibrium, let                                       denote the
...rst period t in which p
                         ~t < 1: Since we assuming a ...xed calibration, for every period below and
equal to      the population shares of epidemiological states will be the same in both equilibria.
                ~t ; s
More formally, fh    ~t ; x
                          ~t ; z    ~t g is equal to fh
                               ~t ; !                 ^t ; s
                                                           ^t ; x         ^t g for all t
                                                                     ^t ; !
                                                                ^t ; z                                       . This result includes
period      because shares of epidemiological states are determined by decisions in the previous
period. Combine this observation with the two previous inequalities in period t =                                       to obtain

                                                                         m
                          (~
                               m
                                   ~ n )(~
                                         vs   +1      ~h
                                                      v    +1 )   > (^            ^ n )(^
                                                                                        vs   +1      v
                                                                                                     ^h   +1 )




    To see what this condition implies, recall that, for a calibration with a constant sequence
of home rewards (et = e; all t), vht is a constant vh , independent of which equilibrium obtains.
                 ~ ; ^ n = ^ n ; while ^ m
              ^ =h
Also, because h                                               ~ m , since         m
                                                                                      is increasing in pt : All of these facts
                                                                t                 t

together imply that the preceding inequality can hold only if the value of remaining vulnerable




                                                                  31
is su¢ ciently greater in the precautionary equilibrium than in the SIR type equilibrium:


                                         v
                                         ~s   +1   >> v
                                                      ^s   +1




   This condition underscores that multiple equilibria can emerge, but only in the presence of
strategic complementarities that have a su¢ ciently strong impact on expectations. Suppose that
a SIR-type equilibrium coexists with a precautionary equilibrium, and consider the dilemma
faced by a vulnerable decision maker at t = : In the precautionary equilibrium, she knows
that p        ^t : This actually implies that the risk of infection outside the home is less in the
     ~t < 1 = p
                                                            m
precautionary equilibrium than in the SIR-type one (since ^         ~ m ). That the agent reduces
                                                                      t

her time working outside then reveals that, in her assessment, the expected value of remaining
in the vulnerable group in    + 1 is much larger in the precautionary equilibrium than in the
one of the SIR type.
   In turn, how much greater the precautionary equilibrium value of starting           + 1 in the
vulnerable group relative to the value in the SIR equilibrium depends on how much future
infection probabilities fall when agents spend less time outside their homes from       on, which
determine the expectation of ...nancial loss and death due to the virus.
   In sum, the interaction between the trajectory of infection and forward-looking decision
making results in the possibility of multiple equilibria. Strategic complementarities may exist,
but in our model they must be dynamic ones Expectations can therefore play a key role.
   To illustrate, we provide an example of multiple equilibria. We run the benchmark calibra-
tion, except that we increase the utility cost of death (D) ...vefold. Recall from subsection xx
that the benchmark calibration has a SIR-type equilibrium, whereas the scenario with 10 times
D has a precautionary-type equilibrium. In both cases, in our numerical work we have been
unable to ...nd other equilibria. In contrast, in the scenario with ...ve times D we have found
two equilibria, one SIR-type and the other precautionary-type.
   The di¤erent outcomes in the number of equilibria due to changes in D reinforce the ar-



                                                   32
gument that strategic complementarities occur through expectations. Moreover, it also signals
that multiple equilibria occur when the expected cost of infection risk, captured by vst+1 vht+1 ,
is neither too big nor too small. If too big, the SIR type equilibrium disappeards because it
is too costly to allot your whole time to market activities. If too small, the precautionary
equilibrium is not feasible because it is not optimal to sacri...ce market time.
   Figure 16 shows the simulation results for both equilibria. In this case,       is equal to 44;
also, market participation is full in the precautionary equilibrium after 88 days. Thus, the
precautionary equilibrium deviates from the SIR-type equilibrium for over a month. As a result,
the precautionary equilibrium reaches a steady state with about one third fewer accumulated
deaths than in the SIR-type equilibrium, and with about 20 percent of the population never
being infected.
   Notably, the infection rate of the economy (center panel, upper row in Figure 16) is the
same between equilibria up to day . However, at this point, by reducing their time at the
market, the infection rate in the precautionary equilibrium stagnates and smoothly falls to zero
by day 120.
   The path of the economy'
                          s infection rate underscores that decision makers are forward look-
ing. Up to day , there is no di¤erence in the evolution of the pandemic between equilibria. At
that point, however, paths diverge, reecting di¤erences in expectations. In the precautionary
equilibrium, decision makers expect relatively low infection rates in the future, so they ...nd
optimal to reduce their market activities. In contrast, in the SIR-type equilibrium, expecta-
tions are that people will not reduce their time at the markets, and, thus, infection rates will
relatively high in the future. At this point, it is not optimal for a decision maker to reduce
their market time since the expected marginal cost of infection risk is low relative to the current
market gain. In this sense, emergence of the SIR-type equilibrium is a coordination failure.
   Figure 17 examines the incentives of a vulnerable decision maker in both equilibria. The
lower row of the ...gure displays the three parts of the derivative of the agent'
                                                                                s maximand.
Note that, at day    (...rst dotted vertical line), both the net current gain (left panel) and the


                                                33
net infection risk (center panel) are practically the same between equilibria. Thus, whether
decision makers decide to reduce their time at the market can be entirely explained by di¤erent
expectations (right panel). That di¤erence reects that the expected path of infection rates is
lower in the precautionary equilibrium than in the SIR-type equilibrium.
   The possibility of multiple equilibria underscores how forward looking behavior and di¤erent
expectations can potentially have a dramatic impact on the dynamics of a pandemic. This result
is not just a novelty of the model, but it also has important consequences for policy.
   To be concrete, suppose that a SIR-type equilibrium coexists with a precautionary equilib-
rium in which time outside the home is denoted by p
                                                  ~t : Then a lockdown policy of restricting
non-essential work outside the home to be no more than p
                                                       ~t would eliminate the SIR-type equi-
librium, while leaving the precautionary equilibrium intact (this is clearly the case, since the
restriction would not be binding for vulnerable decision makers in the precautionary equilib-
rium). Notably, such a lockdown policy would not only eliminate the less desirable equilibrium,
but also would not create incentives for individuals to deviate from p
                                                                     ~t : The lockdown would
act as a coordination device, and would not su¤er from the same implementation challenges
a¤ecting the optimal planning solution, as mentioned at the end of the previous section.
   Notably, the same outcome can be implemented not with a lockdown but with economic
incentives. One such policy would be to require nonessential workers to pay a marginal tax
at rate (wt   et ) on earnings from time working outside over and above p
                                                                        ~t : Intuitively, such a
tax would eliminate the incentives for vulnerable decision makers to spend more than p
                                                                                     ~t time
outside their homes. Clearly, the SIR-type equilibrium would disappear, and the precautionary
equilibrium would remain ­ in fact, in the precautionary equilibrium, no one would pay the
tax.
   We close this section by noting that, even if policy can eliminate the bad SIR-type equi-
librium, the surviving precautionary would still be inferior to the social planning outcome of
the previous section. In this sense, the ability of a government to use policy as a coordination
device is no substitute for the institutional strength needed to implement the social optimum.


                                              34
9        Final Remarks

In this paper we have explored a very simple idea: how fast and widely a virus spreads across
individuals depends on how they behave in response to the health costs of contagion, but also
to economic and ...nancial incentives. This idea is simple but quite powerful. It has implications
for the dynamics of infection, the evolution of economic activity during a pandemic, the role of
forward-looking behavior and expectations and, perhaps most importantly, the scope for public
health directives and economic policy to inuence both lives and livelihoods during a pandemic.
       The model here can be extended in multiple interesting directions. We comment on the
ones that appear most interesting or important to us.
       Today the rollout of vaccines is the best hope to put an end to the pandemic. Indeed,
the quick development of vaccines has been a major triumphs for science. Yet it is plausible
(at least, after having read this paper) that the expectation of vaccine development may have
played a role in extending the duration of the Covid-19 episode.
       Imagine a situation in which a vaccine can appear in each period with some given prob-
ability. Once the vaccine appears, a fraction of the vulnerable population in each remaining
period receives a jab and it becomes immune, joining for all practical purposes the recovered
population. In our model, vaccine development and distribution e¤orts could a¤ect individual
incentives to work outside or stay at home, and may generate e¤ects in opposite directions.
For instance, the imminent arrival of a vaccine could lower contagion probabilities and induce
more risk-taking behavior. But, at the same time, it could prompt expectations of a vigorous
economic recovery, increasing the value of remaining healthy and reducing risk-taking behavior.
We believe that this is a promising question for future research.13
       We have followed convention in economics and assumed that agents have perfect foresight.
But that assumption, never innocuous, becomes even more questionable during a pandemic,
when individuals and households are subjected to new shocks and experiences for which there is
  13
    The importance of this issue can be illustrated by the current experience in Chile, whose vaccination drive
has been among the most successful in the world, in spite of which infection rates have accelerated. Observers
agree the explanation is that, reassured by the vaccination success, Chileans returned to outside activities.


                                                      35
little precedent and limited accumulated knowledge. At the beginning of the Covid-19 episode
there was considerable uncertainty about the basic parameters regarding virus contagion, for
example, and much debate on the e¤ectiveness of masks and other prophylactic devices. One
might then ask how much our analysis might change if one departs from the perfect foresight
assumption and allows for a learning process to take place.
   In building the model of this paper we have made every e¤ort to rely on ...rst principles.
One payo¤ is that the model can be modi...ed in straightforward ways to tackle many important
issues. A possible extension could examine the implications of heterogeneity over the wt        et
wedge. This may capture inequalities in the ability of di¤erent people to work from home.
Alternatively, a distribution over wt might capture income inequality. The model might then
provide some lessons on how inequalities in income, wealth, or labor market opportunities a¤ect
the severity of a pandemic. In that way, the model would not only give insights about what
policies are most e¤ective to control a pandemic once it has started, but also could help identify
the socio-economic characteristics and institutions that left countries better or worse prepared
to face the Covid 19 pandemic ­and which will be highly relevant when the next threatening
virus comes along.



References

 [1] Acemoglu, D., Chernozhukov, V., Werning, I., & Whinston, M. D. (2020). A multi-risk
    SIR model with optimally targeted lockdown (No. w27102). National Bureau of Economic
    Research.

 [2] Alvarez, F. E., Argente, D., & Lippi, F. (2020). A simple planning problem for covid-19
    lockdown (No. w26981). National Bureau of Economic Research.

 [3] Baldwin, R. and B. Weder di Mauro, editors, Economics in the Time of COVID-19, CEPR
    Press, 2020.



                                               36
 [4] Chang, R., & Velasco, A. (2020). Economic policy incentives to preserve lives and liveli-
    hoods NBER Working Paper 27020

 [5] Chen, F. (2012), A Mathematical Analysis of Public Avoidance Behavior During Epidemics
    Using Game Theory, Journal of Theoretical Biology, 302, 18-28.

 [6] Eichenbaum, M. S., Rebelo, S., & Trabandt, M. (2020). The macroeconomics of epidemics.
    NBER Working Paper 26882

 [7] Faria e Castro, M., "Fiscal Policy During a Pandemic". Working Paper 2020-006, Federal
    Reserve Bank of Saint Louis, March 2020.

 [8] Fornaro, L. and M. Wolf, "Covid-19 Coronavirus and Macroeconomic Policy". Technical
    Report, CEPR, March 2020.

 [9] Ganong, P., Noel, P. J., & Vavra, J. S. (2020). US Unemployment Insurance Replacement
    Rates During the Pandemic (No. w27216). National Bureau of Economic Research.

[10] He, D., Zhao, S., Lin, Q., Zhuang, Z., Cao, P., Wang, M. H., & Yang, L. (2020). The
    relative transmissibility of asymptomatic cases among close contacts. International Journal
    of Infectious Diseases.

[11] Jones, C., T. Philippon and V. Venkateswaran, "Optimal Mitigation Policies in a Pan-
    demic: Social Distancing and Working from Home". Manuscript, NYU, April 6, 2020.

[12] Jorda, O., S. Singh, and A. Taylor, "Longer Run Economic Consequences of Pandemics".
    Working paper 2020-09, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 2020.

[13] Kermack, W. O. and McKendrick, A. G. "A Contribution to the Mathematical Theory of
    Epidemics". Proceedings of the Royal Society A. 115 (772), 1927.

[14] Kniesner, T. J., & Viscusi, W. K. (2019). The value of a statistical life. Forthcoming,
    Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance, 19-15.


                                             37
[15] Loayza, N. and S. Pennings, "Macroeconomic Policy in the Time of COVID-19: A Primer
    for Developing Countries". Research and Policy Briefs Number 28, World Bank Malaysia
    Hub, March 2020.

[16] Mossong J, Hens N, Jit M, Beutels P, Auranen K, Mikolajczyk R, et al. (2008) Social
    Contacts and Mixing Patterns Relevant to the Spread of Infectious Diseases. PLoS Med
    5(3): e74. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0050074

[17] Verity, R., Okell, L. C., Dorigatti, I., Winskill, P., Whittaker, C., Imai, N., ... & Dighe, A.
    (2020). Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis. The
    Lancet infectious diseases.

[18] Weiss, H. H. (2013). "The SIR model and the foundations of public health". Materials
    Matematics, 0001-17 Volum 2013, treball no. 3, 17 pp. ISSN: 1887-1097

[19] Yeyati, E. L., & Sartorio, L. (2020). Take me out: De facto limits on strict lockdowns in
    developing countries. Covid Economics, 59.




                                                38
Figure 1: Model (log utility) versus SIR




   Figure 2: Model ( = 10) vs SIR




                  39
Figure 3: Incentives for Decision Making ( = 10)




         Figure 4: Bigger Fear of Death



                      40
    Figure 5: CARES and Multiple Waves




Figure 6: Cases and Deaths: Model and US data


                     41
Figure 7: CARES and Mobility: Model and US Data




      Figure 8: Incentives in the CARES Act



                       42
        Figure 9: Social Distancing




Figure 10: Incentives and Social Distancing




                    43
Figure 11: Social Distancing With Cost of Death = 3D




Figure 12: Incentives and Social Distancing (3D case)




                         44
Figure 13: Social Distancing (cost of death = 10D)




       Figure 14: Social Distancing vs SIR




                       45
 Figure 15: Equilibrium vs Socially Optimal Plan




Figure 16: Multiple Equilbria: Pandemic Dynamics




                       46
Figure 17: Multiple Equilibria: Individual Incentives




                         47
