                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               EFFECTS OF SCHOOL SHOOTINGS ON RISKY BEHAVIOR,
                         HEALTH AND HUMAN CAPITAL

                                         Partha Deb
                                      Anjelica Gangaram

                                      Working Paper 28634
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28634


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




We thank Michael Grossman, Paige Nong, and Hannes Schwandt for their helpful comments, and
Phillip Levine, Sara Markowitz, Edward C. Norton, and Susan T. Parker for substantive
suggestions, that improved the quality of this paper. The authors have no external funding or
relevant financial relationships to disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Partha Deb and Anjelica Gangaram. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of School Shootings on Risky Behavior, Health and Human Capital
Partha Deb and Anjelica Gangaram
NBER Working Paper No. 28634
April 2021
JEL No. I12,I18,I21,J21

                                         ABSTRACT

In this paper, we examine the impact of school shootings on the human health and capital
outcomes of middle and high school student survivors as adults in their twenties and early
thirties. Our data on school shooting events is from a recent, comprehensive database of school
shootings compiled by the Center for Homeland Defense and Security. The analytic dataset
contains incidents from 1994-2005 in conjunction with Behavioral Risk Factors Surveillance
System survey data from 2003-2012 on respondents 23 to 32 years of age. We find substantial
evidence that, relative to their unexposed peers, school shooting survivors experience declines in
health and well-being, engage in more risky behaviors, and have worse education and labor
market outcomes. The effects among those exposed in the more recent past, 6-12 years prior to
the survey, are consistent with those of the full sample. The significance of effects dissipates
among those exposed earlier, 13-18 years prior to the survey.


Partha Deb
Hunter College
Department of Economics
695 Park Avenue
Room 1524 West
New York, NY 10065
and NBER
partha.deb@hunter.cuny.edu

Anjelica Gangaram
University of Michigan
1415 Washington Heights
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
agangara@umich.edu
1        Introduction
"Toxic stress results from intense adverse experiences that may be sustained over
a long period of time--weeks, months or even years" (Middlebrooks and Audage,
2008). Arguably, school shootings are "intense adverse experiences" and the stress
they create may have long lasting effects. Therefore, the health and human capital
outcomes among those exposed to school shootings may plausibly be worse. Gaudiano
(2019) reported that federal aid applications made by school districts after shooting
events describe significant deteriorations in academic performance, mental health and
substance abuse among students in those districts. According to Fetters (2019) "death
by suicide of someone connected to a school shooting is, unfortunately, a familiar story
line."
    The peer reviewed literature on the effect of school shootings on student survivors
echoes the findings of news reports. Beland and Kim (2016) found that ninth grade
enrollment decreases in schools where a shooting occurred, while continuing students
scored lower on math and English standardized tests. The standardized test scores
are lower for continuing students up to three years after a school shooting; the authors
interpreted this finding as evidence that school shooting survivors are subjected to
"medium-term trauma" (Beland and Kim, 2016). Levine and McKnight (2020a)
showed that school shootings, in addition to negatively affecting test scores, increase
chronic absenteeism, and lead to a subsequent increases in suicides and accidental
deaths, with boys being more affected by school shootings than girls. The authors
also found that high fatality school shootings have significant negative effects on the
surviving students, and that shootings with no or a low number of fatalities may also
produce negative effects (Levine and McKnight, 2020a).
    Complementary work by Cabral et al. (2020) uses the universe of public school
shootings in Texas and shows that exposed students have higher rates of absence
and higher rates of chronic absenteeism relative to unexposed students for two years
following a shooting. The exposed students are also more likely to repeat a grade

                                           1
within the same time period. The authors also found that exposure to a school
shooting results in negative educational and employment outcomes. Exposed students
are less likely to graduate from high school and less likely to enroll in and complete
college; they also have decreased employment and earnings at 24-26 years of age.
Mass shootings, of which school shootings are a subset of, also negatively affect the
economic outcomes in the areas in which they occur. Forthcoming work shows that
mass shootings negatively affects employment, earnings, and housing prices at the
county level (Brodeur and Yousaf, 2020).
   A recent working paper by Rossin-Slater et al. (2019) examines the impact of fatal
school shootings on youth antidepressant use for two subsequent years; the authors
compared the number of antidepressant prescriptions written by providers practicing
within five miles of an impacted school with those written by providers in reference
areas ten to fifteen miles away. They found, within this relatively short time frame,
that the number of monthly antidepressant prescriptions written for individuals under
the age of twenty is 21.3 percent higher within five miles of an impacted school relative
to the reference areas and that fatal school shootings have no effect on antidepressant
use among adults.
   More broadly, in a review of the clinical psychology literature, Orcutt et al. (2014)
concluded that "the psychological consequences of directly experiencing or witnessing
a mass shooting are often serious." Individuals subject to such events are at a higher
risk for a variety of consequences of distress. The health of adults and children is
negatively affected by stressful, adverse events (Deb et al., 2011; Flaherty et al., 2013;
Dursun, 2019; Soni and Tekin, 2020). Adults who engage in unhealthy behaviors to
a problematic degree are more likely to increase their engagement in these behaviors
after being laid off (Deb et al., 2011). Soni and Tekin (2020) find that the negative
effects of mass shootings spill over into the communities in which they occur and
subsequently result in decreases in community wellbeing and emotional health, with
greater reductions among parents with children under the age of 18. However, the


                                            2
negative impact of an adverse event on health is more pronounced in children. In-
utero exposure to mass shootings increases the occurrence of very low birth weight
and very premature births (Dursun, 2019). Additionally, childhood adversity, such
as mental or physical abuse, or witnessing the abuse of a caregiver, begins to impact
health outcomes by early adolescence (Flaherty et al., 2013). Similarly, violence can
also attribute to an "underlying risk profile" in children that remains dormant until
adulthood and may result in the early onset of chronic health conditions (Taylor,
2010).
   The Washington Post reports that 228,000 students (as of May 8, 2019) have lived
through a school shooting since the 1999 shooting at Columbine High School (Cox
et al., 2019). However, the effects are likely to extend beyond those directly affected.
"Much of the cost is not directly linked to actual victims; it is the anticipation of
victimization that engenders widespread anxiety, disinvestment in impacted commu-
nities, and costly efforts to avoid and mitigate attacks[;] ... shootings in schools ...
are far more important than they appear in victimization statistics" (Cook, 2020).
Orcutt et al. (2014) conclude that, "although higher levels of exposure are associated
with greater distress, the extant research suggests that even low-level exposure results
in widespread significant distress after a shooting." Low level exposure is typically
experienced by children in nearby schools, plausibly throughout the school district
of the directly affected school. Gaudiano (2019) reports that grant applications de-
scribe how the impacts of the shootings spread through school districts. "Across the
Broward County School district, where Parkland is located, incidents of drug use or
possession grew from 511 incidents the previous year to 637 that school year. "Other
major offenses" grew from 317 to 367. Physical attacks grew from 34 the previous
year to 128. Threats and intimidation grew to 368 incidents compared to 337 the
previous year and tobacco offenses to 439 from 127." (Gaudiano, 2019)
   In this paper, we examine the effects of school shootings on a comprehensive
set of health, health-related behaviors and human capital outcomes of middle and


                                           3
high school student survivors as adults in their twenties and early thirties in the
contiguous United States. Taking a population perspective in an event study design,
we find substantial evidence of declines in health and well-being, worse health-related
behaviors and worse education and labor market outcomes. Our work complements
Rossin-Slater et al. (2019); Cabral et al. (2020); Levine and McKnight (2020b). Each
of those studies examine proximate effects of school shootings. In contrast, we study a
comprehensive set of measures of longer term impacts, 6-18 years after school shooting
incidents, that have not been examined in the literature.
   Our data on school shooting events is from a recent, comprehensive database of
school shootings, the K-12 School Shooting Database, compiled by the Center for
Homeland Defense and Security (CHDS) at the Naval Postgraduate School. In the
documentation of the research methodology, Riedman and O'Neill (2020) wrote that
the data collection attempted to include "[each and every instance] a gun is bran-
dished, is fired, or a bullet hits on school property for any reason, regardless of the
number of victims (including zero), time, day of week, or reason [e.g. planned attack,
accidental, domestic violence, gang-related, officer involved shooting]". The incidents
in the school shootings dataset span the period from 1970 to 2018 and through 2019
up to the date of publication. Work by Levine and McKnight (2020b) using the
same school shooting database examines the effect of shootings that "occurred dur-
ing school hours on a school day and resulted in [at least one] death"; the authors
chose to examine these shootings out of concerns about reporting bias believing that
school shooting reporting "patterns may not be an accurate reflection of experience."
Levine and McKnight (2020b) analyzed their chosen subset of shootings on the basis
of shooting type. Their results demonstrate the different school shooting types affect
different student populations. Cai and Patel (2019) reported on a number of charac-
teristics of these shooting incidents. The key indicators in the dataset for our analysis
are the year of the shooting, the type and location of the school and the number of
casualties (injured and killed) in that incident. We use incidents from 1994 to 2005


                                           4
occurring in middle and high schools in most of our analyses.
   We use the 2003-2012 years of the Behavioral Risk Factors Surveillance System
(BRFSS) surveys as the source for health, human capital and demographic charac-
teristics at the individual-level (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019).
We restrict the sample to individuals 23 to 32 years of age. An individual is defined
as being exposed to a school shooting incident if they live in a county where a school
shooting occurred and that individual was between 11 and 17 years old during the
year of the shooting. All other 23 to 32 old BRFSS respondents living in that county
are defined as unexposed. In addition, all 23 to 32 old BRFSS respondents who live
in counties that did not face school shootings are defined as unexposed. Note that
the matching process assumes that the survey respondent lived in the county of the
shooting at the time of the shooting to the survey date, and no respondent moved
to the county after the shooting date. These are prima facie sources of measure-
ment error, and a limitation of our study which we describe in detail below. The
treatment variable takes the value of zero if the individual was not exposed and is
equal to the number of casualties (injured or killed) in that incident if the individual
is exposed to a shooting incident. We examine the effects of exposure to a school
shooting on a number of health, health-related behaviors, human capital and labor
market outcomes.
   We find substantial evidence of declines in health and well-being, worse health-
related behaviors and worse education and labor market outcomes. The results re-
main qualitatively unchanged when plausible, alternative definitions of exposure and
intensity of incidents are considered. We find that the effects are stronger among
individuals for whom 6-12 years have elapsed since the school shooting. Many effects
appear to dissipate among individuals for whom 13-18 years have elapsed since the
shooting. Unfortunately, for reasons addressed elsewhere in the literature e.g., Mason
and Fienberg (1985); Heckman and Robb (1985), we cannot cleanly identify differ-
ences between age effects and elapsed time effects. Younger exposed individuals are


                                           5
also more likely to have been exposed more recently. Therefore, we cannot definitively
say whether our findings are due to age effects or elapsed time effects. Measurement
errors in assignment to treatment are also likely to be greater among the sample with
longer durations from the shooting incidents.
   Our results are likely to be lower bounds of the true effects. Note that ours is
an intent-to-treat study design. Because we cannot identify individuals who were
actually at the schools where and when the shootings occurred, there is considerable
measurement error in assignment to treatment. First, we are only able to match
BRFSS respondents to the shooting incidents by county. The median county in the US
has four high schools, with larger urban counties having substantially more schools.
To the extent that individuals who went to other schools in the same county may not
have been affected by a shooting at a different school, the measurement error in our
treatment variable leads to estimated effects that are biased toward zero. However,
to the extent that the impacts of school shootings are felt by children throughout
the affected school districts or county, as the popular press suggests, assuming that
all children in the county were exposed may be a reasonable approximation to true
assignment. Second, BRFSS provides no indication of whether the person moved
into the current county of residence recently or whether they have lived there all their
lives. In other words, we cannot identify in- or out-migration in the data. If one of the
consequences of being exposed to a school shooting is for families to move away from
that county, then the estimated effects would be biased toward zero. However, if truly
exposed families (whose high-school age children attend schools in which shootings
occur) are less likely to move as a consequence of exposure relative to their neighbors
whose high-school age children attend schools that did not experience the shooting,
then the estimated effects would be biased away from zero. It is a possibility we
cannot rule out. But, given the low rates of migration during the time period under
consideration (Frey, 2009; DeWaard et al., 2018), along with the small fractions of
exposed relative to unexposed individuals within counties, it seems unlikely that either


                                           6
migration bias would be large.
    We estimate effects using a number of alternative specifications to check the sensi-
tivity of our primary findings to issues of measurement of exposure, the composition
of counties in our analysis, the time period of data we chose to study, and others.
The results are qualitatively robust to each of the alternatives we considered.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we describe
the CHDS K-12 School Shooting Database, the Behavioral Risk Factors Surveillance
System and the characteristics of our sample. Next, in section 3, we describe the
regression specifications used in this study. Results of the main and alternate speci-
fications are described in section 4 following which we conclude.


2     Data
2.1    Datasets

We use the K-12 School Shooting Database (K12SSD) to measure school shooting
events (Riedman and O'Neill, 2020). This dataset, created by the Naval Postgraduate
School's Center for Homeland Defense and Security, is intended to document "[each
and every instance] a gun is brandished, is fired, or a bullet hits school property for any
reason, regardless of the number of victims (including zero), time, day of the week,
or reason [e.g. planned attack, accidental, domestic violence, gang-related, officer
involved shooting]" (Riedman and O'Neill, 2020). The database includes shootings
that range from events with no casualties (injuries or death) to mass shootings with
large numbers of casualties. It documents over 1,400 shootings from 1970 to mid-2019
when we retrieved the database.
    Our analysis considers only school shootings in the contiguous United States (the
48 adjoining U.S. states plus the District of Columbia). We only consider incidents
when the location is known to be "inside the school building" or "outside on school
property". We do not consider shooting events when the type of school is "unknown",
"other" or if the school is an elementary school. In most analyses, we eliminate shoot-

                                            7
ing incidents in which there were no casualties (injured or killed victims). Following
arguments by Levine and McKnight (2020b), who demonstrate the different school
shooting types affect different student populations, we estimate models using data
on exposure limited to shootings that occurred only during school activities and also
shootings that resulted in at least one death. We also expand the definition of expo-
sure to include shooting incidents with no casualties.
   We use data on school shootings from 1994 through 2005. The K12SSD documents
238 incidents with one or more casualties. Of these, 19 schools have 2 incidents in
the same year and 4 schools have 3 incidents in the same year. When more than one
incident occurs in the same school in a year, we sum up the number of casualties
and treat those incidents as one event. Figure 1 shows the time series properties of
school shootings. The top panel displays the number of incidents per year which has
a u-shape, rising at both ends of the analysis period. The bottom panel displays the
total number of casualties per year. In some years, both incidents and casualties are
high, but in other years casualties are high even when the number of incidents is low.
Figure 2 shows the geographic dispersion of these school shootings. No region of the
country is spared such events; 103 counties experienced 1 shooting event, 24 counties
experienced 2-3 events and 13 counties experienced 4 or more events.
   We use data from the 2003 to 2012 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System
(BRFSS) surveys to measure health, health-related behaviors, human capital and
labor market outomes of individuals 23-32 years old. The BRFSS is a nationwide
telephone survey that collects data about US residents' self-perceived health status,
health-related behaviors and chronic health conditions. It also includes measures of
education, labor market status and income. Sponsored by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) and supported by a number of federal and state
government agencies, the BRFSS currently collects data in all 50 states, the District
of Columbia, and three US territories (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2019). According to D. Flegel, a technical writer working on behalf of the CDC's


                                          8
public inquiry system, through 2005, the county code is set to missing if there were
less than 50 respondents for a county, (personal communication, February 3, 2021).
Subsequently, the county code is set to missing if there are fewer than 50 respondents
in that county or if the population of the county is less than 10,000 adults (D. Flegel,
personal communication, February 3, 2021). Consequently our primary samples have
data on individuals living in 1402 counties in the contiguous US. In addition, note
that BRFSS stopped reporting county identifiers after 2012.
   We merge these data with the K12SSD using the county and year of school shoot-
ing incidents, that occur inside the school building or outside on school property, as
identifiers. One county with a school shooting event is not identifiable in the BRFSS
data. In addition, 757 counties without shootings are not identifiable in the BRFSS
data. Figure 2 shows their locations.

2.2    Exposure

A BRFSS respondent is defined as being exposed to a school shooting incident if
that respondent lives in a county where a school shooting occurred and if they were
between 11 and 17 years old in the year of the shooting. Individuals in our sample
who lived in counties with a school shooting but who were not 11-17 years old during
the shooting are defined as being unexposed. In addition, all other 23 to 32 old
BRFSS respondents who live in counties without school shootings are defined as
unexposed. Note that we treat 18 year old individuals as unexposed because we
cannot be sure of their schooling status. Figure 3 shows the range of ages that can
be exposed to shootings that occurred between 1994 and 2005 in each year of the
BRFSS data. For example, individuals ages 25-31 in 2012 could have been exposed
to a shooting in 1998. In 2012, individuals 23-24 and 32 years old could not have
been exposed to a 1998 shooting. Figure 3 also shows ranges of possibly exposed ages
for shootings that occurred in 1994, the earliest shooting year, and 2005, the latest
shooting year. The latest shooting year only contributes exposed individuals in 2011


                                           9
and 2012. The earliest shooting year, 1994, contributes 23-26 year old individuals
exposed to shootings in 2003 through 29-32 year old individuals exposed in 2012.
   In our primary analysis, we define the treatment variable as taking the value of
zero if the individual was not exposed to a school shooting inside the school building
or outside on school property and as taking the value equal to the number of casualties
(injured or killed) in the shooting incident inside the school building or outside on
school property that the individual was exposed to. Table 1 shows that 8.2% of our
sample was exposed to a school shooting. The median number of casualties among
the exposed is 1, while the 95th percentile value is 5. In secondary analyses, we define
the treatment variable using events that occurred only during school activities (during
school days or extra-curricular events) and separately using only those events that
resulted in at least one death. We also expand the definition of exposure to include
shooting incidents with no casualties.

2.3    Covariates

Our primary sample consists of 197,426 women and 122,519 men between 23 and 32
years old (see table 1). We conduct our analysis separately for men and women. The
median age in the primary sample is 28.
   Given our choice of ages of BRFSS respondents, the ages at which they were
at risk of exposure, 6 to 18 years would have elapsed since the shooting up to the
year of the survey. In the primary sample, among those exposed, the median time
elapsed from shooting is 12 years. In order to differentiate between individuals who
may have shorter time elapsed from the date of the shooting as compared to those
with longer elapsed times, we also estimate the models after restricting our sample
to those exposed 6-12 years ago, and those exposed between 13-18 years ago. In the
shorter elapsed time sample, the median time elapsed since shooting in this sample is
10 years; the median age is 28 years. In the longer elapsed time sample, the median
cohort time elapsed is 15 years and the median age is 29 years.


                                          10
   Among respondents not exposed to school shootings, 12% of women and 7% of
men identify as Black (see table 2). In contrast, among those exposed to a school
shooting, about 24% of women and 15% of men identify as Black. Table 2 also shows
that women and men in other minority groups are also overrepresented in the exposed
group relative to the unexposed.

2.4    Outcomes

We examine the effects of exposure to school shootings on four measures of risky
behavior, four measures of health status and three human capital outcomes. Table 3
lists all the measures and presents summary statistics.
   We examine cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption, seatbelt use and physical
exercise as measures of risky behaviors. We examine cigarette smoking using a binary
indicator ever smoked for whether a person smoked at least 100 cigarettes in their
lifetime. We then examine current smoking status among those who ever smoked
using a multinomial variable that takes 3 values: quit, smokes daily and smokes
occasionally. We use counts of the number of drinking days, the maximum number
of drinks on one occasion and the number of days  5 drinks to measure alcohol
consumption. Seatbelt use is measured as a multinomial variable that takes integer
values corresponding to always wears a seatbelt, wears a seatbelt nearly always and
wears a seatbelt sometimes, seldom or never. We use a binary indicator for no physical
exercise and a count of number of days without enough rest.
   We examine a measure of lack of adequate rest, BMI categories, self reported
health and mental health status as measures of health. A count of days with not
enough rest is used to measure rest. We use a multinomial variable with normal
weight, underweight, overweight and obese as the categories of BMI. Self reported
health status is measured as a multinomial variable defined by excellent or very good
health, good health and fair or poor health. Mental health is measured as a count of
the number of not good mental health days.


                                         11
    Education status is measured as a multinomial variable with levels: high school
graduate, not a high school graduate, attended technical school or college and graduated
technical school or college. Income is measured in 8 intervals with lower limits set at
$0, $10,000, $15,000, $20,000, $25,000, $35,000, $50,000 and $75,000. For employment
status, we use a binary indicator for working in contrast to not working for the sample
of men. However, in preliminary analysis on the sample of women, we observed
differences between women who were not employed because they were homemakers
and women who reported other reasons for not working. Therefore, we chose to model
employment status for the sample of women using a multinomial variable with three
categories: employed, homemaker and not working.


3       Econometric specification
3.1     Model

We use an econometric specification that can be described as a two-way fixed effects
specification, which is also sometimes referred to as an event study analysis.
    Denote individuals by i = 1, 2, ..., N , counties in the US by j = 1, 2, ..., J and
years of the survey in the study by t = 1, 2, ..., T . Denote the number of casualties
due to exposure to a school shooting for individual i in county j at time t by cijt .
Let xijt denote age and race indicators. Let dict denote the duration from the school
shooting to the year of the survey for an exposed individual. Duration is set to zero
for unexposed individual.
    For each outcome, we estimate a regression model with the following functional
form:
                    E(yijt ) = f (cijt c + xijt x + d dijt + j + t )                (1)

where j denotes county fixed effects and t denotes year fixed effects. Note that
we enter duration as a linear, continuous variable to avoid the identification issues
introduced if indicators for age and year and duration are all entered together (Mason
and Fienberg, 1985; Heckman and Robb, 1985).

                                          12
   In the cases where the outcome, yijt is binary, we estimate a logistic regression
with equation 1 guiding covariates. In the cases where the outcome is multinomial,
we estimate a multinomial logit regression. When the outcome is measured as a count
variable, we estimate Poisson regressions with covariates specified according to equa-
tion 1. Finally, for income, which is reported as an interval measure in the BRFSS, we
estimate an interval regression for the intervals of the logarithm of income. Income
is substantially skewed while the distribution of the log of income is considerably
symmetric.
   Note that the regressions all include county and year fixed effects, so the coeffi-
cient on the exposure variable, cijt , is identified using two sources of variation, akin to
a difference-in-difference design. One source of variation is the comparison of respon-
dents living in a county who were exposed to a shooting (determined by the difference
between their current age and the date of the shooting) and respondents in the same
county who were not exposed to a shooting. The second source of variation is the
comparison between the outcomes of respondents who live in counties without shoot-
ings with exposure potential (based on their age) compared to individuals without
exposure potential serves to partial out effects of unobserved confounders.
   The current literature suggests that school shootings affect boys and girls differ-
ently (Levine and McKnight, 2020a). Therefore, we estimate our model for male and
female survivors separately. For each regression, we report exponentiated coefficients
on exposure, exp(c ). These have the virtue of being interpretable as percentage
changes in the outcome across all measure types. Standard errors of coefficients are
estimated using the sandwich formula that adjusts for clustering of regression errors
at the state level. We report p-values of the null hypothesis that the exponenti-
ated coefficient equals 1 along with 95% confidence intervals in the figures and tables
described below.
   As described above, we define exposure using incidents that occurred inside the
school building or outside on school property and that resulted in at least one casualty


                                            13
(injured or killed). We also define exposure using events that occurred only during
school days or extra-curricular events, and separately using only those incidents that
resulted in at least one death.

3.2    Specification checks

We estimate effects using a number of alternative specifications to check to the sensi-
tivity of our primary findings. First, we conduct two analyses that change the period
of shooting incidents used in the analysis. Relative to the main sample, we expand
the period to be from 1993 - 2006 and we contract the period to be from 1995 - 2004.
Second, we address a concern arising from the fact that individuals who were exposed
to shootings are, on average, younger and more likely to be of minority race and/or
Hispanic ethnicity. We balance the exposed and unexposed samples on these charac-
teristics, by calculating sampling weights for the unexposed sample using an entropy
balancing technique developed by Hainmueller (2012). Third, we eliminate counties
that had more than 4 shootings out of concern for the possibility that counties with
multiple shootings may be different in ways not accountable by use of fixed effects.
Fourth, we conduct two analyses to address data limitations. Because we can only
assign a shooting incident to a county, and because most counties have more than
one high school, we cannot be sure that an individual designated as being exposed
was actually exposed. Therefore, in one specification check, we drop counties with
more than 20 schools. Such counties, which comprise about 12% of all counties have
many more schools than the typical county and much larger populations. In the sec-
ond check, we modify our definition of exposure from the number of casualties to the
number of casualties divided by the number of schools in the county (the expected
number of casualties for a potentially exposed respondent). Finally, we conduct two
analyses to further check the robustness of our primary results to changes in the types
of incidents included in the measure of exposure. We define exposure using events
that occurred only during a school day. In another analysis, we include additional


                                          14
shooting incidents in which there were no casualties.
    We also estimate two sets of regressions in which assignments to treatment are
placebos. In the first set of placebo regressions, a BRFSS respondent is defined
as being exposed to a school shooting incident if that respondent lived in a county
where a school shooting occurred and if they were between 4 and 10 years old in
the year of the shooting. These individuals are 7 years younger in range than the
actual treated individuals. For this specification, the sample includes 20-29 year old
individuals, who are 3 years younger in range than those chosen for the primary
sample. Ideally, we would have preferred to lower the ages of sampled individuals by
7 years to be consistent with the placebo-treated individuals. Unfortunately, using
18 and 19 year olds in the sample would likely contaminate the placebo assignment
with actual exposure. In the second set of placebo regressions, respondents who
lived in counties where a shooting occurred when they were between 20 and 26 years
old were defined as being exposed, 9 years older in range than the actual treated
individuals. In keeping with the spirit of the cohorts for the first set of placebo
regressions, for this specification, the sample includes 28-37 year old individuals who
are 5 years older than those in the primary sample. We should note that these are
not strictly placebo regressions because we cannot rule out possible exposure among
these older and younger individuals. For example, some of these individuals may
have been siblings of exposed high schoolers. Others may attend schools that were
geographically contiguous or close to the high schools in which shootings occurred.
Nevertheless, we expect to observe statistically insignificant effects in each of these
settings.


4     Results
For each outcome, we estimate a regression model specified as in equation 1 above.
We estimate a logistic regression when the outcome is a binary indicator, a multino-
mial logit regression when the outcome is multinomial, Poisson regression when the


                                          15
outcome is integer valued and interval regression when the outcome is continuous but
reported only as lying in an interval. For each regression, we report exponentiated
coefficients on exposure, exp(c ).
   For the primary sample of women, Figure 4 displays effects reported as expo-
nentiated coefficients with associated 95% confidence intervals associated with the
effect of being exposed to a shooting incident on each of the outcomes described
above. We find that exposure to school shooting affects drinking behavior. There
is weak evidence that the number of drinking days increases (p-value 0.158). There
is statistically significant evidence that an additional shooting casualty increases the
maximum number of drinks an affected woman drinks on one occasion by 0.5 percent
and increases the risk of drinking 5 or more drinks by 1.8 percent.
   Exposure to school shootings also affects other types of behavior. Specifically,
exposed women are significantly less likely to wear seatbelts. To be precise, we find
that one additional shooting casualty increases the likelihood of nearly always wearing
a seatbelt relative to always wearing a seatbelt by 3.3 percent. Women exposed to
shootings are also less likely to engage in physical activity by 0.4 percent. School
shootings affect the Body Mass Index (BMI) of female survivors years later. Relative
to normal weight, we find that an additional shooting casualty increases the likelihood
of being underweight by 2.0 percent, decreases the likelihood of being overweight by
0.7 percent and decreases the likelihood of being obese by 0.9 percent. In other words,
women exposed to school shootings are of uniformly lower weight later in life than
unexposed women, including being underweight.
   We find school shootings affect educational attainment, income and labor force
participation among women. Relative to being a high school graduate, exposure to
an additional shooting casualty increases the likelihood of not being a high school
graduate by 1.1 percent and increases the likelihood of attending college or technical
school by 0.7 percent. The likelihood of graduating college is not significantly affected
by exposure to school shootings. Income among women exposed to school shootings


                                           16
is 0.5 percent lower than those not exposed. As described above, we examine female
labor force participation using a multinomial variable with three categories. We find
that, relative to the likelihood of being employed, exposure to a school shooting
increases the likelihood of being unemployed by 2.2 percent and the likelihood of
being a homemaker by 1.2 percent.
   In our sample of women, we find that exposure to school shootings has no effects
on smoking, both as measured by the likelihood of ever having smoked cigarettes
and on the likelihood of being a current smoker or a past smoker (but having quit)
among those who had ever smoked. Exposure to school shootings also has no statis-
tically significant effect on the quality of rest women get and no effect on the ways
in which women report their own general health. Exposed women also do not re-
port significantly different numbers of not good mental health days compared to the
unexposed.
   Figure 5 displays the effects of exposure to school shootings for the sample of men.
In contrast to the results for women, the risk of smoking among men is modified by
exposure. The risk of smoking daily among those who ever smoked is 1.7 percent
higher for exposed men relative to men who were not exposed. Analogous to the
results for women, we find substantial, statistically significant effects of exposure to
school shootings on the alcohol consumption behavior of men. Exposure to shootings
increases the number of drinking days by 0.5 percent, increases the maximum number
of drinks an affected man drinks on one occasion by 0.3 percent and increases the
number of drinking days where five or more drinks are consumed by 1.2 percent.
   Exposure to school shootings affects seatbelt use among men in more severe ways
than among women. Exposure to a school shooting increases the likelihood of wearing
seatbelts only sometimes, seldom, or never by 2.1 percent. Men are also much less
likely to engage in physical exercise post-exposure; the likelihood of not engaging in
physical exercise increases by 1.5 percent. They also report more days without enough
rest (by 0.9 percent). Exposure to school shootings among men also decreases body


                                          17
mass across categories. Exposed men are 1.1 percent more likely to be underweight
(albeit with a p-value of 0.099) and 0.6 percent less likely to be obese. Men who
were exposed to school shootings report significantly different levels of health status.
Relatively to excellent or very good health, exposure increases the likelihood of being
in good reported health by 1.0 percent and of being in fair or poor health by 2.0
percent.
   Among men, exposure to school shootings also has human capital effects, although
the effects are less noticeable compared to the effects observed in the sample of women.
Exposure to a school shooting increases the likelihood of attending college or technical
school by 1.4 percent with no changes in the likelihoods of not graduating from high
school or graduating from college relative to graduating from high school. Income
decreases by 0.5 percent among exposed men as compared to those not exposed. The
effect on employment status is small and statistically insignificant.

4.1    Alternative definitions of shooting incidents

Not all shootings are the same. Accuracy of measurement might vary by the nature
of the incident. Students and others might be affected in different ways (Levine
and McKnight, 2020b). Therefore, we also estimate models using data on exposure
limited to shootings that occurred only during school activities and also shootings
that resulted in at least one death, both of which are more likely to be reported (a
precondition for inclusion in the K12SSD) and reported with less measurement error.
Figure 6 displays estimates of effects using these two alternative definitions for the
sample of women. Two broad qualitative regularities emerge. First, the results for
both alternative definitions are qualitatively very similar to the effects reported using
the primary definition. There is one qualitative anomaly in terms of the signs of
the effects. When shooting incidents are defined using numbers of people killed only,
it appears that women are less likely to be smoking daily. In contrast, the effect
of school shootings on smoking status is statistically insignificant when the primary


                                           18
definition and the other alternative definitions are used. In addition, a few estimates
that were statistically significant in the main sample become marginally insignificant
(at the 5% level of significance) when the alternative definitions are used. Note that
both alternative definitions reduce the number of shooting incidents, and therefore
reduce the number of people exposed to such incidents. Second, the estimated effects
are largest when the definition of incidents is limited to those involving deaths. We
believe this finding is plausible for both reasons that motivated this analysis.
   Figure 7 displays estimates when the alternative definitions are used for the sample
of men. Relative to the results for the sample of men using the primary definition
of exposure, the results for both alternative definitions are qualitatively very similar
to the effects reported using the primary definition. The most notable difference is
that those exposed to shootings using either of the alternative definitions are more
likely to be underweight. Consequently, what appeared to be a substantive difference
between the effects on women and men may not be so. In addition, as with the effects
for the sample of women, the estimated effects for men are largest when the definition
of incidents is limited to those involving deaths.

4.2    Stratified by duration since exposure

We estimate separate models after splitting the sample of exposed individuals into
two groups. In one group, the duration between exposure to the shooting and the
BRFSS survey is 6-12 years. In the other, the duration between exposure and the
survey is 13-18 years. To be precise, beginning with the main samples of women and
men, we drop exposed individuals if they do not meet the definition of the duration
constraint. The sample of unexposed individuals remains the same.
   Figure 8 displays the results for the sample of women. In the analysis restricted to
those whose exposures occurred 6-12 prior to the survey, we find that the results are
consistent with those obtained using the corresponding full sample. The number of
drinking days increases by 0.6 percent. The maximum number of drinks consumed is


                                          19
0.4 percent higher. Exposed women show an increase of 1.6 percent in the number of
drinking days where five or more drinks are consumed. Women exposed 6-12 years ago
are less likely to wear seatbelts. The effects of exposure to school shootings on body
mass among women also echoes those observed in the full sample. Exposure increases
the likelihood of being underweight by 2.1 percent, decreases the likelihood of being
overweight by 0.8 percent and decreases the likelihood of being obese by 0.9 percent.
Women exposed to school shootings 6-12 years prior to the survey are 1 percent
less likely to graduate from high school and more likely, by 0.6 percent, to attend
college or technical school, but not graduate. Exposure to a school shooting leads to
significant declines in income - by 0.6 percent for women. Finally, the evidence shows
that, among women, exposure 6-12 years prior to the survey increases the likelihood
of not working by 2.7 percent and of being a homemaker by 1.7 percent.
   We find that the effects diminish in magnitudes and statistical significance for
many outcomes from the sample with shorter duration from exposure to survey to the
sample with longer periods. Most of the effects of school shootings are not statistically
significant although generally the signs are consistent with the results for the full
sample of women.
   In the sample of men, the results of the analysis restricted to those whose expo-
sures occurred 6-12 prior to the survey are consistent with those obtained using the
corresponding full sample. Figure 9 displays these findings. There is clear evidence of
more frequent and greater alcohol consumption. There is also evidence of more risky
behavior. Those exposed to school shootings are 1.3 percent more likely to nearly
always wear a seatbelt (as compared to always wearing a seatbelt) and 2.3 percent
more likely to sometimes, seldom, or never wear a seatbelt. As with the sample of
women, we find that the effects diminish in magnitudes and statistical significance
for many outcomes from the sample with shorter duration from exposure to survey
to the sample with longer periods. Nevertheless, exposure to school shootings 13-18
years ago is significantly associated with higher risk of smoking daily, with greater


                                           20
number of drinking days, with higher risk of no physical exercise and the number of
days without enough rest. Exposure also increases the risks of being underweight and
of being overweight, and of not graduating from high school.

4.3    Specification checks

We conduct a number of checks to our basic specifications. The results of these anal-
yses, for the samples of women and men, are shown in Figures 10 and 11 respectively.
   First, we conduct two analyses that change the period of shooting incidents used
in the analysis. Relative to the main sample, we expand the period to be from 1993
- 2006 and we contract the period to be from 1995 - 2004. In both cases, the results
are very consistent with those in the primary analysis. Second, we address a concern
arising from the fact that individuals who were exposed to shootings are, on average,
younger and more likely to be of minority race and/or Hispanic ethnicity (Table
2). Although controlling for these characteristics in our regressions and including
county fixed effects should mitigate any confounding due to these differences, we try
to mitigate any such effects further by balancing the exposed and unexposed samples
on these characteristics. We do so by calculating sampling weights for the unexposed
sample using an entropy balancing technique developed by Hainmueller (2012) that
leads to the treated and untreated samples to have very similar weighted sample
characteristics. Entropy balance combined with regression is doubly robust (Zhao
and Percival, 2017). The results of these analyses for the samples of women and men
are consistent with the primary results. Third, we eliminate counties that had more
than 4 shootings in one analysis out of concern for the possibility that counties with
multiple shootings may be different in ways not accountable by use of the county
fixed effects. Again, the results of both of these analyses are very similar to those
obtained in the primary analysis.
   We also conduct two analyses to address potential biases due to data limitations.
Because we can only assign a shooting incident to a county, and because most counties


                                         21
have more than one high school, we cannot be sure that an individual designated as
being exposed was actually exposed. As a counterargument to this possibility, note
that Gaudiano (2019) reports that impacts of school shootings do spread through
entire school districts which are often geographically aligned with counties. Never-
theless in one specification check, we drop counties with more than 20 schools. Such
counties, which comprise about 12% of all counties have many more schools than the
typical county and much larger populations. The results are consistent with those
obtained in the primary analysis. We also conduct a robustness check using a "scale"
measure of intensity. Instead of assigning the number of casualties as the intensity
of exposure, we use the number of casualties divided by the number of schools in the
county (or expected intensity for a potentially exposed respondent). The results are,
yet again, quite consistent with the main findings.
   Finally, we conduct two analyses that change the definition of exposure. In one
analysis, we only consider incidents with casualties that occurred during school days.
This definition is more stringent than one we considered in our primary analyses
that restricted exposure to incidents with casualties that occurred during school days
or school extra-curricular events. In another analysis, we consider an expansion of
the types of incidents included in the measure of exposure. We include the 12.8%
of shooting events recorded in the K12SSD that meet our school type and location
criteria with no casualties in our definition of exposure. We code exposure equal to
one if the shooting event had no casualties, and exposure equal to the number of
casualties plus one for events with casualties. In both cases, Figures 10 and 11 show
that the results are qualitatively similar to the primary analyses.
   The results of two sets of placebo-like regressions are displayed in Figures 12 and
13. In the first set of placebo regressions, individuals who were between 4 and 10
years old in the year (and county) of a shooting are defined as exposed. The results,
displayed in Figure 12, show that the effects are overwhelmingly insignificant among
women and men. In the case of men, all three statistically significant effects (ever


                                          22
smoked, number of drinking days and no physical exercise), suggest that exposed
men have better health and health behaviors. If these are not spurious, these findings
would suggest that sources of bias would bias coefficients in the primary regressions,
where we find evidence of worse health, toward zero.
    In the second set of placebo regressions, individuals who lived in counties where
a shooting occurred when they were between 20 and 26 years old were defined as
being exposed. Again, the results, displayed in Figure 13, show that the effects are
overwhelmingly insignificant for both samples of women and men. Exposed women
appear significantly less likely to be not working or homemakers, which are opposite
in sign to the results we find in the primary sample. Again, if these are not spurious,
these findings would suggest that sources of bias would bias coefficients in the primary
regressions toward zero.


5     Conclusion
In this paper, we examine the impacts of school shootings on health, health-related
behaviors and human capital outcomes of student survivors as adults in their twenties
and early thirties. We use data from K12SSD, a comprehensive database of school
shootings, and BRFSS, to estimate the effects of exposure to school shootings while
in high school.
    We find substantial evidence of declines in health and well-being, worse health-
related behaviors and worse education and labor market outcomes. These effects are
robust to changes in the definition of exposure to shooting incidents. We also find
that the effects are stronger among individuals for whom 6-12 years have elapsed since
the school shooting as compared to individuals for whom 13-18 years have elapsed
since the shooting. Because duration since the shooting and age are mechanically
related in our design, we cannot cleanly identify differences between age effects and
elapsed time effects. We also expect greater measurement errors in assignment to
treatment in the sample with longer duration since exposure. Therefore, we do not


                                          23
draw strong conclusions about the possibility of effects truly dissipating over time
from these results.
   In general, our results are likely to be lower bounds of the true effects because
a number of likely sources of measurement error, most notably in assignment to
treatment, are likely to attenuate estimates of effects. We estimate effects using a
number of alternative specifications to check the sensitivity of our primary findings
to issues of measurement of exposure, the composition of counties in our analysis,
the time period of data we chose to study, and others. The results are qualitatively
robust to each of the alternatives we considered.
   Our study has a number of limitations. Notably, because we are only able to
match BRFSS respondents to the shooting incidents by county, we cannot identify
whether a high school age individual in a county actually attended the school in
which a shooting occurred. In addition, because BRFSS provides no indication of
whether the person moved into the current county of residence recently or whether
they have lived there all their lives, we cannot identify whether a person who was of
high school age during a shooting incident in a county actually lived in that county
when it occurred or whether they moved out of that county following the school
shooting. Nevertheless, our results including a number of specification checks are
strongly suggestive of detrimental causal effects of school shootings on health behav-
iors, health and human capital in the population. Finally, we are not able to test
the mechanisms through which exposure to school shootings affect our outcomes of
interest. As we alluded to earlier in our paper, the "toxic stress" from these "intense
adverse experiences" may be a mechanism worth exploring. We leave this to future
research.




                                          24
References
Beland, L.-P. and Kim, D. (2016). The effect of high school shootings on schools and
  student performance. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 38(1):113­126.

Brodeur, A. and Yousaf, H. (2020). On the economic consequences of mass shootings.

Cabral, M., Kim, B., Rossin-Slater, M., Schnell, M., and Schwandt, H. (2020).
  Trauma at school: The impacts of shootings on students' human capital and eco-
  nomic outcomes. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cai, W. and Patel, J. K. (2019). A half-century of school shootings like columbine,
  sandy hook and parkland. New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/
  interactive/2019/05/11/us/school-shootings-united-states.html.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2019). Behavioral Risk Factor Surveil-
  lance System. https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/index.html. (Accessed on May 26,
  2019).

Cook, P. J. (2020). Thinking about gun violence. Criminology & Public Policy,
  19(4):1371­1393.

Cox, J. W., Rich, S., Chiu, A., Muyskens, J., and Ulmanu, M. (2019). Analysis | More
  than 240,000 students have experienced gun violence at school since Columbine.
  Washington Post.

Deb, P., Gallo, W. T., Ayyagari, P., Fletcher, J. M., and Sindelar, J. L. (2011).
  The effect of job loss on overweight and drinking. Journal of health economics,
  30(2):317­327.

DeWaard, J., Johnson, J. E., and Whitaker, S. D. (2018). Internal migration in the
  united states: A comparative assessment of the utility of the consumer credit panel.
  Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
  System Working Paper 18-12.

Dursun, B. (2019). The intergenerational effects of mass shootings. Available at SSRN
 3474544.

Fetters, A. (2019).    Lasting grief after a mass shooting.    The At-
  lantic.  https://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2019/03/grief-
  school-shootings-suicide/585865/.

Flaherty, E. G., Thompson, R., Dubowitz, H., Harvey, E. M., English, D. J., Proctor,
  L. J., and Runyan, D. K. (2013). Adverse childhood experiences and child health
  in early adolescence. JAMA Pediatrics, 167(7):622­629.


                                         25
Frey, W. H. (2009).      The Great American Migration Slowdown:     Re-
  gional and Metropolitan Dimensions.    Metropolitan Policy Program at
  Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/1209_
  migration_frey-1.pdf.
Gaudiano, N. (2019). Parkland and santa fe schools disclose devastating after-effects
 of shootings. Politico. https://www.politico.com/news/2019/10/10/parkland-
 santa-fe-school-shootings-effects-students-043687.
Hainmueller, J. (2012). Entropy Balancing for Causal Effects: A Multivariate
  Reweighting Method to Produce Balanced Samples in Observational Studies. Po-
  litical Analysis, 20(1):25­46.
Heckman, J. and Robb, R. (1985). Using Longitudinal Data to Estimate Age, Period
  and Cohort Effects in Earnings Equations. pages 137­150. Springer, New York,
  NY.
Levine, P. B. and McKnight, R. (2020a). Exposure to a school shooting and subse-
  quent well-being. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Levine, P. B. and McKnight, R. (2020b). Not all school shootings are the same and
  the differences matter. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Mason, W. M. and Fienberg, S. E. (1985). Introduction: Beyond the Identification
 Problem. pages 1­8. Springer, New York, NY.
Middlebrooks, J. S. and Audage, N. C. (2008). The effects of childhood stress on
 health across the lifespan. National Center for Injury Prevention and Control of
 the Centers for Disease Control.
Orcutt, H. K., Miron, L. R., and Seligowski, A. V. (2014). Impact of mass shootings
  on individual adjustment. PTSD Research Quarterly, 25(3):1­9.
Riedman, D. and O'Neill, D. (2020). K-12 school shooting database: Research
  methodology. https://www.chds.us/ssdb/methods/#defining. Naval Postgrad-
  uate School, Center for Homeland Defense and Security, Homeland Security Ad-
  vanced Thinking Program.
Rossin-Slater, M., Schnell, M., Schwandt, H., Trejo, S., and Uniat, L. (2019). Local
  Exposure to School Shootings and Youth Antidepressant Use. National Bureau of
  Economic Research. Working Paper 26563.
Soni, A. and Tekin, E. (2020). How do mass shootings affect community wellbeing?
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Taylor, S. E. (2010). Mechanisms linking early life stress to adult health outcomes.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(19):8507­8512.

                                         26
Zhao, Q. and Percival, D. (2017). Entropy Balancing is Doubly Robust. Journal of
  Causal Inference, 5(1).




                                      27
Table 1: Characteristics of casualties and duration in primary sample and strata of duration
since exposure
 Sample definition                         Sample size     P50   Percent    Casualties   Duration from exposure
                                         Female   Male     age   exposed    P50 P95      P50 Min        Max
 Full sample                             197426   122519    28      8.2      1     5     12      6           18
 6-12 years duration                     189119   117150    28      4.5      1     4     10      6           12
 13-18 years duration                    188184   116623    29      4.1      2     5     15     13           18
 Incidents with deaths only              197426   122519    28      4.4      1     3     12      6           17
 Incidents during school day or events   197426   122519    28      5.5      2     3     12      6           17

Note: The primary sample consists of individuals ages 23-32 living in 1402 counties from 2003-2012 BRFSS.
P50 is the median among those exposed. P95 is the 95th percentile value in the sample among those exposed.
Min and Max denote the minimum and maximum sample values among those exposed.




                                                   28
             Table 2: Means of covariates in primary samples of women and men
                                              Sample of women           Sample of men
                                            Not exposed exposed      Not exposed exposed
             Age in years                      28.19        26.85       28.10        26.80
             Black race                        0.12         0.24         0.07        0.15
             non-Black Hispanic ethnicity      0.13          0.20        0.12        0.19
             Other race                        0.06         0.09         0.07        0.11

Note: The primary sample consists of individuals ages 23-32 living in 1402 counties from 2003-2012 BRFSS.




                                                   29
             Table 3: Means of outcomes in primary samples of women and men
                                                Sample of women                     Sample of men
                                         N                mean               N               mean
                                                  Not exposed exposed                Not exposed exposed
 Ever smoked                          196,589       0.376        0.302    121,840      0.454        0.409

 Among ever smoked: quit               69,464       0.435        0.390    51,030       0.419        0.372
  smokes daily                                      0.175        0.213                 0.207        0.259
  smokes occasionally                               0.390        0.397                 0.374        0.369

 No. of drinking days                 137,926       3.821        4.738    99,132       6.850        7.382

 Max drinks on one occasion            78,877       3.284        3.407    63,098       5.978        5.836

 No. of days >= 5 drinks              101,618       0.853        1.077    82,769       2.174        2.177

 Wears seatbelt: always                74,405       0.823        0.872    52,546       0.711        0.794
  nearly always                                     0.106        0.076                 0.148        0.114
  sometimes, seldom, never                          0.071        0.052                 0.141        0.092

 No physical exercise                 196,195       0.209        0.214    121,567      0.168        0.152

 No. of days not enough rest           56,653       11.455      10.543    31,972       9.895        9.117

 BMI category: normal                 157,380       0.033        0.034    66,364       0.015        0.015
  underweight                                       0.471        0.493                 0.352        0.412
  overweight                                        0.262        0.250                 0.409        0.386
  obese                                             0.234        0.223                 0.224        0.186

 Health: excellent or v. good         192,815       0.621        0.614    115,047      0.636        0.643
   good                                             0.287        0.291                 0.280        0.274
   fair or poor                                     0.092        0.095                 0.084        0.082

 No. of not good mental health days   195,394       4.500        4.412    121,332      3.268        3.402

 Education level: HS graduate         188,437       0.088        0.099    112,535      0.093        0.083
   not HS graduate                                  0.239        0.206                 0.282        0.233
   attended college/tech                            0.296        0.269                 0.266        0.262
   graduated college/tech                           0.377        0.426                 0.359        0.421

 Income $0 - $9,999                   180,372       0.064        0.087    112,680      0.037        0.054
   $0,000 - $14,999                                 0.056        0.067                 0.039        0.051
   $15,000 - $19,999                                0.087        0.097                 0.073        0.077
   $20,000 - $24,999                                0.109        0.106                 0.102        0.105
   $25,000 - $34,999                                0.142        0.136                 0.143        0.128
   $35,000 - $49,999                                0.174        0.154                 0.189        0.158
   $50,000 - $74,999                                0.177        0.151                 0.195        0.174
   $75,000 -                                        0.190        0.202                 0.222        0.254

 Employment: working                  195,211       0.651        0.625    122,188      0.840        0.779
  not working                                       0.167        0.226                 0.160        0.221
  homemaker                                         0.183        0.148

Note: The primary sample consists of individuals ages 23-32 living in 1402 counties from 2003-2012 BRFSS.
                                                   30
Table 4: Characteristics of casualties and duration in samples and definitions used in speci-
fication checks
 Change from main specification                    Sample size      Percent    Intensity    Years since exposure
                                                 female   male      exposed    P50   P95    P50 Min       Max
 Shorten shooting period to 1995-2004            197426   122519      6.3       2      4    12     6         17
 Extend shooting period to 1993-2006             197426   122519      10.5      1      5    13     6         19
 Covariate balancing weights applied             197426   122519      50.0      1      5    12     6         18
 Restrict to counties (1396) with  4 incidents   190682   118325       6.5      1      3    12     6         18
 Restrict to counties (1239) with  20 schools    122365   74915        2.4      1      8    12     6         18
 Divide intensity by the number of schools       197426   122519      8.2     .033   .158   12     6         18
 Incidents during the school day only            197426   122519       5.0      2      3    12     6         17
 Incidents include those with 0 casualties       197426   122519       6.8      3      5    12     6         17

Note: The primary sample consists of individuals ages 23-32 living in 1402 counties from 2003-2012 BRFSS.
The samples used in specification checks also span the same counties and years unless otherwise specified.
P50 is the median among those exposed. P95 is the 95th percentile value in the sample among those exposed.
Min and Max denote the minimum and maximum sample values among those exposed. The numbers of
counties in county-restricted samples are reported in parentheses.




                                                   31
    Figure 1: Numbers of school shooting incidents and associated casualties over time

                          30                                                                                 17


                                      5

                          25
        Total incidents




                                                                                               5     4

                          20                                                       15
                                                  4           27    36
                                                        10
                                            4

                          15

                                                                               3
                                                                                          3

                          10
                               1993       1995         1997        1999            2001       2003          2005
                                                                        year
                               Bubble contains, and is proportional to, maximum casualties in an incident



Note: Includes school shootings from 1994-2005.




                                                                   32
                Figure 2: Counties in which school shooting incidents occurred




Note: Includes school shootings from 1994-2005.




                                                  33
Figure 3: Ages of BRFSS respondents in each survey year who would be potentially exposed
to school shootings in three illustrative years

                                min and max age in BRFSS exposed to shooting
            32

            31

            30

            29

            28
      age




            27

            26

            25

            24

            23

                 2003   2004      2005      2006    2007      2008         2009     2010      2011        2012
                                                          year

                        shooting year is 1998      shooting year is 1994          shooting year is 2005




                                                     34
 Figure 4: Estimates of effects of exposure to school shootings on outcomes among women


                                 Ever smoked                                                0.701

               Among ever smoked (base quit)
                               smokes daily                                                 0.928
                        smokes occasionally                                                 0.869

                          No. of drinking days                                              0.158

                   Max drinks on one occasion                                               0.000

                        No. of days >=5 drinks                                              0.035

                 Wears seatbelt (base always)
                                nearly always                                               0.000
                   sometimes, seldom, never                                                 0.616

                          No physical exercise                                              0.037

                   No. of days not enough rest                                              0.368

                   BMI category (base normal)
                                  underweight                                               0.001
                                   overweight                                               0.050
                                       obese                                                0.047

               Health (base excellent, v. good)
                                           good                                             0.329
                                   fair or poor                                             0.373

            No. of not good mental health days                                              0.363

           Education level (base HS graduate)
                              not HS graduate                                               0.021
                        attended college/tech                                               0.016
                       graduated college/tech                                               0.388

                                       Income                                               0.000

                   Employment (base working)
                                 not working                                                0.000
                                 homemaker                                                  0.001

                                                  .96        .98       1   1.02    1.04     p-value


                                                               exp()         95% CI




Note: The primary sample consists of individuals living in 1402 counties from 2003-2012 BRFSS. Covariates
include indicators for age, race and ethnicity, county and year, and duration. Exponentiated coefficients
along with cluster-adjusted p-values for statistical significance and associated 95% confidence intervals are
reported. Confidence limits are bottom and top coded in [0.95,1.05] to enhance readability.




                                                        35
  Figure 5: Estimates of effects of exposure to school shootings on outcomes among men


                                 Ever smoked                                                0.949

               Among ever smoked (base quit)
                               smokes daily                                                 0.000
                        smokes occasionally                                                 0.926

                          No. of drinking days                                              0.003

                   Max drinks on one occasion                                               0.013

                        No. of days >=5 drinks                                              0.023

                 Wears seatbelt (base always)
                                nearly always                                               0.066
                   sometimes, seldom, never                                                 0.016

                          No physical exercise                                              0.000

                   No. of days not enough rest                                              0.012

                   BMI category (base normal)
                                  underweight                                               0.099
                                   overweight                                               0.372
                                       obese                                                0.011

               Health (base excellent, v. good)
                                           good                                             0.001
                                   fair or poor                                             0.000

            No. of not good mental health days                                              0.350

           Education level (base HS graduate)
                              not HS graduate                                               0.893
                        attended college/tech                                               0.024
                       graduated college/tech                                               0.668

                                       Income                                               0.028

                   Employment (base working)
                                 not working                                                0.958
                                 homemaker                                                  .

                                                  .96        .98      1      1.02      1.04 p-value

                                                              exp()          95% CI




Note: The primary sample consists of individuals living in 1402 counties from 2003-2012 BRFSS. Covariates
include indicators for age, race and ethnicity, county and year, and duration. Exponentiated coefficients
along with cluster-adjusted p-values for statistical significance and associated 95% confidence intervals are
reported. Confidence limits are bottom and top coded in [0.95,1.05] to enhance readability.




                                                        36
Figure 6: Estimates of effects of exposure (using alternative definitions) to school shootings
on outcomes among women


                                 Ever smoked

              Among ever smoked (base quit)
                              smokes daily
                       smokes occasionally

                          No. of drinking days

                  Max drinks on one occasion

                        No. of days >=5 drinks

                 Wears seatbelt (base always)
                                nearly always
                   sometimes, seldom, never

                          No physical exercise

                   No. of days not enough rest

                  BMI category (base normal)
                                 underweight
                                  overweight
                                      obese

               Health (base excellent, v. good)
                                           good
                                   fair or poor

            No. of not good mental health days

           Education level (base HS graduate)
                              not HS graduate
                        attended college/tech
                       graduated college/tech

                                       Income

                  Employment (base working)
                                not working
                                homemaker


                                                  .92        .96            1            1.04         1.08

                                                        Exposure uses incidents with deaths only
                                                        Exposure uses incidents during school days or events




Note: The primary sample consists of individuals living in 1402 counties from 2003-2012 BRFSS. Covariates
include indicators for age, race and ethnicity, county and year, and duration. Exponentiated coefficients
along with cluster-adjusted p-values for statistical significance and associated 95% confidence intervals are
reported. Confidence limits are bottom and top coded in [0.9,1.1] to enhance readability. One alternative
definition considers incidents only if a death occurs and defines exposure as the total deaths. The other
definition considers incidents only if one occurs during a school day or during school extra-curricular events.




                                                             37
Figure 7: Estimates of effects of exposure (using alternative definitions) to school shootings
on outcomes among men


                                 Ever smoked

              Among ever smoked (base quit)
                              smokes daily
                       smokes occasionally

                          No. of drinking days

                  Max drinks on one occasion

                        No. of days >=5 drinks

                 Wears seatbelt (base always)
                                nearly always
                   sometimes, seldom, never

                          No physical exercise

                   No. of days not enough rest

                  BMI category (base normal)
                                 underweight
                                  overweight
                                      obese

               Health (base excellent, v. good)
                                           good
                                   fair or poor

            No. of not good mental health days

           Education level (base HS graduate)
                              not HS graduate
                        attended college/tech
                       graduated college/tech

                                       Income

                  Employment (base working)
                                not working
                                homemaker


                                                  .92         .96             1            1.04          1.08

                                                        Exposure uses incidents with deaths only
                                                        Exposure uses incidents during school days or events




Note: The primary sample consists of individuals living in 1402 counties from 2003-2012 BRFSS. Covariates
include indicators for age, race and ethnicity, county and year, and duration. Exponentiated coefficients
along with cluster-adjusted p-values for statistical significance and associated 95% confidence intervals are
reported. Confidence limits are bottom and top coded in [0.9,1.1] to enhance readability. One alternative
definition considers incidents only if a death occurs and defines exposure as the total deaths. The other
definition considers incidents only if one occurs during a school day or during school extra-curricular events.




                                                             38
Figure 8: Estimates of effects of exposure to school shootings on outcomes among women
stratified by duration since exposure


                                Ever smoked

              Among ever smoked (base quit)
                              smokes daily
                       smokes occasionally

                         No. of drinking days

                  Max drinks on one occasion

                       No. of days >=5 drinks

                Wears seatbelt (base always)
                               nearly always
                  sometimes, seldom, never

                         No physical exercise

                  No. of days not enough rest

                  BMI category (base normal)
                                 underweight
                                  overweight
                                      obese

              Health (base excellent, v. good)
                                          good
                                  fair or poor

           No. of not good mental health days

           Education level (base HS graduate)
                              not HS graduate
                        attended college/tech
                       graduated college/tech

                                      Income

                  Employment (base working)
                                not working
                                homemaker


                                                 .92    .96               1             1.04    1.08

                                                            Exposure occurred 6-12 years ago
                                                            Exposure occurred 13-18 years ago




Note: The primary sample consists of individuals living in 1402 counties from 2003-2012 BRFSS. Covariates
include indicators for age, race and ethnicity, county and year, and duration. Exponentiated coefficients
along with cluster-adjusted p-values for statistical significance and associated 95% confidence intervals are
reported. Confidence limits are bottom and top coded in [0.9,1.1] to enhance readability. One stratum
considers events that occurred 6-12 years prior to the survey. The other stratum considers events that
occurred 13-18 years prior to the survey.




                                                       39
Figure 9: Estimates of effects of exposure to school shootings on outcomes among men
stratified by duration since exposure


                                Ever smoked

              Among ever smoked (base quit)
                              smokes daily
                       smokes occasionally

                         No. of drinking days

                  Max drinks on one occasion

                       No. of days >=5 drinks

                Wears seatbelt (base always)
                               nearly always
                  sometimes, seldom, never

                         No physical exercise

                  No. of days not enough rest

                  BMI category (base normal)
                                 underweight
                                  overweight
                                      obese

              Health (base excellent, v. good)
                                          good
                                  fair or poor

           No. of not good mental health days

           Education level (base HS graduate)
                              not HS graduate
                        attended college/tech
                       graduated college/tech

                                      Income

                  Employment (base working)
                                not working
                                homemaker


                                                 .92    .96               1             1.04    1.08

                                                            Exposure occurred 6-12 years ago
                                                            Exposure occurred 13-18 years ago




Note: The primary sample consists of individuals living in 1402 counties from 2003-2012 BRFSS. Covariates
include indicators for age, race and ethnicity, county and year, and duration. Exponentiated coefficients
along with cluster-adjusted p-values for statistical significance and associated 95% confidence intervals are
reported. Confidence limits are bottom and top coded in [0.9,1.1] to enhance readability. One stratum
considers events that occurred 6-12 years prior to the survey. The other stratum considers events that
occurred 13-18 years prior to the survey.




                                                       40
Figure 10: Estimates of effects of exposure to school shootings on outcomes among women
in specification check samples and definitions


                               Ever smoked

             Among ever smoked (base quit)
                             smokes daily
                      smokes occasionally

                        No. of drinking days

                 Max drinks on one occasion

                      No. of days >=5 drinks

               Wears seatbelt (base always)
                              nearly always
                 sometimes, seldom, never

                        No physical exercise

                 No. of days not enough rest

                 BMI category (base normal)
                                underweight
                                 overweight
                                     obese

             Health (base excellent, v. good)
                                         good
                                 fair or poor

          No. of not good mental health days

          Education level (base HS graduate)
                             not HS graduate
                       attended college/tech
                      graduated college/tech

                                     Income

                 Employment (base working)
                               not working
                               homemaker

                                                .96               .98                1            1.02              1.04

                                                      1995-2004                          1993-2006
                                                      Entropy balance                    Counties <= 4 shootings
                                                      Counties <= 20 schools             intensity / # of schools
                                                      Incidents in school day only       Incidents include 0 casualties




Note: The primary sample consists of individuals living in 1402 counties from 2003-2012 BRFSS. Covariates
include indicators for age, race and ethnicity, county and year, and duration. Exponentiated coefficients are
reported.




                                                              41
Figure 11: Estimates of effects of exposure to school shootings on outcomes among men in
specification check samples and definitions


                               Ever smoked

             Among ever smoked (base quit)
                             smokes daily
                      smokes occasionally

                        No. of drinking days

                 Max drinks on one occasion

                      No. of days >=5 drinks

               Wears seatbelt (base always)
                              nearly always
                 sometimes, seldom, never

                        No physical exercise

                 No. of days not enough rest

                 BMI category (base normal)
                                underweight
                                 overweight
                                     obese

             Health (base excellent, v. good)
                                         good
                                 fair or poor

          No. of not good mental health days

          Education level (base HS graduate)
                             not HS graduate
                       attended college/tech
                      graduated college/tech

                                     Income

                 Employment (base working)
                               not working
                               homemaker

                                                .96               .98                1            1.02              1.04

                                                      1995-2004                          1993-2006
                                                      Entropy balance                    Counties <= 4 shootings
                                                      Counties <= 20 schools             intensity / # of schools
                                                      Incidents in school day only       Incidents include 0 casualties




Note: The primary sample consists of individuals living in 1402 counties from 2003-2012 BRFSS. Covariates
include indicators for age, race and ethnicity, county and year, and duration. Exponentiated coefficients are
reported.




                                                              42
Figure 12: Estimates of effects of exposure to school shootings on outcomes with placebo
treatment assigned to individuals 4-10 years old at the time of the shooting incident


                                Ever smoked

              Among ever smoked (base quit)
                              smokes daily
                       smokes occasionally

                         No. of drinking days

                  Max drinks on one occasion

                       No. of days >=5 drinks

                Wears seatbelt (base always)
                               nearly always
                  sometimes, seldom, never

                         No physical exercise

                  No. of days not enough rest

                  BMI category (base normal)
                                 underweight
                                  overweight
                                      obese

              Health (base excellent, v. good)
                                          good
                                  fair or poor

           No. of not good mental health days

           Education level (base HS graduate)
                              not HS graduate
                        attended college/tech
                       graduated college/tech

                                      Income

                  Employment (base working)
                                not working
                                homemaker


                                                 .96        .98          1    1.02           1.04

                                                       Sample of women       Sample of men




Note: The sample consists of individuals ages 20-29 years old living in 1402 counties from 2003-2012 BRFSS.
Covariates include indicators for age, race and ethnicity, county and year, and duration. Exponentiated
coefficients along with cluster-adjusted p-values for statistical significance and associated 95% confidence
intervals are reported. Confidence limits are bottom and top coded in [0.95,1.05] to enhance readability.




                                                       43
Figure 13: Estimates of effects of exposure to school shootings on outcomes with placebo
treatment assigned to individuals 20-26 years old at the time of the shooting incident


                                Ever smoked

              Among ever smoked (base quit)
                              smokes daily
                       smokes occasionally

                         No. of drinking days

                  Max drinks on one occasion

                       No. of days >=5 drinks

                Wears seatbelt (base always)
                               nearly always
                  sometimes, seldom, never

                         No physical exercise

                  No. of days not enough rest

                  BMI category (base normal)
                                 underweight
                                  overweight
                                      obese

              Health (base excellent, v. good)
                                          good
                                  fair or poor

           No. of not good mental health days

           Education level (base HS graduate)
                              not HS graduate
                        attended college/tech
                       graduated college/tech

                                      Income

                  Employment (base working)
                                not working
                                homemaker


                                                 .96    .98          1       1.02        1.04

                                                       Sample of women      Sample of men




Note: The sample consists of individuals ages 28-37 years old living in 1402 counties from 2003-2012 BRFSS.
Covariates include indicators for age, race and ethnicity, county and year, and duration. Exponentiated
coefficients along with cluster-adjusted p-values for statistical significance and associated 95% confidence
intervals are reported. Confidence limits are bottom and top coded in [0.95,1.05] to enhance readability.




                                                       44
