                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


      POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF NON-LINEAR EFFECTS OF TAX CHANGES ON
                                OUTPUT

                                     Samara R. Gunter
                                    Daniel Riera-Crichton
                                      Carlos A. Vegh
                                     Guillermo Vuletin

                                    Working Paper 28646
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28646


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02134
                                    April 2021

We would like to thank seminar participants at the International Monetary Fund,
Inter-American Development Bank, World Bank, Federal Reserve Board, European
Stability Mechanism, Central Bank of Argentina, Central Bank of Chile, Central
Bank of Spain, UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean,
George Washington University, Johns Hopkins University, Williams College, Davidson
College, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, Sao Paulo School of Economics-Getulio Vargas
Foundation, Escola Superior d'Administració i Direcció d'Empreses (ESADE), Institute of
Education and Research (INSPER), International Macro Workshop-RIDGE, Latin American and
Caribbean Economic Association (LACEA), Annual Symposium of the Spanish Economic
Association, and XLIV Meeting of the Network of Central Banks and Finance Ministries-IDB for
many helpful comments and suggestions. We would also like to thank Alberto Alesina, Silvia
Albrizio, Leopoldo Avellan, Frank Bohn, Fernando Broner, Eduardo Cavallo, Javier Garcia-
Cicco, Aitor Erce, Davide Furceri, Vitor Gaspar, Alejandro Izquierdo, Herman Kamil, Graciela
Kaminsky, Aart Kraay, Gerardo Licandro, Alessandro Notarpietro, Peter Montiel, Eduardo
Moron, Ilan Noy, Pablo Ottonello, Peter Pedroni, Javier Perez, Roberto Ramos, David Robinson,
Diego Saravia, Olena Staveley-O'Carroll, Jay Shambaugh, Hamilton Taveras, Teresa Ter-
Minassian, and Martin Uribe for helpful discussions, and José Andrée Camarena Fonseca, Diego
Friedheim, Pablo Hernando-Kaminsky, and Luis Morano for excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Samara R. Gunter, Daniel Riera-Crichton, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Policy Implications of Non-Linear Effects of Tax Changes on Output
Samara R. Gunter, Daniel Riera-Crichton, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin
NBER Working Paper No. 28646
April 2021
JEL No. E32,E62,H20

                                            ABSTRACT

In an earlier paper, titled "Non-linear effects of tax changes on output: The role of the initial level
of taxation," we estimated tax multipliers using (i) a novel dataset on value-added taxes for 51
countries (21 industrial and 30 developing) for the period 1970-2014, and (ii) the so-called
narrative approach developed by Romer and Romer (2010) to properly identify exogenous tax
changes. The main finding is that, in line with existing theoretical distortionary and disincentive-
based arguments, the effect of tax changes on output is highly non-linear. The tax multiplier is
essentially zero under relatively low/moderate initial tax rate levels and more negative as the
initial tax rate and the size of the change in the tax rate increase. This companion paper first
shows that these findings have important policy implications, given that the initial level of taxes
varies greatly across countries and thus so will the potential output effect of changing tax rates.
The paper then turns to some specific policy applications. It focuses on the relevance of the
arguments for revenue mobilization in countries with low levels of provision of public goods and
social and infrastructure gaps, as well as in commodity-dependent countries. The paper then
considers some practical implications for the standard debt sustainability analysis. Lastly, it
evaluates the implications of the findings for the Laffer curve.

Samara R. Gunter                                   Carlos A. Vegh
Colby College                                      School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS)
5230 Mayflower Hill                                Johns Hopkins University
Waterville, ME 04901                               1717 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
srgunter@colby.edu                                 Washington, DC 20036
                                                   and NBER
Daniel Riera-Crichton                              cvegh1@jhu.edu
The World Bank
1818 H St NW                                       Guillermo Vuletin
Washington, DC 20433                               The World Bank
drieracr@bates.edu                                 1818 H Street NW
                                                   Washington, DC 20433
                                                   gvuletin@worldbank.org
1    Introduction

In Gunter et al. (2021), we estimate tax multipliers using (i) a novel dataset on value-added
taxes for 51 countries (21 industrial and 30 developing) for the period 1970-2014 and (ii) the
narrative approach developed by Romer and Romer (2010) to properly identify exogenous tax
changes. The main empirical ...nding is that there are strong non-linear e¤ects of taxation
on output. In particular, and in line with existing theoretical distortionary and disincentive-
based arguments, we show that the e¤ect of tax changes on output is essentially zero for
relatively low initial tax rate levels or small tax changes and becomes increasingly negative
under higher initial tax rates or larger tax changes. The reason is that the distortion imposed
by taxation on economic activity is directly, and non-linearly, related to both the initial level
of the tax rate and the size of the tax change.
    Figure 1 reproduces a key result from our 2021 paper. This ...gure reports the estimated
tax multiplier after two years, evaluated at alternative initial tax rate levels and di¤erent sizes
of the tax change. We can see that the most negative multipliers occur for the highest values
in both axes. In other words, while the fall in output associated with increasing revenues by
$1 tends to be zero for low levels of the initial tax rate and small tax hikes, this cost becomes
much larger as the initial tax rate and the size of the tax hike increase. Hence, the evidence
shows that the output e¤ect of tax changes is, indeed, highly non-linear.


                                     1 


These ...ndings have important policy implications given that the initial level of taxes varies
greatly across countries and thus so will the potential output e¤ect of changing tax rates.
Figure 2 shows that, given countries'current VAT rate, the tax multiplier could be statistically
zero (dark blue color), or moderate to high (yellow, orange, and red colors). For example, a
1.5 percentage-points increase in the VAT rate would essentially not a¤ect GDP in countries
with low tax rates such as Angola, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Ecuador, Nigeria, and Paraguay.
In contrast, the same tax increase (decrease) would cause output to fall (increase) in economies
with relatively high VAT rates, including some emerging markets like Argentina and Uruguay
and, especially, many industrial European countries. For example, according to our estimates,
the 1 percentage-point increase that took place in Greece in June 2016 (when the VAT rate
changed from 23 to 24 percent) should, in and on itself, have reduced GDP by about 1.75
percent by June 2018. In contrast, the 2 percentage-point increase that took place in Ecuador

                                                2
in January 2000 (when the VAT changed from 10 to 12 percent) should not, in and on itself,
have a¤ected GDP.
                                    2 

    This companion paper discusses some relevant policy applications that result from the
non-linear e¤ects of tax changes on output. We ...rst focus on the relevance of our arguments
for revenue mobilization in countries with low levels of provision of public goods and social
and infrastructure gaps (Section 2) as well as in commodity-dependent countries (Section 3).
Section 4 then explores some practical implications for debt sustainability analysis (DSA).
Section 5 analyzes the non-linear implications in terms of the La¤er curve. Finally, Section
6 o¤ers some concluding remarks.


2    Policy implications I: On the relationship between the size
     of the government and economic development

The role and the size of the government in an economy have been studied from di¤erent
perspectives in the literature. Some of the main determinants of government spending as a
proportion of GDP include trade openness (Rodrik, 1998), country size (Alesina and Wacziarg,
1998), degree of economic development (Wagner, 1883, 1893; Easterly and Rebelo, 1993),
political organization (Persson and Tabellini, 1999; Milesi-Ferretti, Perotti, and Rostagno,
2002), and business cycle volatility (Fatas and Mihov, 2001).
    Within this broad set of theories, one that has received considerable attention focuses on
the relationship between the size of the government and the degree of economic development.
In fact, one of the best-established empirical regularities in public ...nance is the existence
of a positive relationship between the size of government spending (relative to GDP) and
real GDP per capita.     This so-called Wagner's Law, also known as the law of increasing
state activities, is named after the German economist Adolph Wagner's empirical analysis of
Western Europe at the end of the 19th century. Wagner (1883, 1893) pointed out that, as
national income rises, public spending tends to increase, both at the extensive margin (i.e.,
new activities are undertaken) and intensive margin (i.e., existing activities are performed on
a larger scale). Speci...cally, Wagner argued that the public sector would take over and ex-
pand administrative, regulatory, and protective activities previously performed by the private
sector because, as nations develop, they face increased complexity in terms of legal and ad-


                                              3
ministrative frameworks. Wagner also predicted the expansion of public expenditures related
to culture and welfare based on the presumption that as income rises, citizens will increase
the demand for services, such as education, public health, old age pension, and other social
protection programs. In fact, these types of goods and services are viewed as luxury goods
(i.e., the income elasticity of demand exceeds unity) and have, in principle, more characteris-
tics of public goods than private goods, in which case public provision seems to be the norm.
Finally, Wagner was of the view that government intervention would be required to manage
and ...nance natural monopolies and ensure the smooth operation of market forces.                           While
not uncontested, these arguments were later re...ned by, among others, Peacock and Wiseman
(1967), Musgrave (1969), and Bird (1971).
       Figure 3 shows that, as predicted by Wagner'
                                                  s law and a large, and more recent, body of
empirical evidence, there is indeed a very strong association between GDP per capita and the
size of government spending (relative to GDP).1 Based on this framework, countries above
(below) the ...tted line are countries with a size of government spending larger (smaller) than
that of a typical country with the same level of income per capita.2 For example, Honduras ­
a lower-middle-income country, based on the World Bank income classi...cation, with a GDP
per capita of $4,785 ­has a ratio of public spending to GDP of 23 percent, while Jamaica's­
an upper-middle-income country with a GDP per capita of $8,528 ­is 27 percent. However,
Costa Rica ­ an upper-middle-income country with a GDP per capita of $14,471 (i.e., a per
capita income 3 times as high and 70 percent larger than that of Honduras and Jamaica,
respectively) ­has a ratio of public spending to GDP of just 18 percent.


                                           3 


       Interestingly, de...ning "excess" spending as the ratio G/GDP minus the predicted ratio
G/GDP from the ...tted line in Figure 3, it follows, from individual country examples in Figure
3 and more systematic evidence from Figure 4, that countries with positive excess spending
(like Honduras, Jamaica, Argentina, and Greece) tend to have higher VAT rates than those
   1
      Most of the recent empirical evidence regarding the existence of Wagner'   s law is based on country-speci...c
analyses as opposed to cross-sectional analyses (like the one shown in Figure 3). While, strictly speaking, a
cross-sectional analysis is technically less accurate (as it does not control for other country determinants that
may be constant over time), this more global cross-section analytical framework should allow us to draw some
relevant policy insights in a more transparent way.
    2
      For comparison purposes, GDP per capita is PPP-based. Figures are in constant 2011 PPP dollars.




                                                         4
with negative excess spending (like Guatemala, Costa Rica, New Zealand, and Australia).


                                     4 


This evidence suggests that countries such as Guatemala, with a low level of provision of
public goods for its degree of development, may reach a more typical level of provision of
public goods by collecting more revenues from increases in the VAT rate with little e¤ect on
economic activity. Note that this analysis is quite conservative regarding the positive e¤ect of
these ...scal changes since it does not include the potential output e¤ect of higher government
spending (associated with larger ...scal revenues). In fact, in the 2016 Article IV Consultation
for Guatemala, the IMF argued that

         [w]hile the ...rst-best option is to quickly mobilize revenue to cover the originally
      planned budget spending in 2016, a temporary relaxation of the overall de...cit (to
      its historical average of 2 percent of GDP) could be justi...ed to prevent further
      cuts in social and capital spending in the event of revenue shortfalls. The acute
      problem of extreme poverty and malnutrition as well as the dire infrastructure
      and security needs could warrant maintaining a de...cit at 2 percent of GDP, or
      even modestly higher, over the medium term to allow the time needed for revenue
      mobilization ...This would not jeopardize ...scal sustainability (Annex III) and be
      consistent with current implementation capacity [Moreover,] tax policy measures
      are also needed...   Reform of tax and customs administration is a key priority,
      both to raise revenue and reduce corruption.

   This view about the importance of revenue mobilization in countries with low levels of
provision of public goods and social and infrastructure gaps is, indeed, in line with the evidence
presented in Figures 3 and 4. In a similar vein, and mainly due to the need to reduce the
...scal de...cit, Costa Rica's ...scal authorities sent to Congress in 2016 a draft law to increase
the VAT rate by one percentage point in 2016 (i.e., from 13 to 14 percent) and another one
in 2017 (from 14 to 15 percent).




                                                 5
3    Policy implications II: On revenue mobilization in commodity-
     dependent countries

Since the fall in commodity prices in 2014, most commodity-rich countries (especially those
whose ...scal revenue structure depends "excessively" upon commodity revenues) have been
facing a growing ...scal challenge as the price fall has increasingly been perceived as more
permanent than anticipated. Indeed, Figure 5 shows, for a sample of 55 countries for which
commodity revenue data were available, that the share of commodity revenues (as percentage
of total revenues) tracks very well that of commodity prices.3             Since commodity prices are
expected to remain low in the years to come, so will commodity revenues.                   This, in turn,
shows the serious challenge faced by commodity-rich countries and particularly by those with
high commodity revenue dependency.


                                        5 


    Figure 6 shows the association between the economy's dependency on commodities (prox-
ied by the commodity GDP as a percentage of total GDP) and the commodity revenue depen-
dency (proxied by commodity revenues as a percentage of total revenues). Not surprisingly,
the ...tted line shows that the higher is commodity GDP, the larger is the share of commodity
revenues in total revenues.4       For example, in a country like Kuwait, where oil production
represents about 60 percent of total GDP, oil revenues constitute about 90 percent of total
revenues. In contrast, in the Philippines, oil production represents less than 1 percent in both
GDP and ...scal revenues.       One can view countries above the ...tted line as countries whose
...scal revenue structure depends "excessively" upon commodity revenues relative to a typical
country with the same level of economic dependency on commodities. The opposite is true
for countries below the ...tted line.      For example, while in Papua New Guinea commodity
   3
     The commodity coverage includes mining and/or hydrocarbons commodities. The list of countries and
commodity coverage comprises the following countries. For both mining and/or hydrocarbons commodities:
Australia, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, DRC, Indonesia, Mauritania, Papua New Guinea, and Viet-
nam. For hydrocarbons commodities: Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Brunei, Cameroon, Chad, Congo
Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia, Mex-
ico, Myanmar, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Philippines, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Sudan,
Syria, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, Uzbekistan, Venezuela,
and Yemen. For mining commodities: Botswana, Chile, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, Kyrgyz Republic, Lesotho,
Mongolia, Peru, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, and Zambia.
   4
     Unlike Figure 3, Figure 6 suggests that a non-linear estimation would not increase the predictive power
relative to the linear estimation.




                                                     6
production represents about 32 percent of GDP and revenue dependency is about 34 percent,
in Nigeria commodity production represents about 18 percent of GDP (i.e., almost half of that
of Papua New Guinea) and revenue dependency is about 77 percent (i.e., more than twice as
that observed in Papua New Guinea).


                                   6 


Interestingly, de...ning "excess" commodity revenue dependency as commodity revenue (as
percentage of GDP) minus the predicted commodity revenue (as percentage of GDP) from
the ...tted line of Figure 6, it follows, from individual country examples in Figure 6 and
more systematic evidence from Figure 7, that countries with "excess" commodity revenue
dependency (like Malaysia, Yemen, and Nigeria) tend to have lower VAT rates (or no VAT at
all, as in the cases of Bahrain, Brunei, and Iraq) than those with negative "excess"commodity
revenue dependency (like Chile, Papua New Guinea, Trinidad and Tobago, and Republic of
Congo).
                                   7 

This evidence suggests that countries, such as Nigeria, with "excessive" dependency on com-
modity revenues could quickly mobilize revenues from non-commodity related activities by
increasing their VAT rates with relatively little e¤ect on economic activity.   This evidence
is in line with the IMF 2016 Nigeria's Article IV Consultation, which "urged a gradual in-
crease in the VAT rate, further improvements in revenue administration, and a broadening of
the tax base." It should be noted that Nigeria is one of Africa'
                                                               s largest economies and has
one of the lowest VAT rates in the world at 5 percent. In particular, Nigeria's VAT rate is
much lower than that of other members of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). The average VAT rate in the ECOWAS (excluding Nigeria) is 16.5 percent,
with rates between 10 and 20 percent. In fact, several proposals have been submitted to the
Nigerian Congress to deal with the new normal of low oil prices, with new VAT rate proposals
ranging from 7.5 to 10 percent. This view about the importance of revenue mobilization in
countries whose ...scal revenue structure depends "excessively"on commodities is in line with
the evidence presented in Figures 6 and 7. Indeed, several commodity-dependent economies
including Nigeria, Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and United Arab Emirates
(with no VAT or GST taxes) are planning to increase/implement a VAT rate.



                                              7
4        Policy implications III: Debt sustainability analysis (DSA)

This section explores some practical implications of the non-linear e¤ect of tax changes on
output for DSA. The most basic equation that characterizes the evolution of public debt
dynamics at a horizon  in DSA is given by5

                                          1+
                               + =            +¬ 1 ¬ (+ ¬ + )                                            (1)
                                        1 + +

where , , and  denote public debt, revenue, and primary spending, respectively, expressed
as a percentage of GDP, and         is the real interest rate paid on public debt, typically assumed
to be constant. Notice that  the growth rate of output, is assumed to be exogenous. While
    is sometimes allowed to change over time (to take into account the debt implications of
di¤erent growth paths), such a path is set exogenously and does not capture the endogenous
response to, for example, a change in tax policy.
        Given our ...ndings regarding the non-linear response of output to tax changes, equation
(1) should, ideally, internalize the endogenous response of output. Naturally, the same would
be true of any other ...scal shock such as, for example, an increase or decrease in government
spending. While the DSA could, in principle, also endogenize the response to any other type
of shock, these endogeneity considerations seem more obvious when dealing with variables
that enter directly equation (1).        To analyze the e¤ects of tax rate changes on output in
the context of the DSA, we will rely on a simple, back-of-the-envelope type of analysis that
enriches equation (1) by including the e¤ect of tax changes not only on revenue collection
(i.e., ), but also on output growth (i.e., ).
        To characterize the e¤ect of changes in tax rates in a simple way, we assume that


                                          =                                                              (2)


where  and  are revenues and output, respectively.                  Moreover, we will assume that the
growth rate at horizon  depends on the change in tax rate at  = 0. Speci...cally,

                                                        +
                                         +   = +                                                         (3)
                                                      (  )
    5
    This basic approach does not take into account the currency of denomination of debt (e.g., Diaz-Alvarado,
Izquierdo, and Panizza, 2004) or the uncertainty of the debt to GDP ratio by exploiting the variance and
covariance among debt determinants (e.g., Arizala, Castro, Cavallo, and Powell, 2008).




                                                     8
where      is an exogenous source of change in growth and the second term on the right-hand
side of (3) captures the e¤ect on economic growth at horizon  of the change in the tax rate
 periods before. For example, when evaluating          +   at  = 0, one would be endogenizing
the impact e¤ect of a tax change on economic growth.
    We will now resort to equations (1)-(3) and use a set of initial conditions for the variables
involved to evaluate the e¤ect of alternative approaches to DSA. Speci...cally, we will assume
an initial stock of public debt of 50 percent of GDP, an exogenous growth rate of 2 percent
(i.e.,    = 002), a real interest rate of 3 percent, and a primary de...cit of 2 percent. When
evaluating the e¤ects of tax changes on growth and debt-to-GDP ratio, we will focus on the
e¤ects, after 2 years, of an increase in the VAT rate of 1.5 percentage points (as in Figure 2).
    Based on equation (1), Figure 8 shows, as a benchmark, that if there were no change in
the VAT rate, the debt-to-GDP ratio would increase by 5 percentage points (i.e., from 50
to 55 percent) after 2 years. Naturally, in this ...rst benchmark scenario, there would be no
change in output. In the second scenario, we evaluate the e¤ects of a 1.5 percentage-points
tax hike on the debt-to-GDP ratio, without considering its e¤ect on economic activity (the
typical assumption in DSA). Given equation (2), this would imply an increase in revenues
(expressed as a percentage of GDP) of 1.5 percent and, as a result, a reduction of 1.5 percent
in the 2 percent primary de...cit (i.e., the new post-tax hike primary de...cit equals 0.5 percent).
Such a reduction in the primary ...scal de...cit lowers the increase in debt/GDP by 3 percentage
points.    In other words, the debt-to-GDP ratio increases from 50 to 52 percent (under the
tax hike scenario) compared to 55 percent (under the no tax change scenario).
    In the third scenario, economic activity is allowed to be a¤ected by the tax hike in a linear
way (i.e., according to conventional linear estimation strategies).      Based on Gunter et al 's
(2021) estimations, output falls by a total of 0.9 percent after 2 years. This fall in economic
activity increases the debt-to-GDP ratio which, in turn, partially o¤sets the positive e¤ect
on debt reduction of the fall in the primary ...scal de...cit. Speci...cally, as indicated in Figure
8, the debt-to-GDP ratio increases by 2.4 percentage points in this case, compared to 2.0
in Scenario 2.    But this begs the question: is this the proper way of endogenizing the role
of tax changes on output in the DSA, given the non-linear e¤ect of tax changes on output?
Certainly not. To illustrate this, scenario 4 in Figure 8 compares two cases depending on the
initial VAT rate: (i) the initial VAT rate is set at a low level (12 percent) and (ii) the initial
VAT rate is set at a high level (24 percent). The di¤erence between the two cases is striking.
When the initial VAT rate is low, the growth e¤ect is virtually zero (i.e., output falls after two


                                                 9
years by just 0.1 percent). Hence, the debt-to-GDP ratio increases by 2 percentage points in
this case, the same as in scenario 2. In contrast, when the initial VAT rate is high, output
falls after two years by 2.8 percent. This drop in output largely o¤sets the positive e¤ect in
debt reduction of the fall in the primary ...scal de...cit. Speci...cally, the rise of 1.5 percentage
points in the VAT rate (from 24 to 25.5 percent) reduces the debt-to-GDP ratio by less than
2 percentage points compared to the case of "no change in VAT" (scenario 1).


                                      8 


    These back-of-the-envelope calculations clearly suggest that endogenizing the e¤ect of tax
changes on output may have important implications for debt sustainability, particularly when
the e¤ect on output is non-linear.


5    Policy implications IV: Implications for the La¤er curve

The La¤er curve is a theory developed by supply-side economist Arthur La¤er.               His main
point is that the relationship between tax rates and tax revenues is non-linear and that the
size of the tax base is a¤ected by the response of economic agents, depending on the level of
the initial tax rate. In line with our non-linear arguments, and a very large tradition in public
...nance that builds on the role of distortionary arguments, La¤er argued that when tax rates
are "low enough", economic activity is not much distorted to begin with and that, in such a
context, higher tax rates should be associated with larger tax revenues. Why? Because the
size of the tax base does not decrease (increase) much in response to an increase (decrease)
in tax rates. In contrast, when tax rates are "high enough" (which, in this supply-side type
of arguments, is a proxy for high levels of distortion), further increases (decreases) in the tax
rate could actually decrease (increase) revenues.       This sort of counterintuitive association
between tax rates and revenues reects, based on supply-side arguments, the large response
of economic agents to high initial levels of distortion.
    Relying on our non-linear ...ndings, Figure 9 illustrates that, indeed, this seems to be the
case for the VAT. Considering, as in Figures 2 and 8, an increase in the VAT of 1.5 percentage-
points, the solid red line shows the corresponding increase in revenues as a percentage of GDP
for di¤erent initial values of the VAT rate.


                                      9 

                                                 10
For su¢ ciently low initial levels of the VAT rate, the increase in revenues (as a percentage of
GDP) is around 1.5 percentage points (reecting the fact that the tax base does not respond
much). In contrast, the increase in revenues falls with higher initial levels of the VAT rate.
In fact, for VAT rates higher than 32 percent, an increase in the VAT rate would actually
decrease revenues as the response of the tax base more than o¤sets the direct e¤ect of the tax
rate change.
       Figure 9 also shows the number of countries that, as of November 2017, have di¤erent VAT
rates as well as their implied location in the estimated relationship. For a total of 172 countries
with VAT taxation, the size of the dots reects the number of countries having di¤erent current
VAT rates.      Small-sized dots indicate VAT rates present in 1 to 6 countries, medium-sized
dots indicate VAT rates present in 7 to 11 countries, and large-sized dots indicate VAT rates
present in 18 to 24 countries. The median and average VAT rate, 16 percent, is far from the
VAT rate of 32 percent. While the minimum VAT rate is 5 percent, the maximum VAT rate
is 27 percent (for only one country). In other words, no country in the world has a VAT rate
above 32 percent, indicating that no country could reduce the VAT rate and still increase the
corresponding revenue collection. In sum, while the La¤er curve is theoretically plausible in
our framework, in practice no country is on the "wrong" side of the La¤er curve.
       This evidence suggests that countries like, for example, Nigeria, with "excessive" depen-
dency on commodity ...scal revenues could quickly mobilize revenues from non-commodity
related activities by increasing their VAT rates with relatively little e¤ect on economic activ-
ity.


6       Concluding remarks

Based on our paper titled "Non-linear e¤ects of tax changes on output: The role of the initial
level of taxation," this companion paper discusses some relevant policy implications.          We
...rst focused on the relevance of our arguments for revenue mobilization in countries with low
levels of provision of public goods and social and infrastructure gaps (measured as deviations
from the predicted value based on Wagner'
                                        s law).         Since such countries have typically low
initial tax rates, we concluded that they could increase the VAT rate, and thus tax collection,
at little or no cost and thus raise productive government spending.
       We then focused on commodity-dependent countries and showed that countries with "ex-
cessive" dependence on commodity revenues tend to have a relative low VAT rate or none at


                                                11
all. Hence, as in the previous case, these countries could increase the VAT tax rate at little
or not cost and thus reduce their dependency on commodity revenues. Thirdly, we explored
some practical implications of our empirical ...ndings for debt sustainability analysis. In par-
ticular, we showed that, when initial VAT rates are high, a tax hike is much less e¤ective in
preventing a rise in public debt if account is taken of the negative e¤ect of higher VAT rates
on output. Finally, we showed the implications for the La¤er curve of the non-linear response
of output to increases in VAT rates and concluded that no country in the world could actually
reduce the VAT rate and still increase total revenues.




                                              12
References

 [1] Alesina, A., and R. Wacziarg (1998). "Openness, country size and government," Journal
    of Public Economics, Vol. 69, Issue 3, pp. 305-321.

 [2] Arizala, F., C. Castro, E. Cavallo, and A. Powell (2008). "Debt sustainability fan charts:
    Combining multivariate regression analysis and external forecasts,"Draft Working Paper
    (IDB).

 [3] Bird, R. (1971). "Wagner'
                             s`law' of expanding state activity," Public Finance, Vol. 26,
    No. 1, pp. 1-26.

 [4] Diaz-Alvarado, C., A. Izquierdo, and U. Panizza (2004). "Fiscal sustainability in emerging
    market countries with an application to Ecuador,"Research Department Working Paper
    No. 511 (IDB).

 [5] Easterly, W., and S. Rebelo (1993). "Fiscal policy and economic growth: An empirical
    investigation," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 32, Issue 3, pp. 417-458.

 [6] Fatas, A., and I. Mihov (2001). "Government size and automatic stabilizers: Interna-
    tional and intranational evidence," Journal of International Economics, Vol. 55, Issue 1,
    pp. 3-28.

 [7] Gunter, S., D. Riera-Crichton, C. Vegh, and G. Vuletin (2021). "Non-linear e¤ects of
    tax changes on output: The role of the initial level of taxation," Journal of International
    Economics, forthcoming.

 [8] Milesi-Ferretti, G., R. Perotti, and M. Rostagno (2002). "Electoral systems and public
    spending," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 117, Issue 2, pp. 609-657.

 [9] Musgrave, R. (1969). Fiscal systems (New Haven: Yale University Press).

[10] Peacock, A., and J. Wiseman (1967). The growth of public expenditure in the United
    Kingdom (London: Allen and Unwin).

[11] Persson, T., and G. Tabellini (1999). "The size and scope of government: Comparative
    politics with rational politicians," European Economic Review, Vol. 43, Issues 4-6, pp.
    699-735.



                                              13
[12] Rodrik, D. (1998). "Why do more open economies have bigger governments?," Journal
    of Political Economy, Vol. 106, No. 5, pp. 997-1032.

[13] Romer, C., and D. Romer (2010). "The macroeconomic e¤ects of tax changes: Estimates
    based on a new measure of ...scal shocks," American Economic Review, Vol. 100, No. 3,
    pp. 763-801.

[14] Wagner, A. (1883). Finanzwissenschaft (Leipzig: C.F. Winter).

[15] Wagner, A. (1893). Grundlegung der politischen oekonomie (Leipzig: C.F. Winter).




                                            14
                                                          Figure 1.  Role of initial tax rate level  
                                                               and size of tax rate change 




                                                                                                                                          
                                  
                                 Notes:  Dark  blue  represents  a  statistically  zero  tax  multiplier.    Source:  Gunter,  RieraCrichton, 
                                 Vegh, and Vuletin (2021). 




                                           Figure 2.  Tax multipliers for countries around the world 




Notes: Tax multipliers are calculated based on a 1.5 percentagepoints change in the VAT rate.  Light blue indicates statistically zero tax multipliers.  Source: Gunter, 
RieraCrichton, Vegh, and Vuletin (2021). 
       Figure 3.  Relationship between GDP per capita and size of 
                  government spending relative to GDP 




                                                                                                         
                                                    
Notes:  Data  correspond  to  the  year  2015. Total  number  of  countries  in  the  sample  is  107.  
Sources:  Data for government spending over GDP ratio from WEOIMF.  Data for GDP per capita 
from World Penn Tables.   




   Figure 4.  Relationship between "excess" spending and VAT rate 




                                                                                                         
                                                    
Notes:  Data  correspond  to  the  year  2015.  Total  number  of  countries  in  the  sample  is  107.  
Sources: Data for government spending over GDP ratio from WEOIMF.  Data for GDP per  capita 
from World Penn Tables.  
        Figure 5.  Relationship between fiscal commodity revenues  
                          and price of commodities 




                                                                                                                      
                                                           
Notes:  Total  number  of  countries  in  the  sample  is  55.   Price  of  minerals  includes  copper, 
aluminum,  iron,  ore,  tin,  nickel,  zinc,  lead,  and  uranium  prices  indices.   Price  of  oil  is  the  simple 
average  of  three  spot  prices  (Dated  Brent,  West  Texas  Intermediate,  and  the  Dubai  Fateh.  
Sources:  Data for commodity revenues (as % of total revenues) based on authors' computations 
using IMF and IDB information.  Price of minerals and oil from IMF, PMETA, and POILAPSP.   




 Figure 6.  Relationship between commodity GDP (as % of GDP) and 
             commodity revenues (as % of total revenues) 




                                                                                                                      
                                                           
Notes: Data correspond to the period 20102013. Total number of countries in the sample is 55.  
Sources:   Data  for  commodity  revenues  (as  %  of  total  revenues)  and  commodity  GDP  (as  %  of 
GDP) is based on authors' computations, using IMF and IDB information.  
             Figure 7.  Relationship between "excess" commodity revenue 
                                dependency and VAT rate 




                                                                                                        
                                                        
        Notes: Data correspond to the period 20102013.  Total number of countries in the sample is 55.  
        Sources: Data for commodity revenues (as % of total revenues) and commodity GDP (as % of GDP) 
        based on authors' computations, using IMF and IDB information.  




    Figure 8.  Change in debt to GDP ratio and cumulative output change under  
            different model assumptions (two years after the tax shock) 
                                           




                                                                                                        
                                                        
    Source:  Authors' computations.  


                   
 

       Figure 9.  Relation between initial VAT rate and change in revenues as percentage of 
               GDP in response to an increase in VAT rate of 1.5 percentagepoints  




                                                                           
                                                                                                                                  
    Notes:  The  solid  red  line  indicates  the  change  in  revenues  (as  percentage  of  GDP)  in  response  to  a  1.5  percentagepoint 
    increase in the VAT rate, taking into account the nonlinear findings and assuming (without loss of generality) that revenues 
    are  given  by  the  VAT  rate  times  GDP.   Dotted  points  reflect  number  of  countries  with  different  VAT  rates  (as  of  November 
    2017).  Source:  Authors' computations.    
 
