                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         GUARANTEED MARKETS AND CORPORATE SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

                                       Sharon Belenzon
                                       Larisa C. Cioaca

                                      Working Paper 28644
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28644


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We thank Ashish Arora, Victor Bennett, Nick Bloom, Ronnie Chatterji, Wesley Cohen, Mirko
Draca, Dan Gross, Sabrina Howell, Sharique Hasan, Florian Ederer, Andrea Patacconi, David
Robinson, Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen for their helpful comments. We thank Lia
Sheer, Dror Shvadron, Honggi Lee, Joyce Ma, and JK Suh for their assistance with the data
construction. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Sharon Belenzon and Larisa C. Cioaca. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Guaranteed Markets and Corporate Scientific Research
Sharon Belenzon and Larisa C. Cioaca
NBER Working Paper No. 28644
April 2021
JEL No. O3,O31,O32,O33,O38

                                           ABSTRACT

Firms invest in scientific research to increase their chances of landing lucrative procurement
contracts with the U.S. government. This is an important, but understudied channel through
which the government encourages corporate research, particularly when other market
mechanisms are insufficient. Using data on $2.3 trillion in contracts matched to 4,323 publicly
traded manufacturing firms from 1980 through 2015, we estimate the effect of procurement
contracts on upstream (scientific publications) and downstream (patents) corporate R&D. We
document a positive effect of contracts on publications, and show that the effect is stronger when
market incentives are weak. Procurement contracts encourage publications that: (i) are not used in
the firm's internal inventions, (ii) spill over to rivals' inventions, and (iii) are not protected by
patents. However, the effect has weakened over time, because the U.S. government has
emphasized reduced cost and increased efficiency and transparency in contract awards. Following
such policy reforms as the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994, the share of R&D
contracts in all contracts declined from a high of 25 percent in 1998 to 7 percent in 2015, while
the share of commercial contracts grew from 6 percent to 14 percent over the same period. Our
results imply that the reorientation of government procurement toward commercially proven
technologies has contributed to the withdrawal of corporations from participating in scientific
research.


Sharon Belenzon
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
sharon.belenzon@duke.edu

Larisa C. Cioaca
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
100 Fuqua Way
Durham 27708
larisa.cioaca@duke.edu
1        Introduction

Between 1980 and 2015, American businesses funded $1.7 trillion in basic and applied research, which

accounted for 45 percent of all research performed in the United States.1 By lowering the cost of research

and increasing its private value, the U.S. government plays an important role in encouraging corporations

to participate in research. The government affects cost directly using subsidies and grants (Bloom, Griffith

and Van Reenen, 2002; Fleming et al., 2019; Wallsten, 2000), and indirectly via spillovers from government

funded research in national laboratories and universities (Adams, Chiang and Jensen, 2003; Cohen, Nelson

and Walsh, 2002; Goolsbee, 1998; Jaffe and Lerner, 2001; National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,

and Medicine, 2021). At the same time, government procurement contracts can increase the private value

of upstream research through guaranteed downstream markets.2 This channel is particularly effective

at driving corporate research when private markets are insufficient. Weak market incentives arise when

commercial applications for novel technologies lie in the future (Weiss, 2014), knowledge spills over to

rivals (Arora, Belenzon and Sheer, 2021; Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen, 2013), and incomplete

contracts and asymmetric information make markets for technology inefficient (Arrow, 1962; Edler and

Georghiou, 2007; Kremer, Levin and Snyder, 2020). In this paper, we document the government's role in

de-risking upstream corporate research by guaranteeing downstream markets, and explore how this role

has changed over time.

        The development of the laser exemplifies how procurement contracts can drive corporate research by

filling voids in commercial demand.3 The U.S. Air Force Office of Scientific Research, Advanced Research

Projects Agency, and the U.S. Army Signal Corps all funded competing research teams in the R&D race

to build the first laser. Military contractor Hughes Research Laboratories demonstrated the Ruby laser on

May 16, 1960. Yet, it took many years for commercial laser markets to develop. Throughout the 1960s,

it was government support for measurement and optical communication lasers that enabled corporate

research laboratories to scale and improve the technology. By 1969, the Department of Defense's share

as a laser customer was 63.4 percent (Bromberg, 1991). In the early 1970s, growth in military laser

procurement slowed, universities curtailed their laser purchases, and companies redirected their R&D

toward civilian applications that held promise for short-term payoffs. The large potential gains from
    1
     Data are from Tables 2, 3, and 4 of the National Patterns of R&D Resources series published by the National Center
for Science and Engineering Statistics (National Science Foundation, 2019).
   2
     The government also affects the value of corporate R&D by designing patent policies, enforcing antitrust laws, and
setting regulations (see Aschhoff and Sofka, 2009; Bloom, Van Reenen and Williams, 2019; Cunningham, Ederer and Ma,
2021; Jaffe, Newell and Stavins, 2003). These indirect mechanisms are outside the scope of the present paper.
   3
     Appendix A summarizes the steps in a typical government procurement process.



                                                          2
supplanting existing telephone networks motivated corporate investment in heterojunction semiconductor

lasers. The first fiber optics communications were demonstrated at Bell Labs in 1976. By the 1980s, lasers

had become prominent in the consumer economy as supermarket scanners and optical discs (Hecht, 2010).

There is little doubt that the development of the commercial laser industry was enabled by government

demand in the technology's early years.4

       In 2015, the U.S. government awarded businesses $440 billion in procurement contracts.5 Of those

procurement dollars, $39 billion were for R&D services, compared to just $4 billion in grants to businesses.6

That year, the government's total support for R&D performed in all government, university, business, and

nonprofit laboratories was $120 billion.7 Despite their large size, we know relatively little about the effect

of procurement contracts on corporate R&D, and how the effect operates. Most prior studies examine the

public funding mechanism by focusing on grants from the Small Business Innovation Research program

and the National Institutes of Health (e.g., Audretsch, Link and Scott, 2002; Azoulay et al., 2019; Howell,

2017; Lerner, 1999; Wallsten, 2000). Several studies investigate spillovers from national laboratories (e.g.,

Adams, Chiang and Jensen, 2003; Jaffe and Lerner, 2001; Link, Siegel and Van Fleet, 2011; Link and Scott,

2020; Mowery and Ziedonis, 2001) or universities (e.g., Cohen, Nelson and Walsh, 2002; Tartari and Stern,

2021). Procurement contracts are the focus of only a handful of studies (e.g., Barder, Kremer and Levine,

2005; Howell et al., 2021; Lichtenberg, 1988; Moretti, Steinwender and Van Reenen, 2019; Slavtchev and

Wiederhold, 2016). Yet, none distinguish between upstream and downstream R&D. This distinction is

important because weak private market incentives should be especially relevant for upstream research.

Guaranteed demand should be more consequential for technologies that cannot be easily commercialized

via private markets, either because they do not have clear commercial applications, or because competition

makes it harder for the original inventors to appropriate sufficient private returns (for example, due to
   4
     Mowery (1998) makes a similar case for commercial aerospace, semiconductors, computers, and software.
   5
     Data extracted using the Advanced Search tool from the USAspending.gov website. The following filters were used: (i)
time period = fiscal year 2015; (ii) award type = grants vs. contracts and contract IDVs; (iii) recipient type = businesses;
and (iv) product or service code = research and development (USAspending.gov, 2021b). Not all procurement contracts are
reported publicly either because the work is classified or sensitive, or because the amount is below the reporting threshold,
which ranges between $2,000 and $25,000 during our sample years.
   6
     It is important to distinguish between R&D contracts and grants (David, Hall and Toole, 2000). Under a contract,
the contractor provides research services to the government for a fee. Under a grant--a form of financial assistance--the
government transfers something of value (either money or in kind) to the grantee so the grantee can carry out activities
to benefit the public (Datalab, 2020). The economic mechanisms behind the effects are also different. While grants are
typically used to lower the cost of R&D, which is mostly relevant for small firms, R&D contracts are used as a "ticket" by
large firms to gain access to lucrative downstream production contracts.
   7
     Data are from Table 2 of the National Patterns of R&D Resources series published by the National Center for Science
and Engineering Statistics (National Science Foundation, 2019). The $120 billion figure included $53 billion for government
entities, $34 billion for universities, $27 billion for corporations, and $6 billion for other nonprofits. The $27 billion in grants
and contracts to firms from National Science Foundation (2019) survey data and the $39 billion in contracts to firms from
USAspending.gov (2021b) administrative data are not consistent for reasons outlined by Pece (2016).



                                                                 3
knowledge spillovers and weak patent protection).

    An important contribution of this paper is distinguishing between scientific research ("R") and down-

stream development ("D") in corporate R&D. Yet, a clear distinction may be difficult to draw, both

conceptually and empirically. Science can be defined as a systematic enterprise directed toward a bet-

ter understanding of the universe, while technology is concerned with the application of knowledge for

practical purposes.8 The main difference between scientific and technical knowledge is that the former is

concerned with general or universal laws, while the latter explains how and why specific artifacts work.

Because both advance understanding, this distinction is more a matter of degree than a stark dichotomy.

Empirically, using publications to measure scientific research and patents to measure technology presents

challenges as well.9 Clearly, advances in technology can find their way into publications, and scientific

knowledge sometimes can be patented (Murray and Stern, 2007). Yet, our premise is that research output

should appear in the scientific literature disproportionately more than technology development does.10

    With these caveats in mind, we begin by estimating the effect of government procurement contracts

on R&D expenditures, publications, and patents. We extend the panel of 4,323 firms and 58,245 firm-year

observations from Arora, Belenzon and Sheer (2021) by adding data on $2.3 trillion in contracts awarded

by the Department of Defense (DoD), Department of Energy (DoE), Health and Human Services (HHS),

and Veterans Affairs (VA). We measure firms' contracting activities using the value of contracts awarded,

upstream research using publications authored by corporate scientists, and downstream development using

patents.

    We then study how the composition of government procurement contracts has changed over time.

Sweeping policy changes in the 1980s and 1990s shifted the composition of contracts away from mission-

focused technologies that met unique government specifications (which accounted for the majority of

procurement dollars in the 1960s and 1970s) toward commercial items and dual use technologies (Weiss,

2014).11 Arguably, this reorientation toward technologies with proven commercial markets reduced the

government's role in de-risking upstream research.

    We present two sets of findings. The first documents an effect of contracts on corporate publications,
   8
     Technology consists of "both a set of specific designs and practices, and a body of generic knowledge that surrounds
these and provides understanding of how things work, key variables effecting performance, the nature of currently binding
constraints, and promising approaches to pushing these back" (Nelson, 1996, p. 350).
   9
     Publications are peer-reviewed journal articles and conference proceedings.
  10
     Arora, Belenzon and Sheer (2021) validate this premise using the Carnegie Mellon Survey of R&D-performing firms.
  11
     Dual use technologies can be used both in military and other strategic uses (e.g., nuclear) and in commercial applications
(Code of Federal Regulations, 2000). For example, in 1995, 25 percent of Department of Defense's $8.4 billion science and
technology budget was allocated to dual use technologies focused on information technology, advanced materials, advanced
manufacturing, and advanced simulation and modelling (Mowery, 1998; U.S. Department of Defense, 1995).



                                                              4
but not on patents. There are three potential explanations for why we do not find an effect for patents: (i)

guaranteed demand may reduce the need to exclude rivals through patents; (ii) the government may restrict

patenting due to disclosure concerns; and (iii) market incentives are likely to be stronger for downstream

development, rendering guaranteed markets less effective. We explore the mechanism behind the effect of

contracts on publications. Guaranteed demand should affect corporate research when capturing private

returns in private markets is difficult. Consistent with this argument, we find a larger effect of contracts

on publications that are: (i) not cited by the firm's own patents (missing downstream applications); (ii)

cited by rival firms' patents (indicating a strong market stealing effect due to spillovers to close product-

market competitors); and (iii) not protected by the firm's own patents. In addition, we find a stronger

effect for larger firms, which is consistent with manufacturing capabilities and complementary assets being

necessary to execute complex downstream government contracts.12

       A major empirical challenge is how to deal with the endogeneity of procurement contracts (David,

Hall and Toole, 2000). Common shocks can affect both corporate R&D and the allocation of government

contracts. If the government targets fields that experience positive technology or demand shocks, our

OLS estimates would be upward-biased. If, on the other hand, contracts target fields that experience

negative shocks, our OLS estimates would be downward-biased. We take two approaches to mitigate

this concern. Following existing literature, the first uses aggregate industry variation in government

procurement as an instrument for contracts awarded to a focal firm. The identifying assumption is that

aggregate changes in contracts at the industry level are unrelated to the firm's idiosyncratic shock in the

innovation equation, and that firm exposure to these changes is pre-determined. The second approach

exploits a quasi-natural experiment surrounding the end of the Cold War, which triggered substantial

reallocation in government contracts due to changes in national priorities. For example, information

technology and healthcare industries benefited from increased contract funding, while defense industries

saw their funding drop significantly. Arguably, these changes arose from new geopolitical conditions, rather

than from technology or demand shocks.13 Our causal estimates point to a positive effect of contracts

on corporate publications, but not on patents. We estimate that a $5 million increase in R&D contracts

leads to one additional publication.14 The causal estimates are larger than OLS, suggesting that contracts
  12
     Appendix Figure A1 illustrates an intricate process used to procure technology-intensive defense products.
  13
     A concern is that the Cold War ended because of American technological superiority. This argument may be plausible
in the case of defense technologies, but not energy or health technologies. Our results are robust to excluding Department
of Defense contracts from our analyses. Also, our analysis is conducted at the firm level, which further mitigates the
identification concern, because it is unlikely that any single firm was responsible for the end of the Cold War.
  14
     Gross and Sampat (2020) trace the origins of R&D contracts to the Office of Scientific Research and Development
during World War II. They note that contracting for R&D services allowed the government to balance flexibility, the



                                                            5
target fields that experience negative technology or demand shocks.15

    Second, we show that the effect on publications was stronger before the mid-1990s, when policy reforms

changed the composition of procurement contracts. By dollar value, the share of R&D contracts in all

contracts fell from a high of 25 percent in 1998 to 7 percent in 2015 (see the solid line in Figure 1). Within-

firm estimates indicate that R&D contracts decreased by almost 22 percent per decade. We interpret this

decline as pointing to a reduced importance of R&D races for downstream procurement. At the same

time, the share of commercial contract dollars in all contracts increased from 6 percent in 1998 to 14

percent in 2015 (see the dashed line in Figure 1).16 If the same policy had been in place during the 1960s

and 1970s, it would have been unlikely that the government would have been able to replace the missing

market demand for the laser technology previously discussed. Such policy would have severely damaged

the private returns to innovation in the research intensive early years of the laser industry. The decline

in the importance of R&D contracts relative to commercial contracts occurred across a wide range of

industries (see Appendix Figure F2). For example, Electronics saw its share of R&D contracts drop from

17 percent in 1998 to just 3 percent in 2015. Conversely, Drugs had the largest increase in the share of

commercial contracts, from 14 percent in 1998 to 77 percent in 2015.17

    The importance of firm scientific capabilities for contract value has fallen as well. Figure 2 shows

that the average contract value per $1 million in firm sales has remained relatively stable for firms that

perform scientific research (solid line), but has increased sharply for firms that never publish scientific

articles, from $2,000 in 1980 to $28,000 in 2015 (dashed line). Concurrently, the number of corporate

publications per $1 million in research contracts has declined from 14 in 1985 to 5 in 2015 (shaded area).

Arora, Belenzon and Patacconi (2018) document a decline in the stock market value and the mergers

and acquisitions value of scientific capabilities. We contribute to those results by showing that corporate

science has fallen out of favor not only with investors and managers, but also with the U.S. government.

    Our final examination focuses on temporal changes in the relationship between winning R&D races

and guaranteed downstream demand. The government has historically awarded a majority of procurement

contracts noncompetitively, providing guaranteed demand for firms that were able to demonstrate strong
intrinsic uncertainty of research, and coordination and information sharing across efforts when speed was of the essence.
  15
     This finding is consistent with government procurement aiming to maintain the existing military-industrial base (Con-
gressional Research Service, 2021a). For example, the U.S. Congress appropriated $2.5 billion in 1994 for the Defense
Reinvestment and Conversion Initiative, a transition assistance program helping industries affected by post-Cold War re-
ductions in defense spending (U.S. Government Accountability Office, 1997).
  16
     Commercial contracts are awarded using streamlined acquisition procedures that are designed to resemble transactions
in commercial markets.
  17
     Transportation had the smallest increase in the share of commercial contracts. This is not surprising given that the
government is the sole buyer of military aircraft and guided missiles, two of the largest industries included in this group.



                                                             6
                  Figure 1: Share of R&D Contracts in All Contracts Over Time




Notes : This figure plots the share of R&D contract dollars in all contracts awarded by DoD, DoE, HHS, and VA for our
sample firms over time (solid line). The share of commercial contract dollars in all contracts is presented from 1995 (the first
year when the classification is available) through 2015 (dashed line). Commercial contracts use special (usually simplified)
requirements that are designed to resemble transactions in the commercial market.


technical capabilities. In noncompetitive procurement, the government either selects the company to

buy from or restricts the bidding process to certain suppliers. Over time, pressures to reduce cost and

increase efficiency and transparency led to legislative mandates to use competition whenever practicable

(Congressional Research Service, 2011). Figure 3 shows that the share of competitive contracts in all

contracts (by dollar value) increased from 31 percent in 1980 to 64 percent in 2015. Competition increased

even more among service contracts, whether for R&D or non-R&D services. At the same time, the share

of noncompetitive product contracts dropped from 74 percent in 1980 to 54 percent in 2015. This change

should hamper corporate research if firms participate in upstream research to win competitive R&D races

as a pathway to subsequent noncompetitive production contracts.

    In summary, these trends underscore three key forces that jointly shape how government procurement

contracts drive corporate research: (i) diluted importance of R&D races in securing downstream guaran-

teed demand; (ii) a rise in the prevalence of commercial contracts, which limits the government's ability to

replace missing private demand; and (iii) a larger allocation of contracts to firms that do not participate

in scientific research.

    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 positions our study in the literature. Section 3


                                                               7
                              Figure 2: Average Contract Value Over Time




Notes : This figure plots the average contract value awarded to producers and nonproducers of science over time (left axis),
and the number of corporate publications per $1 million in research contracts (right axis). We classify a firm as a producer
of science if its annual number of publications over annual sales is above industry median value. Other firms are classified
as nonproducers of science. Average contract value normalized by sales is the ratio of total contract value and total sales.
Number of publications per $1 million in research contracts is the ratio of total number of publications to total value of
research contracts. Dollar values are adjusted using the GDP Implicit Price Deflator to reflect 2012 dollars (U.S. Bureau of
Economic Analysis, 2020).


presents the data, Section 4 outlines the econometric specifications, and Section 5 presents the results.

Section 6 concludes and suggests directions for future work.



2    Related Literature

A voluminous literature examines the government's effect on corporate R&D through subsidies, public

funding, and spillovers from national laboratories and universities (see David, Hall and Toole, 2000). Only

a handful of studies examine procurement contracts, and, to the best of our knowledge, none focus on

corporate participation in scientific research or test systematically the guaranteed demand mechanism.

    Most existing studies focus on lowering the cost of R&D through subsidies (e.g., Bloom, Griffith and

Van Reenen, 2002) and public funding. For example, small-firm research shows that Small Business

Innovation Research (SBIR) grants crowd out firm-financed R&D expenditures (Wallsten, 2000). Yet,

early-stage SBIR awards also increase forward citation-weighted patents, especially for financially con-

strained firms (Howell, 2017) and the likelihood of raising venture capital (Lerner, 1999). In a recent


                                                             8
            Figure 3: Share of Competitive Contracts in All Contracts Over Time




Notes : This figure presents the trend in the share of competitive contract dollars in all contracts of the same type obligated
by the DoD, DoE, HHS, and VA to all recipients (not limited to our sample firms). Competitive contracts are awarded using
full and open competition.


paper, Howell et al. (2021) evaluate policy reforms aimed at changing how the U.S. Air Force SBIR pro-

gram procures innovative technologies from small businesses. They compare the conventional approach to

R&D contracting, where firms respond to solicitations for specific research topics, with an open approach

that allows firms to submit proposals on any topic. Using data on 7,229 proposals submitted during

2017-2019 by 3,170 firms and a regression discontinuity design, they find that winning an open topic R&D

competition increases the likelihood of raising venture capital funding and improves the chances of win-

ning a subsequent non-SBIR contract from the Department of Defense. This finding supports the premise

of the present paper, with its focus on large firms, that winning R&D races is a pathway to subsequent

government contracts.

    Large-firm research shows that National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants have a positive effect on

corporate R&D (Azoulay et al., 2019). An additional $10 million in NIH grant funding for a research

area generates 2.3 additional biopharmaceutical firm patents in that area, or roughly one patent for every

2-3 NIH grants. This result underscores that patents are effective tools for appropriating returns from

corporate R&D in the biopharmaceutical industry. Yet, the NIH's tendency to fund new ideas has declined

over time (Packalen and Bhattacharya, 2020). Between the 1990s and the 2000s, grant support shifted



                                                              9
away from "edge science" and toward more traditional science. This coincides with the shift in procurement

contracts away from cutting-edge, mission-focused technologies and toward commercial items. It suggests

that the government's withdrawal from funding risky, explorative science that lays the foundation for later

breakthroughs occurred not only in contracts, but also in grants.

       Many studies focus on spillovers from government-funded research in national laboratories and uni-

versities to corporate R&D (e.g., Cohen, Nelson and Walsh, 2002; Fleming et al., 2019; Jaffe, Fogarty and

Banks, 1998; Link, Siegel and Van Fleet, 2011; Link and Scott, 2020). For example, Mowery and Ziedonis

(2001) document the relatively limited role of spinoffs in commercializing laboratory-owned technologies.

Jaffe and Lerner (2001) show an increase in patenting of federally owned technologies after 1986, with no

overall decrease in citation intensity, which they attribute to laboratories reorienting their research toward

areas with greater commercial applicability. They also find that laboratories performing a greater share

of basic science have fewer patents and cooperative research and development agreements (CRADAs).

These patterns complement the trend in commercial contracts from Figure 1. Adams, Chiang and Jensen

(2003) find that corporate laboratories that have CRADAs patent more and invest more in R&D expen-

ditures. They also document that CRADAs dominate other channels of technology transfer from federal

laboratories to firms. These patterns point to the importance of formal agreements between firms and

government entities.

       Only a handful of studies examine procurement contracts and are closely related to the present paper.

Lichtenberg (1988) investigates the effect of Department of Defense contracts on private R&D expendi-

tures using a panel of 169 U.S. contractors between 1979 and 1984.18 He distinguishes between competitive

procurement (contracts awarded using full and open competition) and noncompetitive procurement (con-

tracts exempted from full and open competition; the list of exceptions is included in Appendix B). He uses

aggregate product level contracts to instrument for the contracts awarded to a focal firm.19 Lichtenberg

estimates that a $1 increase in competitive procurement (including both R&D and non-R&D contracts)

increases R&D expenditures by $0.54. In addition, a $1 increase in noncompetitive R&D contracts reduces

R&D expenditures by more than $2, while noncompetitive non-R&D contracts have no effect on firm R&D

investment. He argues that competitive procurement spurs firm-financed R&D because winning contrac-
  18
     In contrast, our panel includes more than ten times as many contractors and covers a period six times longer.
  19
     The instrument for competitive contracts is constructed as the aggregate annual value of competitive contracts for all
the two-digit product or service codes that the focal firm ever sold to the government during 1979-1985. A similar procedure
is used for noncompetitive contracts. Moreover, non-government sales are instrumented using the aggregate annual value
of sales for all firms in the Compustat 1987 Annual Industrial File with the same industrial classification as the focal firm.
Our first instrument follows the same logic. Yet, because aggregate funding may be related to unobserved technological
opportunity that also affects corporate R&D, we improve identification by using a second instrument that exploits an
exogenous cause for funding redeployment, the end of the Cold War.


                                                             10
tors are almost guaranteed to receive much larger follow-on noncompetitive contracts. This is a key point

that we underscore as well. Conversely, noncompetitive R&D contracts reduce R&D expenditures for both

winners (who let the government sponsor the cost of R&D) and losers (who reduce expenditures because

the follow-on contracts are no longer at stake). These findings are consistent with the view that R&D

contracts drive corporate science because they represent a "ticket to play" in the lucrative downstream

government market.

   Recently, Moretti, Steinwender and Van Reenen (2019) study the impact of government-funded R&D

on corporate R&D investment and productivity growth using industry-country data from OECD countries

and firm data from France (i.e., a panel of 12,539 French firms between 1980 and 2015). They document

a "crowding in" effect, whereby increases in government-funded R&D for an industry or firm drive private

R&D in that industry or firm. In the firm-level analysis, they use industry-level defense R&D subsidies to

instrument for the public R&D funding received by a focal firm. At the mean values of public and private

R&D in France, they estimate that a e1 increase in government-funded R&D generates e0.85 of additional

corporate R&D. Moreover, they estimate that the induced increases in corporate R&D result in significant

productivity gains. These results are consistent with the argument that government-funded R&D, and

especially defense-related R&D, are important policy tools for driving corporate R&D investment.

   Our work is different from previous studies on procurement contracts in several important ways. First,

our paper is the first to examine the effect of procurement contracts separately on corporate research

("R") and development ("D"). The distinction between "R" and "D" is critical, in our view, because the

economic mechanism behind the effect--guaranteed demand--should be more relevant for upstream rather

downstream R&D. In fact, consistent with the guaranteed demand mechanism, our results show an effect

of contracts only for upstream research (publications), especially when private markets are insufficient.

Second, in terms of identification, both Lichtenberg (1988) and Moretti, Steinwender and Van Reenen

(2019) aggregate funding to predict contracts for a focal firm. We do the same with our first instrument.

But we also present causal evidence using the end of the Cold War as a quasi-natural experiment that

exploits changes in aggregate funding driven by geopolitical forces, not firm-specific shocks. Third, we

extend the work by Lichtenberg (1988) by dynamically matching contracts from multiple agencies to a large

number of firms and their subsidiaries, which is essential for creating a long panel that is representative

of publicly traded U.S. manufacturing firms. Forth, similar to Lichtenberg (1988), we distinguish between

R&D and non-R&D contracts. But we also distinguish between commercial and noncommercial contracts.

As a result, we are able to systematically investigate an important, but understudied, channel through


                                                    11
which the U.S. government affects corporate investment in upstream research: guaranteeing downstream

demand through procurement contracts.



3         Data

We combine data from two primary sources: (i) corporate R&D data, including matched patents from

PATSTAT and academic publications from Web of Science, obtained from Arora, Belenzon and Sheer

(2021); and (ii) government procurement contracts data obtained from the Federal Procurement Data

System (FPDS).20 Our data construction work is detailed in Appendix B.


3.1         Corporate Publications and Patents

We extend the panel from Arora, Belenzon and Sheer (2021) by matching firms to government procurement

contracts awarded from 1980 through 2015. We focus on "prime" contracts awarded to firms that work

directly with the government, manage any subcontractors, and are responsible for ensuring contract

completion. We account for changes in company names and ownership structures over time (e.g., due

to mergers, acquisitions, or spinoffs), which is essential for constructing accurate contract flows in a long

panel.

         Our sample includes 4,323 publicly-traded manufacturing firms headquartered in the U.S. that had

at least one year of positive R&D expenditures and at least one granted patent during 1980-2015. We

use data on firm accounting measures (e.g., sales and R&D expenditures sourced from Standard & Poor's

Compustat North America), publications (sourced from Clarivate Analytics' Web of Science), and patent-

ing (sourced from the European Patent Office's PATSTAT database). Similar to Arora, Belenzon and

Patacconi (2018) and Arora, Belenzon and Sheer (2021), we measure firms' upstream research using pub-

lications authored by their corporate scientists, and downstream development using granted patents. In

addition, we measure contracting by the flow of contracts awarded to the firms. Appendix Table C1

presents definitions and sources for the variables used in our econometric analyses.


3.2         Government Procurement Contracts

We collect all the prime procurement contracts awarded by the Department of Defense (DoD), Department

of Energy (DoE), Health and Human Services (HHS), and Veterans Affairs (VA).21 The USAspending.gov
    20
         Data were downloaded from the federal government's USAspending.gov and beta.SAM.gov websites.
    21
         These four agencies awarded more procurement contract dollars during 2008-2015 than any other federal agency.



                                                               12
archives only go back to fiscal year 2001. To match our full sample period, we also collect historical data

on all prime procurement contracts awarded by the aforementioned agencies during fiscal years 1980-2000

from beta.SAM.gov.22

    We match the names of contract recipients with the names of ultimate owners and their subsidiaries

from our panel of manufacturing firms (see Appendix B for details). We identify 2,247 U.S.-headquartered

manufacturing firms that receive a total of $2.3 trillion in procurement contracts during the sample

period.23 Contractors typically receive multiple government contracts per year.24 We calculate the total

value of contracts at the firm-year level by aggregating all the contracts and modifications awarded to a

focal firm and its subsidiaries each fiscal year.

    To describe the products and services purchased in each contract, agencies use four-digit codes main-

tained by the U.S. General Services Administration. Appendix Tables F13 and F14 present the 24 letter

codes used to classify services, and the 78 two-digit numerical codes used to classify products. These

codes are relatively stable over time, so they can be used for our long panel. Using the Product or Ser-

vice Code field, we separate contracts into R&D contracts (that involve R&D services) vs. non-R&D

contracts, as detailed in Appendix B. We further divide non-R&D contracts into non-R&D service con-

tracts vs. product contracts. In addition, we use crosswalks between product or service codes, North

American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes, and Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)

codes to identify the correct four-digit industry (SIC4) for each procurement contract. This allows us to

calculate the value of procurement contracts for each industry-year, which is essential for constructing our

instrumental variables.

    Using the Commercial Items Acquisition Procedures field, we break down non-R&D contracts into

commercial contracts vs. noncommercial contracts.25 Commercial contracts are awarded using special

(usually simplified) requirements intended to resemble more closely those customarily used in the com-

mercial market. Acquisition procedures for commercial items incorporate more streamlined purchasing
  22
     The government reports obligations for procurement contracts, not actual outlays. An obligation is the government's
promise to spend funds (immediately or later) as a result of entering into a contract, so long as the agreed-to actions take
place. An outlay takes place when those funds are actually paid out to the contractor (Datalab, 2020).
  23
     This represents 32 percent of the $7.1 trillion in procurement contracts awarded by the four agencies during 1980-2015
to all for-profit recipients (including privately held firms, foreign firms, and those not engaged in manufacturing or R&D).
For comparison, in 2015 U.S. government agencies awarded 4 percent of all procurement dollars to firms located outside the
U.S. (U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2019).
  24
     We match 2.5 million different contract IDs to sample firms and their subsidiaries. Because multi-year contracts are not
unusual, the average contract value is $958 million (and the median is $15 million), which is much larger than the average
annual contract value for our sample firms.
  25
     The R&D service contracts coded as having used acquisition procedures for commercial items represent less than 0.7
percent of the value of all R&D contracts awarded to our sample firms. Therefore, we do not break down contracts for R&D
services into commercial vs. noncommercial.



                                                             13
practices and free market principles while exempting contractors from the requirement to submit certi-

fied cost or pricing data.26 These procedures were introduced at scale with the passage of the Federal

Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994, which established a statutory preference for procuring commercial

items (Barry, 1995). This breakdown into commercial vs. noncommercial contracts allows us to test the

theory that government contracts affect corporate R&D by guaranteeing demand, especially when market

mechanisms are insufficient (e.g., for technologies that may not have existing commercial applications).

If, over time, procurement contracts shifted toward funding technologies that already have viable market

applications, then the government's role in driving corporate research would have eroded.


3.3      Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 presents descriptive statistics over the sample period of 1980-2015 for the main variables used in

the econometric analyses. Approximately 68 percent of firms perform scientific research (i.e., have at least

one publication during the sample period). These firms publish an average of 18 scholarly publications

per year (and a median of 1). By construction, all firms have at least one patent during the sample period.

Firms produce an average of 23 patents per year (and a median of 1). Approximately 52 percent of firms

receive at least one contract during the sample period (we refer to these firms as contractors).

                                          Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                        (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)
                                                                                              Distribution
                                                       Obs.      Mean      Std. dev.   10th     50th     90th
                R&D expenditures ($ mm)               52,122     114.8       568.1      0.6      10.6    156.0
                Publications                          43,989      17.9        98.4      0.0      1.0      21.5
                Patents                               58,245      22.9       134.3      0.0       1.0    33.0
                All contracts ($ mm)                  37,101      61.7       814.2      0.0      0.0     11.8
                R&D contracts ($ mm)                  37,101      10.4       183.5      0.0      0.0      0.2
                Non-R&D contracts ($ mm)              37,101      51.4       656.4      0.0       0.0    10.0
                R contracts ($ mm)                    37,101       1.6       30.6       0.0      0.0      0.0
                D contracts ($ mm)                    37,101       8.7       158.5      0.0       0.0     0.0
                Commercial contracts ($ mm)           24,002       7.1        78.4      0.0      0.0      1.7
                Noncommercial contracts ($ mm)        24,002      52.4       749.4      0.0      0.0      3.8
                Sales ($ mm)                          57,957    2,702.0    13,019.5     3.5     156.7   4,555.5
                R&D stock ($ mm)                      58,245     446.5      2,550.0     0.7     28.0     516.8
Notes: This table displays descriptive statistics for the main variables used in the econometric analyses. The unit of analysis
is a firm-year. Publication and contract statistics are only provided for firms that perform scientific research and contractors,
respectively. Commercial and noncommercial contracts are only summarized for fiscal years 1995-2015.


       The distribution of contracts is highly skewed. Contractors receive an average of $62 million in
  26
    Examples of commercial items include transportation equipment, computers, medicine, and fuel that have been sold
or leased to the general public. In general, the government asks acquisition professionals to use their best judgement to
determine (and document) whether a product or service is a commercial item.


                                                               14
procurement contracts per year (with a median of much less than $1 million). Our sample is drawn from

a wide distribution of industries, as indicated in Appendix Table F12. The two-digit industries (SIC2)

most represented are Chemicals and drugs (757 firms), Electronic equipment (650 firms), and Instruments

(645 firms). Appendix Table F15 presents the classification of industries into several main groups. The

largest average annual contracts are in Transportation ($760 million), while the smallest are in Drugs

($7 million), as can be seen in Appendix Table F16. Among contractors, the number of publications

per $1 million in contracts ranges from a low of 0.03 in Transportation to a high of 11.64 in Drugs.27

Industries with the lowest and highest numbers of patents per $1 million in contracts are Transportation

and Chemicals, respectively.28 Among R&D contractors, the average number of publications per $1 million

in R&D contracts ranges from a low of 0.17 in Transportation to a high of 109.14 in Drugs. Meanwhile, the

average number of patents per $1 million in R&D contracts ranges from a low of 0.36 in Transportation

to a high of 53.71 in Chemicals.

       The composition of government contracts varies by main industry and over time, as shown in Appendix

Figure F2. In 1994, just before the passage of the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act, the industries

with the highest share of R&D contracts in all contracts were Chemicals (29 percent) and Business services

(14 percent). In 2015, the industries with the highest share of commercial contracts in all contracts were

Drugs (77 percent) and Electronics (54 percent).

       Table 2 presents mean comparison tests between 802 R&D contractors and the other 3,531 firms in

our sample. On average, R&D contractors are much larger ($6 billion vs. $1.5 billion in annual sales),

invest more in R&D ($300 million vs. $42 million per year), but have lower R&D intensity ($1.5 million

vs. $5.5 million in R&D expenditures per $1 million in sales) compared to other firms. In addition,

R&D contractors perform more upstream research (0.5 vs. 0.3 annual publications per $1 million in R&D

expenditures), and about half as much downstream development (0.6 vs. 1.2 patents per $1 million in

R&D expenditures) as other firms.29 These descriptive statistics suggest that publishing firms are more

likely to win R&D contracts.
  27
     Between 1980 and 2015, contractors in Drugs published a total of 248,116 publications and received $21,308 million in
contracts. Therefore, the number of publications per $1 million in contracts was 248, 116/21, 308 = 11.64.
  28
     Transportation has an average of 0.07 patents per $1 million of contracts, while Chemicals has an average of 5.20.
  29
     A comparison between R&D contractors and other firms in the same industry is included in Appendix Table F17.




                                                           15
                                Table 2: R&D Contractors vs. Other Firms

                                                           (1)          (2)       (3)      (4)          (5)        (6)
                                                      Difference in means        R&D contractors          Other firms
                                                   R&D contractors -
                                                     Other firms           t     Mean     Std. dev.    Mean     Std. dev.
    Sales ($ mm)                                      4,594.75          38.26   6,048.9   18,324.7    1,454.2   10,088.8
    R&D expenditures ($ mm)                            258.48           47.76    300.4     1,011.3      41.9      170.0
    R&D intensity                                       -4.02           -2.82     1.5       31.7        5.5       171.0
    Publications per $1 mm in R&D expenditures           0.23            5.15     0.5        5.8        0.3        3.9
    Patents per $1 mm in R&D expenditures               -0.55           -1.26     0.6        4.2        1.2       52.6
Notes: This table displays mean comparison tests between R&D contractors and other firms. R&D intensity is calculated
as R&D expenditures divided by sales. The two-sample t-tests use unequal variances.


4      Econometric Specifications

Our econometric analysis proceeds in three steps. First, we estimate the relationship of contracts with

R&D expenditures, publications, and patents. We distinguish R&D contracts from non-R&D contracts

because winning a competitive R&D contract is typically how firms access guaranteed demand (i.e.,

noncompetitive product contracts) for technology-intensive products.30

     Second, we explore the potential mechanism behind the effect--guaranteed demand--and the condi-

tions when the effect is stronger. We expect guaranteed demand to drive upstream corporate science when

market incentives to conduct risky research are weak. We test three such conditions, when the research is

(i) not used in the internal inventions of the firm, (ii) used by close product-market competitors, and (iii)

not protected by patents. In addition, we examine whether the effect is stronger for larger firms, which

would be consistent with manufacturing capabilities and complementary assets being required to handle

complex downstream government contracts.

     Third, we explore temporal changes in the composition of procurement contracts within our sample,

in support of the patterns shown in Figure 1, and in the relationship between procurement contracts and

firm scientific capabilities.
  30
     In our sample, 60.5 percent of firms that receive an R&D contract subsequently win at least one non-R&D contract.
Among R&D contractors, the average annual non-R&D contract value is $117 million, almost five times larger than the
average annual R&D contract value. The competition for the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle illustrates the relationship between
R&D contracts and subsequent product contracts. AM General, Lockheed Martin, and Oshkosh each won R&D contracts
in 2012 for the engineering and manufacturing development phase of this competition--totaling approximately $185 million.
This positioned Oshkosh to win a $6.7 billion contract in 2015 for low rate initial production of 16,901 vehicles. Full-rate
production for an additional 54,600 vehicles is expected to continue through 2042 (Congressional Research Service, 2020).




                                                            16
4.1    The Relationship of Upstream and Downstream Corporate R&D with Procure-
       ment Contracts

We estimate the following specification for the relationship of R&D expenditures, publications and patents

(denoted by yi,t ) with procurement contracts:


                       ln(yi,t ) = 0 + 1 ln(Contractsi,t-1 ) + Zi,t-1  + i + t +   i,t                     (1)


   Contractsi,t-1 are lagged contract awards to focal firm i at year t - 1 (in Section 5.4 we show that our

results are not sensitive to specific lag structures). In our main specifications we focus on R&D contracts.

In the robustness section we show that our results hold for using total contracts and noncompetitive

contracts. The vector Z includes time-varying controls, such as the natural logarithms of sales and R&D

stock. The vectors  and  are firm and year fixed effects, respectively, and              is an iid error term.

Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Dollar values are adjusted using the GDP Implicit Price

Deflator to reflect constant 2012 dollars (U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2020). One dollar is added

to contracts, sales, and R&D stock values, and one unit is added to publications and patents, before

calculating natural logarithms.

   We expect ^1 > 0 in the publication equation. When technologies are novel and unproven, guaranteed

demand can fill in for missing private demand. In this case, the government can act as an early or lead

user that bears the cost of learning and refining novel products. When technologies have immediate

applications, markets may still fail to reward corporate investment in research under weak appropriability

conditions (e.g., when the science spills over to rivals). In that case, guaranteed demand is a non-market

mechanism to reward corporate R&D. Excluding competition via noncompetitive procurement contracts

may be more beneficial to firms when patent protection is weak, as is likely the case with upstream

scientific research.

   Conversely, there are several reasons why we expect no or little effect of procurement contracts on

patents. First, guaranteed demand may reduce the need to exclude rivals via costly patenting. Second,

some government contracts may prohibit patenting altogether (e.g., those for sensitive defense technolo-

gies). Third, market incentives may already be stronger for downstream R&D, rendering guaranteed

demand less effective in driving corporate development.




                                                    17
4.2     Instrumental Variable Strategy

A major econometric challenge is dealing with the endogeneity of contracts. Common shocks can affect

both corporate R&D and contract funding. If the government targets firms that experience positive tech-

nological or demand shocks, ^1 will be upward-biased. However, if contracts target firms that experience

negative shocks, ^1 will be downward-biased.

   We take two approaches to mitigate this concern. The first is to construct an instrument that exploits

variation in aggregate industry R&D contracts to predict R&D contracts awarded to a focal firm, building

on Moretti, Steinwender and Van Reenen (2019). The advantage of this instrument is that it allows us to

predict R&D contracts over time for sample firms and estimate the effect of R&D contracts controlling for

time-invariant firm heterogeneity. The limitation of this approach is that changes in aggregate industry

R&D funding may still be related to unobserved or miss-measured temporal shocks that directly affect the

focal firm's publications and patents. That is, changes in contracts across industries over time might be

related to technology or demand shocks that affect firm R&D decisions. Therefore, we develop a second

instrument that exploits variation in aggregate contracts unrelated to such shocks.

   Our second instrument exploits a quasi-natural experiment around the collapse of the former Soviet

Union. The end of the Cold War triggered massive reallocation in government contracts. Changes in

government funding in that period were driven by geopolitical forces arguably unrelated to technological

shocks. The limitation of this instrument is that it does not vary within firms. There is only one change

per firm (pre- and post- the end of the Cold War), which means that our causal estimates cannot use the

traditional firm fixed-effects methodology. To control for firm time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity,

we follow Blundell, Griffith and Van Reenen (1999) and include the pre-sample mean of the dependent

variable as a separate control. We describe the two identification strategies in detail below.


4.2.1    Instrumenting for R&D Contracts Using Industry R&D Funding

A simple identification strategy might be to instrument for a focal firm's R&D contracts using R&D

contracts awarded to its four-digit industry (SIC4) that year. However, this instrument may still be

endogenous (e.g., when a firm dominates its SIC4 industry, it is possible that industry R&D contracts

respond to the same technological shocks as firm R&D). Hence, we take advantage of changes in R&D

funding at a higher level of aggregation, the three-digit industry (SIC3). We "distribute" these changes

across SIC4 industries according to time-invariant industry shares. Doing so lowers the power of our

instrument in the first stage, but increases its validity.

                                                      18
    We follow Moretti, Steinwender and Van Reenen (2019) and build our instrument as Industry R&D

f undingi,t = (Industry R&D contractst - F irm R&D contractsi,t ) × Industry share. Industry R&D

contractst is the total value of R&D contracts awarded to the firm's SIC3 industry in year t, net of the

firm's own R&D contracts. Industry share is calculated by dividing the total value of R&D contracts

awarded to the SIC4 industry during 1980-2015 by the total value of R&D contracts awarded to the

higher-level SIC3 industry during 1980-2015. Appendix D provides further details on this instrument,

including an example.


4.2.2    Quasi-natural Experiment: Contract Reallocation Due to the End of the Cold War

During the Cold War (1948-1989), government procurement focused on achieving and sustaining techno-

logical superiority for the purpose of national security (Weiss, 2014). The large scale (especially in nuclear

programs) and long duration of Cold War threats led to procurement budgets that were dominated by the

Department of Defense and exceeded previous peacetime expenditures (Mowery, 2012). The end of the

Cold War removed the perception of an existential threat to the United States, and resulted in a signifi-

cant reallocation of procurement priorities. Between 1988 and 1992, Department of Defense procurement

obligations dropped 36 percent, while Department of Health and Human Services obligations more than

tripled (from a much smaller baseline).31

    Government demand in the form of procurement contracts increased in some industries and decreased

in others (see Figure 4). Appendix Table F18 shows annual procurement contracts awarded by the Depart-

ments of Defense, Energy, Health and Human Services, and Veterans Affairs to various SIC4 industries in

1988 and 1992. The average change was a $91 million reduction in federal contract funding to an industry,

which is nine times larger than the average R&D contract value awarded in a year to contractors in our

sample.32 However, the overall reduction in government procurement did not affect all industries to the

same extent. Among the "winners" receiving increased funding after the end of the Cold War were IT

industries (e.g., Computer integrated systems design, Information retrieval services) and health industries

(e.g., Medicinal chemicals and botanical products, Health and allied services). Among the "losers" were

defense industries (e.g., Tanks and tank components, Guided missiles and space vehicles). Because the re-

allocation between industries was caused by geopolitical circumstances unrelated to technological shocks,
  31
     The Department of Defense awarded $226.7 billion in contracts in 1988 and $145.3 billion in 1992 (using constant 2012
dollars). Meanwhile, the Department of Health and Human Services awarded $1.1 billion in contracts in 1988 and $3.4
billion in 1992.
  32
     The four agencies collectively awarded $261.5 billion in procurement contracts in 1988 and $185.4 billion in 1992 (using
constant 2012 dollars).



                                                             19
       Figure 4: Government Procurement Contracts During and After the Cold War




Notes : This figure plots the aggregate value of procurement contracts awarded by DoD, DoE, HHS, and VA to various
industries. Dollar values are adjusted using the GDP Implicit Price Deflator to reflect constant 2012 dollars (U.S. Bureau
of Economic Analysis, 2020).


we exploit the end of the Cold War as a quasi-natural experiment. Figure 5 shows the timeline used to

calculate our second instrumental variable.

                     Figure 5: The Cold War Identification Strategy Timeline




      Specifically, we take advantage of variation in the value of all contracts awarded to various industries

to instrument for R&D contracts awarded to firms during 1993-2015. Many of our sample firms operate

in multiple business segments. As a result, they were affected by changes in procurement contracts across

multiple industries. To estimate the "average" shock experienced by each firm, we use the shares of firm

sales in each industry as weights. We calculate this second instrumental variable as Cold W ar shocki =

  j   Contractsj × Share of salesi,j . Here, Cold W ar shocki is the instrument for firm i, and it does


                                                           20
not vary over time. The subscript j indexes SIC4 industries. We calculate Contractsj as the difference

between pre (1988) and post (1992) periods in federal procurement contracts awarded to industry j .

Share of salesi,j is the share of firm i's sales during 1982-1985 that came from industry j , calculated

using the Compustat Segments dataset (Standard & Poor's, 2018).33 We use a multi-year lag in calculating

the share of sales to alleviate concerns that firms might have anticipated the end of the Cold War and its

differential impacts on various industries. Under that scenario, firms might have entered industries where

they anticipated growing procurement funding, and exited industries where they anticipated shrinking

procurement funding.


4.3      The Changing Nature of Procurement Contracts

We estimate the following specification for trends in the value of government procurement contracts:


                        ln(Contract f lowi,t ) = 0 + 1 T ime trendt + Zi,t-1  + i +                  i,t                    (2)


We present specifications where we use the different types of procurement contracts described in Section

3, including R&D contracts and commercial contracts, as the dependent variable. We also report results

where the dependent variable is the share of R&D or commercial contracts in all contracts. The indices

i and t denote firms and years, respectively. T ime trendt is the focal year t minus 1980, presented in

decennial units. The other elements of the specification are the same as described in section 4.1.

       We are interested in the estimate of 1 . Consistent with the trends in Figure 1, we expect ^1 < 0 for

the share of R&D contracts regression, and ^1 > 0 for the share of commercial contracts regression.


4.4      The Relationship between Contracts and Firm Scientific Capabilities Over Time

We estimate the following specification for changes in the relationship between contract value and firm

scientific capabilities over time:


                        ln(Contractsi,t ) = 0 + 1 T ime trendt + 2 ln(P ublicationsi,t-1 )
                                                                                                                            (3)
                             +3 T ime trend × ln(P ublicationsi,t-1 ) + Zi,t-1  + i +                i,t

  33
    For example, Komatsu Ltd. operated only in industry 3531 Construction machinery and equipment during 1982-1985,
generating 100 percent of its sales from that industry. As a result, the firm's Cold W ar shock came entirely from reallocations
in contracts awarded to industry 3531. In contrast, Caterpillar Inc. generated 76 percent of its sales during 1982-1985 from
industry 3531 Construction machinery and equipment, and 24 percent from industry 3519 Internal combustion engines, not
elsewhere classified. As a result, 76 percent of this firm's Cold W ar shock came from reallocations in contracts awarded to
industry 3531, and 24 percent from reallocations to industry 2519.


                                                              21
where Contractsi,t is the flow of procurement contracts awarded to firm i in year t. T ime trendt is the

focal year t minus 1980, presented in decennial units. Once again, the other elements of the specification

are described in Section 4.1.

         We are interested in the estimate of 3 , and expect ^3 < 0. This prediction is consistent with the view

that the importance of scientific capabilities for getting government contracts has decreased over time (as

contracts have increasingly been awarded for commercial items and dual-use technologies).



5         Estimation Results

5.1        R&D Equation

We begin by examining the relationship between procurement contracts and R&D expenditures. Table 3

presents the within-firm estimation results. The general pattern points to a positive relationship between

contracts and R&D expenditures, consistent with prior studies (e.g., Lichtenberg, 1988; Moretti, Stein-

wender and Van Reenen, 2019). Columns 1-2 present OLS estimates, which indicate positive associations

across contract types.34

         Columns 3 and 4 present causal estimates using two-stage-least-squares (2SLS). In the first stage, we

predict R&D contracts awarded to a focal firm using the Industry R&D funding instrument (see Column

1 in Appendix Table D2). The first stage results confirm that firm-level R&D contracts are a function

of industry-level R&D funding. In the second stage, we estimate R&D expenditures as a function of the

predicted R&D contracts (see Column 3 in Table 3). As expected, ^1 > 0. The IV estimate is larger than

OLS, suggesting that contracts might target fields affected by negative technological shocks. Evaluated

at the sample means, the IV estimate indicates that a $1 million increase in R&D contracts leads to a

$1.7 million increase in R&D expenditures.35

         Our second identification strategy exploits the Cold War shock as a quasi-natural experiment for

exogenous changes in government funding across industries. In the first stage, we predict the R&D

contracts awarded to a focal firm using our instrument (see Column 2 in Appendix Table D2) and find

that firm-level R&D contracts are a function of changes in industry funding triggered by the end of the Cold

War. In the second stage, we once again estimate R&D expenditures as a function of the predicted R&D
    34
      In unreported specifications, we also split R&D contracts into "R" vs. "D" contracts. The coefficient estimates are
positive, statistically different from zero, and close in size.
   35
      Average values for R&D expenditures and R&D contracts are $107 million and $6 million, respectively. The marginal
effect of an additional $1 million in R&D contracts is 0.098(107 + 0.000001)/(6 + 0.000001) = 1.748 million in R&D expen-
ditures.



                                                           22
contracts (see Column 4 in Table 3). Because the instrument does not vary over time, we report pooled

estimates and rely on pre-sample information regarding R&D expenditures to replace the unobservable

firm fixed effect (similar to Blundell, Griffith and Van Reenen, 1999). The coefficient estimate once again

indicates a positive effect of contracts on R&D expenditures.36

                          Table 3: Estimation Results for the R&D Equation

                                                     (1)             (2)              (3)                    (4)
                                                                           ln(R&D expenditures)
                                                    All             R&D          2nd stage IV,         2nd stage IV,
                                                 contracts        contracts    Ind. R&D funding       Cold War shock
  ln(All contracts)t-1                              0.006
                                                   (0.001)
  ln(R&D contracts)t-1                                              0.006            0.098                  0.134
                                                                   (0.001)          (0.029)                (0.047)
  ln(Non-R&D contracts)t-1                                          0.005
                                                                   (0.001)
  ln(R&D stock)t-1                                  0.539           0.536            0.516                  0.967
                                                   (0.013)         (0.013)          (0.014)                (0.017)
  Pre-sample mean R&D expenditures                                                                          -0.125
                                                                                                           (0.014)
  Sample years                                   1980-2015        1980-2015        1980-2015             1993-2015
  Firm fixed effects                                Yes              Yes               Yes                  No
  Year fixed effects                                Yes              Yes               Yes                  Yes
  Weak identification (Kleibergen-Paap)                                               52.65                15.72
  Firms                                            4,145            4,145            4,127
  Observations                                     47,753          47,580            46,354                 4,610
  Adjusted R-squared                                0.938           0.938            0.175                  0.880
Notes: This table presents the estimation results for the relationship between contracts and R&D expenditures. One is
added to logged variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.




5.2    Publication Equation

Table 4 presents the estimation results for publications, our measure of upstream corporate R&D. Columns

1-2 present OLS results for the relationship between different contract types and publications. Column

1 shows that publications are positively associated with All contracts. Unlike the R&D equation results,

the coefficient estimate on R&D contracts is much larger than on Non-R&D contracts. This finding is

consistent with the view that R&D races drive upstream research, and motivates our focus on R&D

contracts in the instrumental variable equations. Because the government buys all types of products and
  36
     One caveat is that the R&D expenditures reported by contractors are not all firm-financed, as the government reimburses
Independent R&D costs as indirect expenditures on government contracts. We do not observe the reimbursement amounts.


                                                             23
services, including some that don't have clear technological links (such as office supplies, clothing, and

food services), using All contracts likely introduces noise in our estimates. Using R&D contracts allows

us to mitigate that noise.

       Columns 3 and 4 present the IV results. Column 3 shows results from the second stage of 2SLS

regressions using Industry R&D funding as the instrumental variable. Evaluated at the sample means, $5

million in additional R&D contracts lead to one additional publication.37 The IV estimate is larger than

OLS, suggesting that government contracts target fields where corporations face negative technology or

demand shocks.

       Column 4 presents the estimation results based on the Cold War shock instrumental variable approach.

Evaluated at the sample means, the estimate indicates that to obtain one additional publication, R&D

contracts need to increase by $0.06 million.38 This estimate is substantially larger than the estimate from

Column 3 for two potential reasons. Our first instrument may not fully resolve the downward bias in

estimate because aggregate industry variation in funding can still be correlated with firm-specific, time

invariant unobserved heterogeneity. Or, the Cold War instrument does not fully remove firm time-invariant

heterogeneity using the pre-sample mean, making it sensitive to temporal reallocation of contracts away

from innovating firms (as shown in Figure 2 and Section 5.8).39


5.3      Patent Equation

Table 5 presents the within-firm estimation results for patents, our measure of downstream corporate

R&D. Columns 1-2 present our OLS results. Similar to the publication estimates, we find a positive

relationship between All contracts and patents. Column 2 shows that this relationship is mostly driven

by R&D contracts.40

       Estimation results using Industry R&D funding and Cold War shock as instrumental variables are

included in Columns 3 and 4, respectively. The coefficient estimates on R&D contracts are no longer

statistically different from zero (Column 3) or negative (Column 4). Interpreted together, these results

cast doubt on the existence of a causal relationship between R&D contracts and patents.
  37
      Average values for publications and R&D contracts are 13 and $5 million, respectively. The marginal effect of an
additional $1 million in R&D contracts is 0.069(13 + 1)/(5 + 0.000001) = 0.193 publications.
   38
      Average values for publications and R&D contracts are 44 and $0.64 million, respectively. The marginal effect of an
additional $1 million in R&D contracts is 0.229(44 + 1)/(0.64 + 0.000001) = 16.102.
   39
      In unreported specifications, we split the sample into two sub-periods using 1998 as the cutoff year. We find that the
effect of R&D contracts on corporate publications is positive and significant during 1980-1997, but not during 1998-2015.
Section 5.7 examines how the effect of contracts on publications has changed over time.
   40
      In unreported specifications, we once again split R&D contracts into "R" vs. "D" contracts. The coefficient estimates
are positive, statistically different from zero, and close in size, which indicates that the relationships of patents with research
contracts and development contracts, respectively, are equally strong.


                                                                24
                      Table 4: Estimation Results for the Publication Equation

                                                  (1)              (2)               (3)                        (4)
                                                                           ln(Publications)
                                                  All           R&D             2nd stage IV,            2nd stage IV,
                                               contracts      contracts       Ind. R&D funding          Cold War shock
  ln(All contracts)t-1                           0.006
                                                (0.001)
  ln(R&D contracts)t-1                                           0.011                0.069                    0.229
                                                                (0.002)              (0.031)                  (0.065)
  ln(Non-R&D contracts)t-1                                       0.004
                                                                (0.001)
  ln(R&D stock)t-1                               0.197           0.194                0.178                    0.164
                                                (0.014)         (0.013)              (0.014)                  (0.015)
  Pre-sample mean publications                                                                                 0.641
                                                                                                              (0.031)
  Sample years                                1980-2015       1980-2015            1980-2015                1993-2015
  Industry fixed effects                         No              No                    No                      No
  Firm fixed effects                             Yes             Yes                   Yes                     No
  Year fixed effects                             Yes             Yes                   Yes                     Yes
  Weak identif. (Kleibergen-Paap)                                                     60.68                   23.47
  Firms                                         4,318           4,318                4,302
  Observations                                  53,554          53,373               52,076                    5,779
  Adjusted R-squared                            0.863            0.862               0.003                     0.534
Notes: This table presents the estimation results for the relationship between contracts and publications. One is added to
logged variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.


       Our key finding--that R&D contracts affect publications--is consistent with firms investing in up-

stream research to increase their chances of winning R&D races as a pathway to guaranteed demand. If

contracts drove corporate R&D simply by lowering costs (i.e., the public funding mechanism), we would

expect to find an effect on patents as well. Conversely, the effect of guaranteed demand should be stronger

when market incentives are weak, which is more likely to occur in the case of upstream research than

downstream development (due to fewer immediate market applications, higher spillovers to rivals, and

weaker patent protection).


5.4      Robustness Checks

We present several robustness checks for the effect of R&D contracts.41
  41
    In unreported specifications, we find that our results in Tables 3, 4, and 5 are robust to using different firm sub-samples.
For example, when using only publishing firms, the 2SLS coefficient estimates on R&D contracts in the publication equation
are 0.059 (using the Industry R&D funding instrument) and 0.213 (using the Cold War shock instrument). When using only



                                                              25
                         Table 5: Estimation Results for the Patent Equation

                                                 (1)             (2)               (3)                       (4)
                                                                            ln(Patents)
                                                All           R&D            2nd stage IV,            2nd stage IV,
                                             contracts      contracts      Ind. R&D funding          Cold War shock
  ln(All contracts)t-1                         0.009
                                              (0.002)
  ln(R&D contracts)t-1                                         0.012               -0.037                  -0.252
                                                              (0.002)             (0.042)                 (0.080)
  ln(Non-R&D contracts)t-1                                     0.007
                                                              (0.002)
  ln(R&D stock)t-1                             0.344           0.341               0.349                   0.408
                                              (0.019)         (0.019)             (0.020)                 (0.016)
  Pre-sample mean patents                                                                                  0.650
                                                                                                          (0.055)
  Sample years                               1980-2015      1980-2015           1980-2015               1993-2015
  Industry fixed effects                        No             No                   No                     No
  Firm fixed effects                            Yes            Yes                  Yes                    No
  Year fixed effects                            Yes            Yes                  Yes                    Yes
  Weak identif. (Kleibergen-Paap)                                                  60.68                  23.65
  Firms                                        4,318          4,318               4,302
  Observations                                 53,554         53,373              52,076                   5,779
  Adjusted R-squared                           0.825           0.824              0.083                    0.333
Notes: This table presents the estimation results for the relationship between contracts and patents. One is added to logged
variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.


    First, we explore whether our results are robust to using All contracts and Noncommercial contracts

instead of R&D contracts. Appendix Table E3 presents the second stage estimation results for the effect of

total contracts on R&D expenditures, publications, and patents.42 All contracts have a positive effect on

R&D expenditures and publications, but no effect on patents. Consistent with our theoretical predictions,

we obtain similar results when using Noncommercial contracts as the predictor variable, as reported in

Appendix Table E4.

    Second, a concern is that our results are driven by Department of Defense contracts, which may have

specific secrecy requirements that can affect patenting behavior, as well as undermine our identification

strategy that treats the end of the Cold War as an exogenous shock on our sample firms. As shown

in Appendix Table E5, our results are not driven solely by Department of Defense R&D contracts. The
contractors, they are 0.084 and 0.273, respectively.
  42
     In Columns 1, 3, and 5, the instrument is Industry funding, a modified version of our first instrument, where we use
the value of all contracts to calculate the industry-level exogenous variable. In Columns 2, 4, and 6, the instrument is the
familiar Cold War shock.


                                                            26
coefficient estimates on Non-defense R&D contracts are significantly larger in both the R&D expenditures

equation and the publication equation.43 In unreported specifications, we also find that our results are

robust to dropping firms operating primarily in the Transportation industry, which are the main recipients

of Department of Defense contract dollars.

       Third, because Publications and Patents are over-dispersed count variables, Columns 1 and 4 in

Appendix Table E6 present estimations using Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood regressions. Consistent

with our OLS results, we find that R&D contracts are positively related to both publications and patents.

To check whether our preferred data transformation (i.e., taking the natural logarithm of publications or

patents plus one) impacts our analyses, we also present OLS and 2SLS estimations where we use an inverse

hyperbolic sine transformation.44 Consistent with previous results, Columns 3 and 6 in Appendix Table

E6 show that R&D contracts have a positive effect on publications, but not on patents. The coefficient

estimate on R&D contracts for the publication equation is very close in size with our main specification

in Table 4.

       Forth, our results are not sensitive to the specific lag structure assumed in our main specifications.

Checking the sensitivity of our of results to lag structure is important because we do not observe the

actual annual spending associated with contract awards. To construct our panel, we aggregate contract

obligations, not actual outlays, at the firm-year level. Since multi-year contracts are common, the outlays

may occur one, two, or more years after the original obligation date. Moreover, there is typically a lag

between the year when the R&D activity is conducted and the publication year or patent grant year.

Therefore, the specific lag structure between receiving an award and publishing a scholarly paper or

receiving a patent is unclear. However, our results are robust to using two, three, four, and five year

lags in the publication and patent equations. Appendix Table E7 indicates that R&D contracts have

a positive effect on publications regardless of the specific lag structure used. The coefficient estimates

increase slightly compared to our main specification in Table 4. In unreported specifications, we still find

no effect of R&D contracts on patents despite using two, three, four, or five year lags.

       Our analysis thus far has focused on the number of publications and patents, rather than on their

quality. Our final robustness check examines the sensitivity of our results to controlling for quality using

citations. Appendix Table E8 presents estimation results using quality-adjusted publication and patent

flows.45 As before, All contracts and R&D contracts drive firms to increase high-quality publications, but
  43
     Evaluated at the sample means, the coefficient estimate in Column 3 of Appendix Table E5 indicates that a $1 million
increase in Non-defense R&D contracts leads to 49 additional publications.
                                                                     
  44
     The inverse hyperbolic sine is calculated as asinh(x) = ln(x + x2 + 1).
  45
     For the quality-adjusted publication flow, we weight each publication by its normalized citations, calculated as (Forward


                                                             27
not high-quality patents.


5.5    Industry Variation

Table 6 shows how the effect of R&D contracts on publications and patents varies by main industry.

Column 1 presents OLS results using Publications as the dependent variable. The coefficient estimates

indicate that the relationship between contracts and publications is positive across all industries. Column

2 presents estimates from the second stage of 2SLS regressions using Industry R&D funding and its inter-

actions with industry indicator variables as instrumental variables. The coefficient estimates suggest that

the effect of contracts on publications is robust across a majority of industries. However, the Kleibergen-

Paap rk Wald F statistic is just 0.51, indicating that the excluded instruments are only weakly correlated

with the endogenous regressors.

    Column 3 presents OLS results using Patents as the dependent variable. The coefficient estimates

show that the correlation between contracts and patents is positive for all industries. However, we do not

find evidence of a causal effect of R&d contracts on patents across a variety of industries in Column 4.


5.6    Exploring the Guaranteed Demand Mechanism

We examine how the effect of R&D contracts on publications varies with characteristics of science. Based

on the argument that procurement contracts drive corporate research when market incentives are weak,

we anticipate a larger effect on publications that are: (i) not cited by the firm's own patents (missing

downstream applications); (ii) cited by rival firms' patents (the science spills over to close product-market

competitors); and (iii) not protected by the firm's own patents (hence, the science is harder to appropriate).

    Table 7 presents the within-firm estimation results from the second stage of 2SLS regressions using

Industry R&D funding as an instrument for R&D contracts. The construction of the own use, spillovers,

and scope of patent protection measures is detailed in Appendix B.

    Columns 1 and 2 compare the effect on publications with and without downstream applications inside

the inventing firm. Consistent with our prediction, the coefficient estimate is positive and statistically

significant when the science does not have internal use (Column 2).46 Evaluated at the sample means,

$4.6 million in additional R&D contracts lead to one additional publication.47 Columns 3 and 4 compare
citations it received from other publications up to the year 2016) / (Average forward citations received by all publications
published in the same journal-year). For the quality-adjusted patent flow, we weight each patent by its normalized citations,
calculated as (Forward citations it received from other patents up to the year 2016) / (Average forward citations received
by all granted patents in the same 4-digit International Patent Classification (IPC)-year).
   46
      We obtain qualitatively similar results when using the Cold War shock as an instrument for R&D contracts.
   47
      Average values for publications used internally and R&D contracts are 13 and $5 million, respectively.


                                                             28
                                    Table 6: Variation by Main Industry

                                                      (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)
                                                            ln(Publications)                     ln(Patents)
                                                                   2nd Stage IV,                     2nd Stage IV,
                                                     OLS         Ind. R&D funding       OLS        Ind. R&D funding
  ln(R&D contracts)t-1                               0.016             0.133            0.018             0.016
                                                    (0.004)           (0.036)          (0.004)           (0.059)
  ln(R&D contracts)t-1 × [Transp. = 1]               -0.009            -0.167           0.003             -0.151
                                                    (0.008)           (0.051)          (0.009)           (0.110)
  ln(R&D contracts)t-1 × [Chemicals = 1]             -0.001            -0.374           -0.013            -0.289
                                                    (0.007)           (0.181)          (0.011)           (0.170)
  ln(R&D contracts)t-1 × [Drugs = 1]                 -0.009            -0.032           -0.011            -0.417
                                                    (0.006)           (0.063)          (0.006)           (0.118)
  ln(R&D contracts)t-1 × [Electronics = 1]           -0.005            -0.112           -0.010            0.251
                                                    (0.005)           (0.063)          (0.006)           (0.110)
  ln(R&D contracts)t-1 × [Buss. services = 1]        -0.010            -0.076           0.003             0.072
                                                    (0.008)           (0.069)          (0.012)           (0.169)
  ln(R&D stock)t-1                                   0.196             0.182            0.344             0.359
                                                    (0.013)           (0.015)          (0.019)           (0.023)
  Sample years                                    1980-2015          1980-2015       1980-2015         1980-2015
  Firm fixed effects                                 Yes                Yes             Yes               Yes
  Year fixed effects                                 Yes                Yes             Yes               Yes
  Weak identification (Kleibergen-Paap)                                 0.51                              0.51
  Observations                                      53,693             52,076          53,693            52,076
  Adjusted R-squared                                0.862              -0.143          0.824             -0.408
Notes: This table presents the estimation results for the relationship of contracts with publications and patents by main
industry. One is added to logged variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.


the effect of R&D contracts on publications when the science has low vs. high spillover to product-market

rivals. Consistent with our prediction, the coefficient estimates indicate that the effect is strong when rival

patents cite the firm's publications. The last two columns compare the effect on publications with low

vs. high protection from the firm's own patents. In line with our expectations, the coefficient estimates

indicate that the effect is strong when publications are unlikely to be protected by a patent.

    In summary, the results presented in this table indicate that the effect of R&D contracts on corporate

science is larger when firms have lower ability to appropriate returns from participating in upstream

research.

    Table 8 further shows that the effect of contracts on publications increases in firm size, underscoring

the importance of complementary assets and scale for meeting the complex requirements of downstream

procurement contracts. Consistent with the premise that R&D contracts are the "ticket to play" in the

government market, we show in Appendix Table E10 that receiving R&D contracts has a positive effect


                                                            29
                                  Table 7: Guaranteed Demand Mechanism

                                            (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                            ln(Publications)           ln(Rival citations)         ln(Publications)
                                         Internal    No internal        Low          High          Low         High
                                           use           use         rival use     rival use    protection   protection
  ln(R&D contracts)t-1                     -0.037        0.077         -0.001        0.304        0.069         0.019
                                          (0.014)       (0.031)       (0.001)       (0.109)      (0.031)       (0.017)
  ln(R&D stock)t-1                         0.020         0.179         0.000         0.142        0.177         0.022
                                          (0.005)       (0.014)       (0.000)       (0.063)      (0.014)       (0.005)
  Sample years                          1980-2015     1980-2015      1980-2015    1980-2015     1980-2015     1980-2015
  Firm fixed effects                        Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
  Year fixed effects                        Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
  Weak identif. (Kleibergen-Paap)          60.63         60.63          45.44        9.52         60.63          60.63
  Firms                                    4,302         4,302          4,231         732          4,302         4,302
  Observations                            52,074        52,074         45,664        6,184        52,074        52,074
  Adjusted R-squared                      -0.112        -0.014         -0.027       -2.748        0.003         -0.018
Notes: This table presents second stage results from estimating how the effect of R&D contracts on publications varies by
characteristics of the science. Industry R&D funding is used as an instrument for R&D contracts. One is added to logged
variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.


on the value of subsequent procurement contracts.


5.7      Changes Over Time

Table 9 presents how the value and composition of procurement contracts have changed over time. Column

1 shows that total contract size increased by 26 percent per decade, or effectively doubled over the complete

sample period.48

       Columns 2 and 3 show that the increase in total contract value was driven by non-R&D contracts, and

by a rise in commercial contracts (awarded using special requirements designed to more closely resemble

the commercial market, as detailed in Appendix B). The estimates imply that the annual value of R&D

contracts decreased by almost 22 percent per decade, while the annual value of commercial contracts almost

doubled per decade.49 Evaluated at the sample mean of $4.6 million in annual commercial contracts, the

estimate in Column 3 indicates an increase of about one $0.4 million per year.50

       Consistent with Figure 1, Column 4 shows that the share of R&D contracts in all contracts decreased

by 0.083 over the sample period, while Column 6 shows that the share of commercial contracts increased
  48
     When dropping the controls for R&D stock, the coefficient estimate on Time trend increases to 0.864, indicating that a
substantial part of the increase in contract value is explained by sample firms getting bigger over time.
  49
     The specifications in Columns 3, 6, and 7 use data from fiscal years 1995-2015 because the data element that allows us
to identify commercial contracts was only introduced following the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994.
  50
     Average values for commercial contracts and time trend are $4.6 million and 2.44, respectively. The increase in average
contract value per decade was calculated as 2.002($4.6 + 0.000001)/2.44 = 3.774.



                                                            30
                                        Table 8: Variation by Firm Size

                                                            (1)              (2)                    (3)
                                                                          ln(Publications)
                                                                        2nd stage IV,         2nd stage IV,
                                                          OLS         Ind. R&D funding       Cold War shock
           ln(R&D contracts)t-1                           0.005             -0.103                -0.180
                                                         (0.002)           (0.071)               (0.196)

           ln(R&D contracts)t-1 × [Large = 1]             0.010              0.260                0.335
                                                         (0.003)            (0.082)              (0.193)

           [Large = 1]                                    0.188              3.489                4.483
                                                         (0.046)            (1.072)              (2.518)

           ln(R&D stock)t-1                               0.192              0.164                0.165
                                                         (0.014)            (0.014)              (0.013)

           Pre-sample mean publications                                                           0.692
                                                                                                 (0.024)
           Sample years                                 1980-2015         1980-2015             1993-2015
           Firm fixed effects                              Yes               Yes                    No
           Year fixed effects                              Yes               Yes                   Yes
           Weak identification (Kleibergen-Paap)                             8.59                  0.93
           Observations                                   53,416            51,803                5,755
           Adjusted R-squared                              0.863            -0.385                0.641
Notes: This table presents results from estimating how the relationship between R&D contracts and publications varies
by firm size. Large is an indicator variable equal to one when a firm's annual sales are above the median for its industry,
where the median is calculated over the sample period of 1980-2015. One is added to logged variables. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.


by 0.626 between 1995 and 2015. Both trends make it less likely for contracts to drive upstream corporate

research in recent years. A smaller share of contract R&D suggests that there may be fewer technology

races leading to lucrative downstream guaranteed markets. A higher share of commercial contracts in-

dicates that the effectiveness of procurement contracts in replacing weak market incentives should have

fallen as well.

    Columns 5 and 7 present variation by main industries. Column 5 shows a decline in the share of R&D

contracts in all contracts across industries, with the exception of Drugs, where the share of R&D contracts

has increased slightly over time. This pattern is consistent with the reallocation of government research

funds (including both grants and contracts) away from chemistry and electrical engineering and toward

life sciences fields. For example, between 1980 and 2015, the share of federal research funds obligated to

life sciences increased from 36 percent to 49 percent (Merrill, 2018).

    Column 7 documents a rise in the share of commercial contracts in all industries. Transportation

experienced the smallest increase. A potential explanation for this pattern is that, for national security



                                                            31
reasons, some industries included in this group simply do not have a commercial market. For example,

the government is the only buyer of guided missiles and fighter aircraft. As a result, the sweeping policy

changes of the 1980s and 1990s have had a more limited impact in shifting Transportation contracts

toward commercial items.

    In summary, the evidence presented in this table is consistent with the patterns presented in Figure 1.

Over time, the composition of government contracts has shifted away from technology races and toward

buying products and services that already have proven commercial markets. These changes are evident

across most industries, with the possible exception of life sciences. Appendix Table E9 shows that the

documented changes are robust to considering non-linear time effects.

                                     Table 9: Procurement Contracts Over Time

                                         (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)                (7)
                                                   Contract value                                    Contract composition
                                        ln(All        ln(R&D        ln(Comm.     Share R&D/      Share R&D/      Share comm./    Share comm./
                                      contracts)     contracts)     contracts)   All contracts   All contracts   All contracts   All contracts
 Time trend                             0.380          -0.169         2.002         -0.023          -0.030           0.281           0.296
                                       (0.101)        (0.071)        (0.111)       (0.008)         (0.008)          (0.038)         (0.029)
 Time trend x [Transp. = 1]                                                                         0.016                            -0.159
                                                                                                   (0.025)                          (0.050)
 Time trend x [Chemicals = 1]                                                                       0.013                            -0.004
                                                                                                   (0.034)                          (0.064)
 Time trend x [Drugs = 1]                                                                           0.044                            0.033
                                                                                                   (0.016)                          (0.047)
 Time trend x [Electronics = 1]                                                                     0.010                            -0.066
                                                                                                   (0.015)                          (0.032)
 Time trend x [Buss. services = 1]                                                                  0.007                            0.186
                                                                                                   (0.019)                          (0.232)
 ln(R&D stock)t-1                       0.493          0.200          0.319         0.003           0.002            -0.016          -0.020
                                       (0.074)        (0.042)        (0.071)       (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.016)         (0.018)
 Sample years                         1980-2015      1980-2015      1995-2015     1980-2015       1980-2015       1995-2015       1995-2015
 Firm fixed effects                       Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
 Firms                                   4,322          4,323          3,620        1,838           1,838           1,461           1,461
 Observations                           53,534         53,678         37,011        17,927          17,927          12,198          12,198
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.659          0.589          0.635         0.299           0.299           0.078          0.079

Notes: This table presents OLS estimates for changes in procurement contract value and composition over time. Time trend
is divided by 10. One is added to logged variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.




5.8    The Changing Relationship Between Contracts and Firm Scientific Capabilities

Table 10 examines the relationship between All contracts and scientific capabilities measured by the stock

of corporate publications. Column 1 shows that scientific capabilities are positively related to the size of

procurement contracts. Yet, this relationship is weakening over time, as shown in Column 2. Columns

3-5 indicate that this pattern is robust for different firm sub-samples and additional controls.


                                                                         32
      The evidence presented in this table is consistent with Figure 2, indicating that the importance of

scientific capabilities for contract value has fallen over time. This result complements Arora, Belenzon

and Patacconi (2018), who document a decline in the stock market value and mergers and acquisitions

value of scientific capabilities. Taken together, the evidence suggests that corporate science has fallen out

of favor not only with investors and managers, but also with the U.S. government.

                       Table 10: Contracts and Scientific Capabilities Over Time

                                                 (1)          (2)            (3)                  (4)             (5)
                                                                          ln(All contracts)
                                              All firms    All firms   Publishing firms    Contractor firms    All firms
    ln(Publications stock)t-1                   0.310        0.328           0.320               0.478           0.251
                                               (0.043)      (0.061)         (0.062)             (0.074)         (0.076)
    Time trend × ln(Publications stock)t-1                   -0.028          -0.048              -0.083          -0.055
                                                            (0.016)         (0.017)             (0.018)         (0.025)
    ln(Patents stock)t-1                                                                                         0.335
                                                                                                                (0.074)
    Time trend × ln(Patents stock)t-1                                                                            0.013
                                                                                                                (0.026)
    Time trend                                               0.402           0.474               0.602           0.394
                                                            (0.048)         (0.062)             (0.070)         (0.060)
    ln(R&D stock)t-1                            0.377        0.395           0.433               0.515           0.261
                                               (0.036)      (0.036)         (0.042)             (0.050)         (0.040)
    Sample years                             1980-2015    1980-2015       1980-2015           1980-2015       1980-2015
    Firm fixed effects                          Yes          Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes
    Year fixed effects                          Yes           No              No                  No              No
    Observations                               53,534       53,534          41,741              34,484          53,534
    Adjusted R-squared                         0.676        0.659           0.655               0.551           0.660
Notes: This table presents OLS estimates for changes in the relationship between total contracts and scientific capabilities
over time. Time trend is divided by 10. One is added to logged variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to
arbitrary heteroskedasticity.




6      Discussion and Conclusion

Corporate participation in scientific research can help firms gain access to guaranteed downstream markets.

We provide the first systematic evidence in support of the government's role in de-risking upstream research

via the guaranteed demand mechanism. We present two sets of results. First, we document a positive

effect of government contracts on publications ("R"), and show that the effect is stronger when market

incentives are relatively weak. This finding supports the view that firms invest in upstream research to

increase their chances of winning R&D races as a pathway to downstream guaranteed demand. The hope

for market exclusivity (in the form of noncompetitive product contracts) induces corporate investments

                                                            33
in upstream research, which is harder to protect with patents. Second, we show that the effect was

stronger before the mid-1990s, when policy reforms such as the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of

1994 changed the composition of procurement contracts. The government's new emphasis on reducing

cost and increasing efficiency and transparency in procurement is evidenced by a falling share of R&D

contracts and rising shares of commercial and competitive contracts.

       With the above findings, we make two main contributions. First, we help explain why corporations

are withdrawing from scientific research (e.g., Arora, Belenzon and Patacconi, 2018; Arora, Belenzon and

Sheer, 2021; Mowery, 1998, 2009). Our results show that firms invest in research to win contracts, yet

research has become less important for government demand. Recent studies show that the composition of

corporate R&D has shifted away from research and toward development. Specifically, the share of research

in business R&D has dropped from a high of 31 percent in 1986 to just 20 percent in 2015.51 Moreover,

the annual number of corporate publications has steadily declined since the mid-1990s (Arora, Belenzon

and Sheer, 2021). In addition, the market value attributed to firm scientific research capabilities (i.e., the

"shadow price" of scientific publications) has also fallen over time (Arora, Belenzon and Patacconi, 2018).

This means that investors value corporate research less today than in the past. The same pattern holds

for managers, who are willing to pay less today for the scientific capabilities of their acquisition targets

than in years prior. The present paper reinforces these trends by showing that scientific research has fallen

out of favor with the U.S. government as well. Once the government began competing with the commer-

cial market, corporations had fewer incentives to perform risky upstream scientific research, and more

incentives to invest in downstream development of commercially viable products and services. By empha-

sizing commercially proven technologies and de-emphasizing leading-edge, mission-driven technologies,

the government has potentially amplified the corporate withdrawal from science.

       Second, we add to the literature on the effect of government policy on innovation (e.g., Bloom,

Van Reenen and Williams, 2019; Edler and Georghiou, 2007; Mowery, 2010; Mowery, Nelson and Martin,

2010; Rogerson, 1989; Slavtchev and Wiederhold, 2016). Our results show that procurement policy--an

area that has not received as much scholarly attention as the public funding and tax policies--should also

be considered a national innovation policy. Legislative and executive actions, such as the Buy American

Act of 1933, have long used procurement contracts to boost domestic economic activity and support tar-

geted geographies or industries. President Biden's Executive Order on Ensuring the Future Is Made in

All of America by All of America's Workers, signed January 25, 2021, is just a recent example. Yet, to
  51
    Data are from Tables 2, 3, and 4 of the National Patterns of R&D Resources series published by the National Center
for Science and Engineering Statistics (National Science Foundation, 2019).


                                                         34
the best of our knowledge, the present paper is the first to estimate the effect of procurement contracts

separately on upstream research and downstream development, and to investigate the guaranteed demand

mechanism. By providing evidence that R&D contracts have a positive effect on upstream corporate re-

search, we advance the understanding of how, and under what conditions, government contracts affect

the U.S. innovation ecosystem.

   While we document that, on average, publicly-traded firms perform more upstream research when they

receive procurement contracts, this effect may mask substantial heterogeneity. The R&D race leading up

to the production of stealth aircraft exemplifies it (Westwick, 2019). In the 1970s, Northrop Corporation

and Lockheed Corporation competed to design and build the first operational stealth aircraft. The main

technical challenge was to minimize the diffraction of radar waves after they hit the aircraft's surface.

Northrop CEO Tom Jones once remarked: "We knew that it was the laws of physics that caused radar to

be invented in the first place" (Grant, 2013, p. 5). Understanding those laws eventually led to defeating

radar tracking.

   In the late 1950s, Soviet physicist Pyotr Ufimtsev had worked on the problem of diffraction, how

water, sound, or light waves interact with the edges of an object. Ufimtsev discovered "fringe currents,"

nonuniform components that helped account for how diffraction happens around corners. This discovery

became the basis for stealth aircraft development, but not in the Soviet Union. While the Soviet Defense

Ministry showed no interest in Ufimtsev's findings, the U.S. Department of Defense did. During the Cold

War, the agency funded the translation of Russian scientific journals to see what they could gleam and

apply to military programs. Ufimtsev's 1962 book, "Method of Edge Waves in the Physical Theory of

Diffraction," was published in English in 1971.

   Both Northrop and Lockheed understood the basic science of radar waves, but not fringe currents.

Once they were able to access Ufimtsev's findings, and the mathematical theory and equations that

anchored them, firms could begin to design aircraft with minimal radar footprints. Northrop invested

heavily in the science behind the Physical Theory of Diffraction, while Lockheed relied on numerical

simulations. Northrop radar expert John Cashen remarked: "I could see the waves [...] We didn't need

a computer program to tell us what the [radar cross section] could be. That was the difference between

Northrop and Lockheed" (Grant, 2013, p. 8). Interestingly, Lockheed won the first contract to produce

the F-117 stealth fighter, but Northrop won the bigger contract to produce the B-2 stealth bomber because

they were able to build planes with curvatures or "big bellies." Northrop was able to predict how waves

would behave when they hit curved surfaces due to their deep understanding of diffraction around corners.


                                                   35
   To what extent this example is representative of firms' strategic choices in response to R&D races, and

the implications of different R&D choices for winning a single or subsequent innovation contests, remains

an empirical question and a potentially fruitful avenue for future research.

   Another promising direction for future research would examine the effect of government procurement

on small firms by studying the vertical coordination between "prime" contractors and subcontractors in

the federal supply chain. The Federal Acquisition Regulation specifies that the government-wide target

for small businesses is at least 23 percent of the total value of all prime contracts awarded each year.

Studying the implications of such policy would deepen substantially our understanding of the effect of

public demand on the American innovation ecosystem as a whole.




                                                    36
References
Adams, James D, Eric P Chiang and Jeffrey L Jensen. 2003. "The Influence of Federal Laboratory R&D
  on Industrial Research." Review of Economics and Statistics 85(4):1003­1020.

Arora, Ashish, Sharon Belenzon and Andrea Patacconi. 2018. "The decline of science in corporate R&D."
  Strategic Management Journal 39(1):3­32.

Arora, Ashish, Sharon Belenzon and Lia Sheer. 2021. "Knowledge spillovers and corporate investment in
  scientific research." American Economic Review 111(3):871­98.

Arrow, Kenneth. 1962. Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention. In The rate and
  direction of inventive activity: Economic and social factors. pp. 609­626.

Aschhoff, Birgit and Wolfgang Sofka. 2009. "Innovation on Demand--Can Public Procurement Drive
  Market Success of Innovations?" Research Policy 38(8):1235­1247.

Audretsch, David B, Albert N Link and John T Scott. 2002. "Public/private technology partnerships:
 Evaluating SBIR-supported research." Research Policy 1(31):145­158.

Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S Graff Zivin, Danielle Li and Bhaven N Sampat. 2019. "Public R&D investments
  and private-sector patenting: Evidence from NIH funding rules." The Review of Economic Studies
  86(1):117­152.

Barder, Owen, Michael Kremer and Ruth Levine. 2005. "Making Markets for Vaccines: Ideas to Action.".
  Report of the Center for Global Development. Washington DC.

Barry, Charles B. 1995. "The Federal Acquisition Reform Act of 1994." The DISAM Journal, Spring 1995
  17(3):124­130.

Bloom, Nicholas, John Van Reenen and Heidi Williams. 2019. "A toolkit of policies to promote innovation."
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(3):163­84.

Bloom, Nicholas, Mark Schankerman and John Van Reenen. 2013. "Identifying Technology Spillovers and
  Product Market Rivalry." Econometrica 81(4):1347­1393.

Bloom, Nick, Rachel Griffith and John Van Reenen. 2002. "Do R&D tax credits work? Evidence from a
  panel of countries 1979­1997." Journal of Public Economics 85(1):1­31.

Blundell, Richard, Rachel Griffith and John Van Reenen. 1999. "Market share, market value and innovation
  in a panel of British manufacturing firms." The Review of Economic Studies 66(3):529­554.

Bromberg, Joan Lisa. 1991. The Laser in America, 1950-1970. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT
  Press.

Code of Federal Regulations. 2000.       "Dual Use Exports. Title 15, §730.3.".             Avail-
  able at https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/CFR-2000-title15-vol2/CFR-2000-title15-vol2-sec730-
  3/summary. Accessed January 30, 2021.

Cohen, Wesley M, Richard R Nelson and John P Walsh. 2002. "Links and Impacts: The Influence of
  Public Research on Industrial R&D." Management Science 48(1):1­23.

Congressional Research Service. 2011. Competition in Federal Contracting: An Overview of the Legal
  Requirements. Technical report. Available at https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc31464/.
  Accessed February 26, 2021.


                                                   37
Congressional Research Service. 2020. Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV): Background and Issues
  for Congress. Technical report. Available at https://fas.org/sgp/crs/weapons/RS22942.pdf. Accessed
  February 8, 2021.

Congressional Research Service. 2021a. Defense Primer: U.S. Defense Industrial Base. Technical report.
  Available at https://fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/IF10548.pdf. Accessed February 8, 2021.

Congressional Research Service. 2021b. Overview of the Federal Procurement Process and Resources.
  Technical report. Available at https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RS22536.pdf. Accessed March 19, 2021.

Cunningham, Colleen, Florian Ederer and Song Ma. 2021. "Killer Acquisitions." Journal of Political
  Economy 129(3):000­000.

Datalab. 2020.         "Analyst's Guide to Federal Spending Data.".                       Available   at
 https://datalab.usaspending.gov/analyst-guide/. Accessed November 8, 2020.

David, Paul A, Bronwyn H Hall and Andrew A Toole. 2000. "Is Public R&D a Complement or Substitute
  for Private R&D? A Review of the Econometric Evidence." Research Policy 29(4-5):497­529.

Defense Acquisition University. 2020. "Interactive Defense Acquisition Life Cycle Wall Chart.". Available
  at https://www.dau.edu/tools/t/ILC. Accessed February 15, 2021.

Edler, Jakob and Luke Georghiou. 2007. "Public Procurement and Innovation--Resurrecting the Demand
  Side." Research Policy 36(7):949­963.

Federal Acquisition Regulation. 2019. "Circumstances Permitting Other than Full and Open Competition.
  Subpart 6.302.". Available at https://www.acquisition.gov/far/6.302. Accessed February 11, 2021.

Fleming, Lee, Hillary Greene, G Li, Matt Marx and Dennis Yao. 2019. "Government-funded research
  increasingly fuels innovation." Science 364(6446):1139­1141.

FPDS. 2020. "Federal Procurement Data System (FPDS) Government User's Manual.". Available at
  https://www.fpds.gov/downloads/Manuals/FPDS-NG_User_Manual_V15.pdf. Accessed January 30,
  2021.

Goolsbee, Austan. 1998. "Does government R&D policy mainly benefit scientists and engineers?" Amer-
 ican Economic Review 88(2):298­302.

Grant,    Rebecca. 2013.        "B2:    The Spirit of Innovation.".                Available at
  https://www.northropgrumman.com/wp-content/uploads/B-2-Spirit-of-Innovation.pdf.       Accessed
  March 24, 2021).

Gross, Daniel P and Bhaven N Sampat. 2020. "Organizing Crisis Innovation: Lessons from World War
  II.". Working Paper 27909. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hecht, Jeff. 2010. "A short history of laser development." Applied Optics 49(25):F99­F122.

Howell, Sabrina T. 2017. "Financing Innovation: Evidence from R&D grants." American Economic Review
  107(4):1136­64.

Howell, Sabrina T, Jason Rathje, John Van Reenen and Jun Wong. 2021. "Opening up Military Innovation:
  Causal Effects of "Bottom-up" Reforms to U.S. Defense Research.". Working paper.

Jaffe, Adam B and Josh Lerner. 2001. "Reinventing public R&D: Patent policy and the commercialization
  of national laboratory technologies." RAND Journal of Economics pp. 167­198.


                                                   38
Jaffe, Adam B, Michael S Fogarty and Bruce A Banks. 1998. "Evidence from patents and patent citations
  on the impact of NASA and other federal labs on commercial innovation." The Journal of Industrial
  Economics 46(2):183­205.

Jaffe, Adam B, Richard G Newell and Robert N Stavins. 2003. Technological change and the environment.
  In Handbook of Environmental Economics. Vol. 1 Elsevier pp. 461­516.

Kremer, Michael, Jonathan Levin and Christopher M Snyder. 2020. Advance Market Commitments:
  Insights from Theory and Experience. In AEA Papers and Proceedings. Vol. 110 pp. 269­73.

Lerner, Josh. 1999. "The Government as Venture Capitalist: The Long-Run Impact of the SBIR Program."
  Journal of Business 72(3).

Lichtenberg, Frank R. 1984. "The relationship between federal contract R&D and company R&D." Amer-
  ican Economic Review 74(2):73­78.

Lichtenberg, Frank R. 1988. "The private R and D investment response to federal design and technical
  competitions." American Economic Review 78(3):550­559.

Link, Albert N, Donald S Siegel and David D Van Fleet. 2011. "Public science and public innovation:
  Assessing the relationship between patenting at U.S. National Laboratories and the Bayh-Dole Act."
  Research Policy 40(8):1094­1099.

Link, Albert N and John T Scott. 2020. "Invention disclosures and the slowdown of scientific knowledge."
  Science and Public Policy 1(5).

Merrill, Stephen A. 2018. "Righting the Research Imbalance.". White paper. The Center for Innovation
 Policy at Duke Law.

Moretti, Enrico, Claudia Steinwender and John Van Reenen. 2019. "The Intellectual Spoils of War?
 Defense R&D, Productivity and International Spillovers.". Working paper. IZA Discussion Papers.

Mowery, David C. 1998. "The changing structure of the US national innovation system: Implications for
 international conflict and cooperation in R&D policy." Research Policy 27(6):639­654.

Mowery, David C. 2009. "Plus ca change: Industrial R&D in the "Third Industrial Revolution"." Industrial
 and Corporate Change 18(1):1­50.

Mowery, David C. 2010. Military R&D and Innovation. In Handbook of the Economics of Innovation.
 Vol. 2 Elsevier pp. 1219­1256.

Mowery, David C. 2012. "Defense-related R&D as a model for "Grand Challenges" technology policies."
 Research Policy 41(10):1703­1715.

Mowery, David C and Arvids A Ziedonis. 2001. "The commercialisation of national laboratory technology
 through the formation of "spin-off" firms: Evidence from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory."
 International Journal of Manufacturing Technology and Management 3(1-2):106­119.

Mowery, David C, Richard R Nelson and Ben R Martin. 2010. "Technology policy and global warming:
 Why new policy models are needed (or why putting new wine in old bottles won't work)." Research
 Policy 39(8):1011­1023.

Murray, Fiona and Scott Stern. 2007. "Do formal intellectual property rights hinder the free flow of
 scientific knowledge?: An empirical test of the anti-commons hypothesis." Journal of Economic Behavior
 & Organization 63(4):648­687.


                                                  39
NAICS Association. 2020. "NAICS to SIC Crosswalk.". Available at https://www.naics.com/naics-to-sic-
 crosswalk-2/. Accessed September 1, 2020.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2021. "Advancing Commercialization of
  Digital Products from Federal Laboratories.". Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

National Science Foundation, National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics. 2019. "National
  Patterns of R&D Resources: 2017­18 Data Update. NSF 20-307.". Alexandria, VA. Available at
  https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf20307. Accessed January 5, 2021.

Nelson, Richard R. 1996. National innovation systems: A retrospective on a study. In Organization and
  Strategy in the Evolution of the Enterprise. Springer pp. 381­409.

Packalen, Mikko and Jay Bhattacharya. 2020. "NIH funding and the pursuit of edge science." Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences 117(22):12011­12016.

Pece, Christopher. 2016. Putting the Cart Before a Lame Horse: A case study for future initiatives to
  automate the use of administrative records for reporting government R&D. Technical report National
  Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation.

Raffo, Julio. 2020. "MATCHIT: Stata module to match two datasets based on similar text patterns.".

Rogerson, William P. 1989. "Profit regulation of defense contractors and prizes for innovation." Journal
  of Political Economy 97(6):1284­1305.

Slavtchev, Viktor and Simon Wiederhold. 2016. "Does the Technological Content of Government Demand
  Matter for Private R&D? Evidence from U.S. States." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
  8(2):45­84.

Standard & Poor's. 2018.         "Compustat Segments 1980-2015 [data set].".           Available
  to Duke University through Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS). https://wrds-
  web.wharton.upenn.edu/wrds/ds/comp/seghistd/index.cfm?navId=87. Accessed August 10, 2020).

Tartari, Valentina and Scott Stern. 2021. "More than an Ivory Tower: The Impact of Research Institutions
  on the Quantity and Quality of Entrepreneurship.". Working paper.

U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2020.         "Gross Domestic Product: Implicit Price Defla-
  tor [GDPDEF]. Retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.".         Available at
  https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/GDPDEF. Accessed October 11, 2020.

U.S. Defense Logistics Agency. 2003. "Federal Supply Classification: Groups and Classes.". Supply Bul-
  letin 708-21. Available at https://mn.gov/admin/assets/DISP_h2book%5B1%5D_tcm36-281917.pdf.
  Accessed March 24, 2021.

U.S. Defense Logistics Agency. 2020.            "North American Industry Classification Sys-
  tem (NAICS) Code to Federal Supply Class or Product Service Code.".            Available at
  https://www.dla.mil/SmallBusiness/Resources/. Accessed September 1, 2020.

U.S. Department of Defense. 1995. Dual Use Technology: A Defense Strategy for Affordable, Leading-Edge
  Technology. Technical report Defense Department, Washington, DC.

U.S. General Services Administration. 2021. "Product and Service Codes (PSC) Manual.". Fiscal Year
  2021 Edition. Available at https://www.acquisition.gov/psc-manual. Accessed January 29, 2021.




                                                  40
U.S. Government Accountability Office. 1997.       Trends in DOD Spending, Industrial
  Productivity,  and Competition. Technical report.        GAO/PEMD-97-3. Available at
  https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO/PEMD-97-3. Accessed February 8, 2021.

U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2014.              Noncompetitive Contracts Based               on
  Urgency Need Additional Oversight. Technical report.                GAO-14-304. Available            at
  https://www.gao.gov/assets/670/661983.pdf. Accessed February 28, 2021.

U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2019. International Trade: Foreign Sourcing in Government
  Procurement. Technical report. GAO-19-414. Available at https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-19-
  414. Accessed January 31, 2021.

USAspending.gov. 2020.     "Frequently Asked Questions.".      Available at https://usaspending-
 help.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/sections/115000739433-Frequently-Asked-Questions-. Accessed November
 8, 2020.

USAspending.gov. 2021a. "About.". Available at https://www.usaspending.gov/about. Accessed January
 15, 2021.

USAspending.gov. 2021b. "Advanced Search.". Available at https://www.usaspending.gov/search. Ac-
 cessed January 30, 2021.

USAspending.gov. 2021c.        "Glossary.".     Available        in   the   top   navigation    area   of
 https://www.usaspending.gov/. Accessed January 15, 2021.

Wallsten, Scott J. 2000. "The effects of government-industry R&D programs on private R&D: The case
 of the Small Business Innovation Research program." The RAND Journal of Economics pp. 82­100.

Weiss, Linda. 2014. America Inc.? Innovation and Enterprise in the National Security State. Cornell
 University Press.

Westwick, Peter. 2019. Stealth: The Secret Contest to Invent Invisible Aircraft. Oxford University Press.

Wittie, Patricia H. 2003. "Origins and History of Competition Requirements in Federal Government
 Contracting: There's Nothing New Under the Sun." Ninth Annual Federal Procurement Institute .




                                                   41
A      Federal Procurement Background
Procuring goods and services for the U.S. government through an advertised, competitive process goes back
as far as the Revolutionary War (Wittie, 2003).52 In modern times, the Armed Services Procurement Act of
1947 and the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 provided comprehensive legislative
frameworks for defense and civilian procurement, respectively. Also noteworthy was the Competition
in Contracting Act of 1984 that established "full and open competition" as the standard for federal
procurement contracts.

A.1     Procurement Process
The U.S. government's procurement process typically begins with federal acquisition professionals deter-
mining an agency's requirements for goods and services, and the most appropriate method for purchasing
them (Congressional Research Service, 2021b). In general, solicitations for contracts above $25,000 are
posted on the System for Award Management website, beta.SAM.gov.53 In response, interested firms
prepare and submit offers.54 Agency personnel then evaluate the offers using the source selection method
and criteria described in the solicitation, in accordance with Federal Acquisition Regulation.55 The agency
awards a contract to a firm only after determining that the company is responsible, meaning it has ad-
equate resources to perform the contract (financial, organizational, technical skill, production facilities,
etc.) as well as a satisfactory record of performance, integrity, and business ethics. The next steps include
contract performance and administration (e.g., invoice processing and payments, performance monitoring,
and contract modifications), followed by contract closeout.

A.2     Policy Changes
During the Cold War (1948-1989), government procurement focused on achieving and sustaining techno-
logical superiority for the purpose of national defense (Weiss, 2014). Federal agencies acquired products
and services that met government requirements and specifications, and were often unproven in commercial
markets (Howell et al., 2021). In the case of defense R&D, which represented the majority of R&D con-
tracts, the Department of Defense was often the sole customer (Mowery, 2012). As shown in Figure A1,
the government's acquisition procedures could be very complex. R&D races were often used to develop
new products at the technological leading-edge. Winners were rewarded with noncompetitive production
contracts. This incentivized firms to perform upstream science and enabled contractors to mitigate the
market risk of performing scientific research that didn't yet have commercial applications.
    The composition of procurement contracts began shifting toward dual use technologies and commercial
items in the 1980s, and accelerated in the 1990s. Numerous policy changes were made in response to
the end of the Cold War, increased global trade, constrained defense budgets, and the need to attract
nontraditional, innovative suppliers from the much larger commercial markets, especially those in the
growing IT sector (Mowery, 1998; Weiss, 2014). Specifically, the U.S. government implemented sweeping
patent and intellectual property reforms, acquisition reforms, and organizational reforms. For example,
the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 and its extensions allowed contractors to retain ownership of inventions made
with federal funding. The Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 and its extensions gave
businesses access to technologies developed in federal laboratories. The Competition in Contracting Act
  52
     For example, the Continental Congress passed a resolution on November 20, 1775 to appoint a committee responsible
for advertising, receiving proposals, and contracting rations for two new military battalions.
  53
     Other procurement methods include using a government purchase card (i.e., a credit card), placing a task or delivery
order against an existing contract, or ordering from a General Services Administration schedule. For R&D contracting, firms
can also submit unsolicited proposals or compete in government-sponsored challenges and prize competitions.
  54
     Firms can also participate in government procurement by serving as subcontractors to "prime" government contractors.
  55
     The two primary methods of source selection are sealed bidding and negotiated contracting. The latter is typically used
for R&D contracts.



                                                            42
                               Figure A1: Defense Acquisition Life Cycle




Notes : This figure shows a process map of the milestones, phases, and decision points typically included in the defense
acquisition life cycle for hardware-dominant programs (Defense Acquisition University, 2020).


of 1984 mandated that all procurement contracts be awarded based on full and open competition unless
regulatory or statutory exclusions applied. The Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization
Act of 1986 reworked the military command structure and implemented shared procurement across the
military branches. The Defense Acquisition Workforce Improvement Act of 1990 established education
and training standards for government acquisition professionals. The organizational reforms included the
creation of new "hybrid" forms of public-private partnering (Weiss, 2014). One example is the SEMATECH
industrial consortium, which was formed in 1987 with funding from the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency and the involvement of 14 American semiconductor manufacturers.
    These policy changes culminated in the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994, which enabled
simplified acquisition procedures and established a statutory preference for government procurement of
commercial items (Barry, 1995). Procurement dollars were reallocated away from mission-focused tech-
nologies that met government specifications and toward dual use technologies that had both government
and commercial potential. Driven by pressures to reduce cost and increase efficiency and transparency,
the government began competing with the commercial market for technologies that already had low(er)
commercial risk. As a result, corporations had fewer incentives to perform upstream scientific research,
and more incentives to invest in downstream development of commercially viable products and services.




                                                          43
B      Data Construction
B.1     Collecting Procurement Contracts
The U.S. General Services Administration manages the Federal Procurement Data System (FPDS), the
central repository of information on U.S. government procurement contracts. FPDS contains detailed
information on all contract transactions above the micro-purchase threshold, which generally ranges from
$2,000 to $25,000, depending on the fiscal year, type of award recipient, and place of performance.56
     The Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 (FFATA) required that federal
contract, grant, loan, and other financial assistance awards of more than $25,000 be displayed on a publicly
accessible website.57 In response, the U.S. Department of the Treasury developed USAspending.gov as
the official public source of federal government contract data (pulled from FPDS) and grant, loan, and
other financial assistance data (reported to the Data Act Broker managed by the U.S. Department of
the Treasury). The "Custom Award Data" section of the USAspending.gov website allows the public to
view and download award transactions for fiscal years starting in 2001.58 We used it to download .csv
files containing transactions for all prime procurement contracts, awarded by all federal agencies and
sub-agencies, for all locations, during fiscal years 2001-2020.59
     We supplemented these data with historical contract transactions from beta.SAM.gov, a website man-
aged by the U.S. General Services Administration. The website allows the public to download FPDS award
transactions after creating user accounts. We used it to download .csv files containing prime award trans-
actions for procurement contracts awarded by the Departments of Defense, Energy, Health and Human
Services, and Veterans Affairs for all locations during fiscal years 1980-2000.
     The federal government reports obligations for procurement contracts, not actual outlays. An obli-
gation is the government's promise to spend funds (immediately or later) as a result of entering into a
contract, so long as the agreed-to actions take place. An outlay takes place when those funds are actually
paid out to the contractor (Datalab, 2020). If the entire amount initially obligated is not used, the last
modification will display a negative dollar amount. For example, if an initial contract award was for
$100,000 and an agency only used $90,000 of that initial obligation, the last transaction associated with
award the would display an amount of -$10,000 (Datalab, 2020).

B.2     Matching Contracts to Firms
We merged the contract data with the panel of U.S.-headquartered publicly traded firms from Arora,
Belenzon and Sheer (2021). We string-matched more than 800,000 contractor names against almost
60,000 firm names (including ultimate owners and their subsidiaries).60 Specifically, we used matchit, a
Stata tool that can join observations from two datasets based on string variables that are not exactly the
same (Raffo, 2020), to perform vectoral decomposition of firm names using five-character grams. Then,
we applied Jaccard similarity scoring. For each contractor, we retained the five best potential matches (in
decreasing order of similarity score, as long as the score was above 0.5). Next, we completed a four-step
process to clean the potential matches.
  56
     Other exceptions to the reporting rule include classified contracts, as well as contracts that contain sensitive information
about recipients, locations, and operations. For obvious reasons, we cannot estimate the precise value of these unreported
contracts.
  57
     FFATA was amended by the Government Funding Transparency Act of 2008, which required prime contractors to report
details on their first-tier subcontractors, and expanded with the Digital Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014, which
established government-wide financial data standards (USAspending.gov, 2021a).
  58
     An award usually is made up of a series of transactions, which include the initial award and any subsequent modifications,
such as additions or continuations of funding and changes to the scope of work (USAspending.gov, 2020).
  59
     Award types include prime awards for contracts, contract indefinite delivery vehicles (IDV), grants, direct payments,
loans, insurance, and other financial assistance (USAspending.gov, 2021c).
  60
     We standardized recipient names using the same code as used by Arora, Belenzon and Sheer (2021) to identify the best
possible matches to the panel of firms.



                                                               44
    Step 1. We removed unicode and special characters, as well as legal suffixes (e.g., inc, corp, ltd) and
conjunctions (e.g., and, on, at) from names, generating "core" versions of contractor and firm names. We
reapplied the matchit tool to evaluate the quality of the match between these "core" names. This time,
we used bigrams in the vectoral decomposition, and dropped potential "core" matches that had a Jaccard
similarity score below 0.65.
    Step 2. We removed generic words from firm names (e.g., terms describing an industry or activity),
generating "nongeneric" versions of contractor and firm names. We reapplied the matchit tool to evaluate
the quality of the match between these "nongeneric" names. Once again, we used bigrams in the vectoral
decomposition, and dropped potential "nongeneric" matches that had a Jaccard similarity score below
0.65.
    Step 3. We calculated the Levenshtein distance between "nongeneric" names, and dropped potential
matches with an edit distance greater than 15. For each contractor, we retained only the best potential
match (in decreasing order of "core" and "nongeneric" similarity scores).
    Step 4. We manually cleaned potential matches that had similarity scores below 0.9, discarding any
obvious mis-matches.
    We obtained a dataset of 27,434 contractors matched to 10,814 ultimate owner and subsidiary names.
We aggregated contracts by firm-year, then allocated contracts matched to subsidiaries to the appropriate
ultimate owners using the dynamic match produced by Arora, Belenzon and Sheer (2021). In summary,
we identified 2,247 U.S.-headquartered manufacturing firms (i.e., ultimate owners) that received a total
of $2.3 trillion in procurement contract obligations during 1980-2015. Table F12 presents the distribution
by two-digit SIC code, while Table F11 displays the largest contractors (by total value of contracts won)
in each decade covered by our sample.


C        Variable Construction
Table C1 includes definitions and sources for all the variables used in our econometric analyses. The
steps used to split procurement contracts into various types (e.g., R&D vs. non-R&D), assign contracts
to industries, and create variables for several characteristics of science are detailed below.

C.1       Contract Variables
To describe the products and services acquired in each procurement award, agencies use four-digit Product
and Service Codes (PSC) that mirror the Federal Supply Classification (FSC) codes.61 Currently, the
PSC/FSC classification consists of 24 service categories (see Table F13) and 78 product groups (see Table
F14). The product groups are further subdivided into 645 classes, as defined in the FPDS Product and
Service Codes Manual (U.S. General Services Administration, 2021).
    We link the PSC/FSC classification to NAICS industries using the crosswalk from the U.S. Defense
Logistics Agency (2020), and then link NAICS industries to SIC industries using the crosswalk from the
NAICS Association (2020). This allows us to identify the SIC4 industry for 71 percent of procurement
contract dollars awarded between 1980 and 2015.
    We use the Product or Service Code field to split all contracts into R&D contracts (service codes
starting with the letter A) vs. non-R&D contracts (service codes starting with letters B through Z and
product codes starting with any number).62 In the procurement contract data, codes for R&D services
are composed of two alphabetic and two numeric digits:

       · 1st digit: always the letter A to identify R&D services,
  61
     The FSC is a government-wide commodity classification system designed for grouping, classifying, and naming all
personal property items (U.S. Defense Logistics Agency, 2003).
  62
     When a contract action includes more than a single product or service, the awarding agency uses the code corresponding
to the predominant product or service.



                                                            45
    · 2nd digit: alphabetic A to Z to identify the major category,

    · 3rd digit: numeric 1 to 9 to identify a subdivision of the major category, and

    · 4th digit: numeric 1 to 7 to identify the appropriate stage of R&D:

         1. Basic research,
         2. Applied research and exploratory development,
         3. Advanced development,
         4. Engineering development,
         5. Operational systems development,
         6. Management and support, and
         7. Commercialization (U.S. General Services Administration, 2021).

    We use these patterns to split R&D contracts into research contracts vs. development contracts.
Specifically, we code the first two stages of R&D (i.e., Basic research and Applied research and exploratory
development) as R contracts, and the other five stages as D Contracts. We further divide non-R&D
contracts into non-R&D service contracts vs. product contracts.
    We use the Commercial Items Acquisition Procedures field to split non-R&D contracts into commercial
contracts vs. noncommercial contracts.63 Contracts were awarded using commercial item procedures only
after the passage of the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994. Therefore, our data separating
commercial vs. noncommercial contracts only span 1995-2015. While some R&D service contracts were
awarded using streamlined commercial item procedures, they represent less than 0.7 percent of the value
of all R&D contracts awarded to sample firms. Therefore, we do not break down R&D contracts into
commercial vs. noncommercial contracts.
    We also use the Extent Competed field to distinguish contracts that were awarded competitively from
those awarded noncompetitively. In general, federal agencies are required to use full and open competi-
tion when awarding procurement contracts (U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2014). Competitive
procedures include sealed bids, competitive proposals, or a combination of competitive procedures. How-
ever, the Competition in Contracting Act of 1984 authorized noncompetitive contracting under certain
conditions.64 We aggregate competed and total contracts by year and contract type to produce the trend
lines in Figure 3.

C.2     Characteristics of Science Variables
We measure several characteristics of corporate science. First, we split the annual publication flow into: (i)
publications cited by the firm's own patents; and (ii) publications not cited by the firm's own patents. We
use the non-patent literature citations file from Arora, Belenzon and Sheer (2021) to do so. The number
of unique publications that receive one or more citations from the firm's own patents is aggregated at
the firm-year level into the variable Internal use publications. The remaining annual publication flow is
captured in the variable No internal use publications.
    Second, we identify science that spills over to close product-market rivals. We use Rival citations,
a measure of rivalry-weighted external citations from patents of other panel firms to the focal firm's
publications, also sourced from Arora, Belenzon and Sheer (2021). Product-market rivalry is calculated
  63
     This field indicates whether the solicitation used the special requirements for the acquisition of commercial items,
supplies, or services. Those requirements are intended to more closely resemble the commercial market as defined by Federal
Acquisition Regulation Part 12 (FPDS, 2020).
  64
     The Federal Acquisition Regulation currently identifies seven exceptions to full and open competition: (i) only one
responsible source and no other supplies or services will satisfy agency requirements; (ii) unusual and compelling urgency; (iii)
industrial mobilization; engineering, developmental, or research capability; or expert services; (iv) international agreement;
(v) authorized or required by statute; (vi) national security; and (vii) public interest (Federal Acquisition Regulation, 2019).


                                                               46
                                         Table C1: Variable Definitions

 Variable                Definition                                                                    Source
 Publications            Sum of scholarly, peer-reviewed publications that have at least one au-       Clarivate Analytics' Web
                         thor affiliated with the focal firm and were published in the focal year.     of Science (Arora, Belen-
                         Appendix C details how we split this variable into Internal use vs. No        zon and Sheer, 2021)
                         internal use (to capture the focal firm's own use of science) and High pro-
                         tection publications vs. Low protection publications (to capture the scope
                         of protection offered by the focal firm's own patents).
 Publications            Calculated using a perpetual inventory method with a 15 percent de-
 stock                   preciation rate (Hall et al., 2005), such that the stock in year t is
                         P ublications stockt = P ublicationst +(1- )P ublications stockt-1 , where
                          = 0.15.
 Patents                 Sum of patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office to the         European Patent Office's
                         focal firm in the focal year.                                                 PATSTAT        database
                                                                                                       (Arora, Belenzon and
                                                                                                       Sheer, 2021)
 Rival citations         Sum of rivalry-weighted external citations from patents of other panel        European Patent Office's
                         firms to the focal firm's publications, sourced from Arora, Belenzon and      PATSTAT       database,
                         Sheer (2021). The product-market rivalry is calculated as the Mahalanobis     Standard & Poor's Com-
                         similarity of vectors representing the shares of industry segment sales for   pustat Segments (Arora,
                         each pair of firms.                                                           Belenzon and Sheer,
                                                                                                       2021)
 All contracts           Sum of all contract awards associated with a firm-year ($ mm).                USAspending.gov,
                                                                                                       beta.SAM.gov
 R&D contracts           Sum of R&D contract awards associated with a firm-year ($ mm).
 Non-R&D contracts       Sum of non-R&D contract awards associated with a firm-year ($ mm).
 R contracts             Sum of research contract awards associated with a firm-year ($ mm).
 D contracts             Sum of development contract awards associated with a firm-year ($ mm).
 Commercial contracts    Sum of commercial contract awards associated with a firm-year ($ mm).
 Noncommercial           Sum of noncommercial contract awards associated with a firm-year ($
 contracts               mm).
 Time trend              Focal year minus 1980 (in decennial units).
 Sales                   Sales for the focal firm-year ($ mm).                                         Standard & Poor's Com-
                                                                                                       pustat North America
                                                                                                       (Arora, Belenzon and
                                                                                                       Sheer, 2021)
 R&D stock               Calculated using a perpetual inventory method with a 15 percent de-           Standard & Poor's Com-
                         preciation rate, such that the stock in year t is R&D stockt =                pustat North America
                         R&D expenditurest + (1 -  )R&D stockt-1 , where the focal firm's              (Arora, Belenzon and
                         R&D expenditures in year t are based on Compustat data and  = 0.15.           Sheer, 2021)
                         Expressed in $ mm.
 Industry R&D funding    Calculated by multiplying the level of R&D contracts obligated to the         USAspending.gov,
                         focal firm's SIC3 industry (not including the contracts obligated to the      beta.SAM.gov
                         focal firm that year) times the share of R&D contracts obligated to the
                         focal firm's SIC4 industry (averaged over the sample period of 1980-2015).
                         Expressed in $ mm.
 Cold War shock          Calculated using the difference in contract values between pre (1988) and     USAspending.gov,
                         post (1992) periods for each SIC4 industry, weighted by the focal firm's      beta.SAM.gov, Standard
                         sales exposure to different SIC4 industries. Expressed in $ mm. The           & Poor's Compustat
                         sales exposure is calculated as the share of the focal firm's sales during    North America
                         1982-1985 that came from each SIC4 industry.
Notes: This table displays definitions and sources for the variables used in our econometric analyses. Dollar values are
deflated using the GDP Implicit Price Deflator to reflect constant 2012 dollars (U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2020).


as the Mahalanobis similarity of vectors representing the shares of industry segment sales for each pair of
firms. In Table 7, firm-years with rival citations above the median (relative to the firm's SIC4 industry)
are included in the High rival use regression, while the remaining firm-years are included in the Low rival
use regression.
    Third, we split the annual publication flow into: (i) publications that have low patent protection;

                                                              47
and (ii) publications that have high patent protection. We measure the textual proximity of publications
(abstract and title) to patents (claims) for all Web of Science publications and USPTO patents for our
sample period using a three-step procedure.
    Step 1: Bag of words. We extract all words from the claims text of patents, and the titles and
abstracts of publications. For each document (patent or publication), we create a vector of all word stems.
Each word stem is weighted by the inverse of its frequency in the complete patent corpus. For each word
in a patent, we create an inverse frequency index as:
                                                               pi
                                                  Ii = Ni × (1 -  )
                                                               P
where Ni is the number of times the ith word stem appears throughout the claims section of patents, pi is
the number of patent documents that contain the ith word stem, and P is the number of patents issued
by the USPTO. Each item in the index represents the weight assigned to extracted word stems according
to their specificity across all USPTO patent documents. We follow the same procedure for the title and
abstract of publications (we treat a publication record as a patent document).
     An important part of the word stemming process is mapping acronyms and technical concepts. For
example, the acronym RAM refers to random access memory. Thus, in our textual comparison algorithm,
when the sequence of words "random access memory" appears, we collapse it into RAM. Acronyms appear
in capital letters on patent documents. We retain all words with at least two capital letters and manually
search for their meaning. To mitigate cases where an acronym has multiple meanings, we perform the
acronym-meaning match at the four-digit IPC level. (Chemical compounds also appear in capital letters,
but we leave them unchanged.)
     Step 2: Distance between words. Similar ideas might be described using different text. Thus,
a major challenge is how to compute the "technical distance" between two words. To address it, we
develop a dictionary that aims to measure the probability that two distinct words refer to the same
technical concept. We identify words used in patent documents deemed to be technically similar by
patent examiners. Specifically, we extract a random sample of about 150,000 non-final rejection letters
from the USPTO's Public PAIR (Patent Application Information Retrieval) system. We include only
rejections pertaining to novelty or non-obviousness, as outlined in 35 U.S.C. 102 and 35 U.S.C. 103 of the
USPTO's Manuals for Patent Examining Procedure. We extract the text of the original patent application
associated with a rejection, as well as the text of the prior-art patents cited as the reason for the rejection.
When multiple rejections are associated with the same application, we extract the relevant (modified)
application claims for each rejection.
     Next, we extract all relevant word stems from the claims section of the focal patent application and
corresponding prior-art patents.65 Then, we calculate the proximity between each pair of word stems based
on their co-occurrence. To account for the baseline tendency of two word stems to co-occur across two
documents, for each rejected application and rejection prior-art patent pair, we construct a control pair by
linking the rejected application with a control patent that was not cited as a reason for the rejection but
is in the same 4-digit IPC and has the same application year as the rejection prior-art patent. Proximity
between word stems is calculated as the ratio of the number of times the pair appears in the rejected
application and rejection prior-art patent to the number of times it appears in the rejected application
and the control prior-art patent:

                                                                 (A    R)w1,w2
                                          P roximityw1,w2 =
                                                                 (A    C )w1,w2
    (A R)w1,w2 is the number of times the words w1 and w2 co-occur within the focal application A and
rejection prior-art patent R. (A C )w1,w2 is the number of times the words w1 and w2 co-occur in the
focal application A and control patent C . Because the same word stem pair, w1 and w2, can co-occur in
  65
    We use original applications rather than final patent documents because claims can change during the patent examination
process.


                                                            48
more than one application and rejection prior-art patent pair, we average the proximity scores between
                                                                                  ¯W 1 ,W 2 .
w1 and w2 across all application and rejection prior-art patent pairs, denoted by P   i    i
    Step 3: Textual overlap between documents. We construct a similarity score between a pair
of documents (i.e., a publication and a patent) based on the "technical distance" between their words.
We create a vector of words for each document with their corresponding weights (i.e., inverse frequency)
as described in step 1. Then, we calculate the cosine proximity score between the two word vectors W 1
and W 2, each vector consisting of n elements, while taking into account the average word pair proximity
¯W 1 ,W 2 calculated in step 2:
P    i   i

                                                      i=n                 ¯w1 ,w2
                                                      i=1 W 1i   × W 2i × P  i    i
                                     P SW 1,W 2 =
                                                          i=n    2       i=n    2
                                                          i=1 W 1i       i=1 W 2i

    We normalize the proximity score P SW 1,W 2 to be between 0 and 1 by dividing it by max(P SW 1i ,W 2i ).
As a result, 1 indicates the highest possible similarity and 0 indicates the lowest possible similarity between
two documents.
    For each publication between 1980 and 2015, we retain up to five of the highest proximity scores with
granted patents. We identify which of those patents are owned by the publishing firm, and retain the top
matching publication-patent pair. Publications with proximity scores above the median (relative to the
publication year) are coded as "protected" by a patent, while those with scores below the median and those
unmatched to firm patents are coded as "unprotected" by a patent.66 The number of unique publications
that are "protected" by the firm's patents is aggregated at the firm-year level into the variable High
protection publications. The remaining annual publication flow is captured in the variable Low protection
publications.


D      Instrumental Variable Estimation
D.1     Constructing the Industry R&D Funding Variable
Our first instrument exploits variation in aggregate industry R&D contracts to predict R&D contracts
awarded to a focal firm. It is important to recognize that R&D contracts awarded to a firm's SIC4 industry
may still be endogenous. To mitigate this concern, we take advantage of changes in R&D funding at a
higher level of aggregation, the firm's SIC3 industry. We "distribute" these changes across SIC4 industries
according to time-invariant industry shares, closely following Moretti, Steinwender and Van Reenen (2019).
    We construct our IV in three stages. First, we identify the SIC4 industry for each procurement contract
awarded by the Department of Defense, Department of Energy, Health and Human Services, and Veterans
Affairs during 1980-2015. For transactions that do not list the recipient firm's NAICS code, we use the
Product or service code (PSC) field and the PSC-to-NAICS crosswalk from U.S. Defense Logistics Agency
(2020) to identify the NAICS code. Then, we use the NAICS-to-SIC crosswalk available from NAICS
Association (2020) to identify the SIC4 code. We aggregate all R&D contracts awarded to all firms (not
just our panel firms) at the SIC4-year and SIC3-year levels, respectively.
    Second, we calculate the share of R&D contracts awarded to the SIC4 industry relative to the R&D
contracts awarded to the SIC3 industry that contains it. Specifically, we divide the total value of R&D
contracts awarded to the SIC4 industry during 1980-2015 by the total value of R&D contracts awarded
to the higher-level SIC3 industry during 1980-2015.
    Third, we calculate the instrument as Industry R&D f undingi,t = (Industry R&D contractst -
F irm R&D contractsi,t ) × Industry share. Industry R&D contractst is the total value of R&D contracts
awarded to the firm's SIC3 industry in year t, from which we subtract the firm's own R&D contracts in
year t. The reason for excluding firm R&D contracts from the construction of the IV is to avoid a
  66
    Our choice of cutoff--the median publication-patent proximity score for all the publications published by sample firms
in a given year--allows us to take into consideration how the proximity between papers and patents changes over time.


                                                           49
mechanical correlation between the endogenous variable we want to instrument and the instrument itself.
We use a time-invariant Industry share because it allows us to smooth out year-to-year variation in the
R&D contracts awarded to the SIC4 industry.
     Take Boeing as an example. In 2012, Boeing's SIC3 industry ("372 Aircraft and parts") received $4.2
billion in R&D contracts, including almost $1 billion for Boeing. Over the sample period of 1980-2015,
Boeing's SIC4 industry ("3721 Aircraft") received 85 percent of the R&D contracts awarded to its SIC3
industry ("372 Aircraft and parts"). The instrument for Boeing in 2012 was calculated as (4.2 - 1) × .85 =
2.7 (in $ billions).
     Using this industry R&D funding measure (rather than the total value of R&D contracts awarded to
the firm's SIC4 industry in year t) strengthens the validity of our instrument because it makes it less likely
to be related to the focal firm's idiosyncratic technical opportunities.

D.2     First Stage Results
Table D2 shows the first stage results of the two-stage-least-squares (2SLS) instrumental variable estima-
tions used in this paper.

                     Table D2: Instrumental Variable Estimation (First Stage)

                                                 (1)                    (2)                (3)                  (4)
                                                                      ln(R&D contracts)t-1
                                                                   1st stage IV,         1st stage IV,     1st stage IV,
                                            1st stage IV,         Cold War shock       Cold War shock     Cold War shock
                                         Ind. R&D funding     for R&D Expenditures     for Publications     for Patents
  ln(Industry R&D funding)t-1                   0.060
                                               (0.008)
  ln(Cold War shock 1988-1992)                                         0.033                 0.030             0.030
                                                                      (0.007)               (0.006)           (0.006)
  Pre-sample mean R&D expenditures                                     0.068
                                                                      (0.017)
  Pre-sample mean publications                                                               0.386
                                                                                            (0.057)
  Pre-sample mean patents                                                                                      0.530
                                                                                                              (0.070)
  ln(R&D stock)t-1                              0.137                  0.280                 0.181             0.150
                                               (0.035)                (0.030)               (0.027)           (0.027)
  Sample years                               1980-2015              1993-2015             1993-2015          1993-2015
  Firm fixed effects                            Yes                    No                    No                 No
  Year fixed effects                            Yes                    Yes                   Yes                Yes
  Observations                                 52,076                 5,154                 5,779              5,779
  F statistic                                    34                    62                    73                 77
  Adjusted R-squared                           0.575                  0.056                 0.071              0.077
Notes: This table displays first stage OLS regression results. Industry R&D funding is calculated by multiplying the level of
R&D contracts obligated to the focal firm's SIC3 industry (not including the contracts obligated to the focal firm that year)
times the share of R&D contracts obligated to the focal firm's SIC4 industry (averaged over the sample period of 1980-2015).
Cold War shock is calculated using the difference in contract values between pre (1988) and post (1992) periods for each
SIC4 industry, weighted by the focal firm's sales exposure to different SIC4 industries. One is added to logged variables.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level in Column 1, and are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity
in Columns 2-4.




                                                             50
E      Robustness Checks
E.1      Effect of R&D Contracts
Tables E3 through E9 preset several robustness checks for the effect of R&D contracts.

                                             Table E3: Using All Contracts

                                           (1)             (2)                (3)                 (4)             (5)                     (6)
                                          ln(R&D expenditures)                   ln(Publications)                         ln(Patents)
                                      2nd stage IV,     2nd stage IV,     2nd stage IV,     2nd stage IV,     2nd stage IV,       2nd stage IV,
                                    Industry funding   Cold War shock   Industry funding   Cold War shock   Industry funding     Cold War shock
 ln(All contracts)t-1                    0.053             0.092             0.111              0.168            0.045                   -0.156
                                        (0.039)           (0.032)           (0.039)            (0.051)          (0.046)                 (0.056)
 ln(R&D stock)t-1                        0.514             0.885             0.140              0.064            0.327                   0.513
                                        (0.026)           (0.046)           (0.026)            (0.047)          (0.032)                 (0.050)
 Pre-sample mean R&D expenditures                          -0.113
                                                          (0.017)
 Pre-sample mean publications                                                                   0.592
                                                                                               (0.044)
 Pre-sample mean patents                                                                                                                 0.643
                                                                                                                                        (0.059)
 Sample years                          1980-2015         1993-2015         1980-2015          1993-2015        1980-2015            1993-2015
 Firm fixed effects                        Yes              No                 Yes               No                Yes                 No
 Year fixed effects                        Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                 Yes
 Weak identif. (Kleibergen-Paap)           5.54            15.11              11.93             17.79             11.93               18.68
 Firms                                   4,144                               4,317                               4,317
 Observations                            47,406            4,609             53,104             5,775            53,104                 5,775
 Adjusted R-squared                       0.212            0.875             -0.576             0.457             0.070                 0.305

Notes: This table presents the estimation results for the relationship of all contracts with R&D expenditures, publications,
and patents. One is added to logged variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.



                                    Table E4: Using Noncommercial Contracts

                                           (1)             (2)                (3)                 (4)             (5)                     (6)
                                          ln(R&D expenditures)                   ln(Publications)                         ln(Patents)
                                      2nd stage IV,     2nd stage IV,     2nd stage IV,     2nd stage IV,     2nd stage IV,       2nd stage IV,
                                    Industry funding   Cold War shock   Industry funding   Cold War shock   Industry funding     Cold War shock
 ln(Noncommercial contracts)t-1          0.058             0.072             0.132              0.141            0.055                   -0.144
                                        (0.048)           (0.021)           (0.045)            (0.038)          (0.055)                 (0.046)
 ln(R&D stock)t-1                        0.515             0.916             0.140              0.105            0.327                   0.475
                                        (0.029)           (0.030)           (0.025)            (0.030)          (0.032)                 (0.034)
 Pre-sample mean R&D expenditures                          -0.110
                                                          (0.015)
 Pre-sample mean publications                                                                   0.620
                                                                                               (0.033)
 Pre-sample mean patents                                                                                                                 0.649
                                                                                                                                        (0.053)
 Sample years                          1980-2015         1993-2015         1980-2015          1993-2015        1980-2015            1993-2015
 Firm fixed effects                        Yes              No                 Yes               No                Yes                 No
 Year fixed effects                        Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                 Yes
 Weak identif. (Kleibergen-Paap)           4.91            29.44              10.20             28.97             10.20               30.08
 Firms                                   4,144                               4,317                               4,317
 Observations                            47,441            4,602             53,149             5,769            53,149                 5,769
 Adjusted R-squared                       0.197            0.909             -0.750             0.585             0.045                 0.376

Notes: This table presents the estimation results for the relationship of noncommercial contracts with R&D expenditures,
publications, and patents. One is added to logged variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.




                                                                     51
                                    Table E5: Using Non-defense R&D Contracts

                                            (1)             (2)                 (3)                 (4)             (5)                     (6)
                                           ln(R&D expenditures)                    ln(Publications)                         ln(Patents)
                                       2nd stage IV,     2nd stage IV,     2nd stage IV,      2nd stage IV,     2nd stage IV,       2nd stage IV,
                                     Industry funding   Cold War shock   Industry funding    Cold War shock   Industry funding     Cold War shock
 ln(Non-defense R&D contracts)t-1         0.372              0.357             0.281              0.710            -0.147                  -0.668
                                         (0.146)            (0.123)           (0.133)            (0.220)          (0.172)                 (0.238)
 ln(R&D stock)t-1                         0.511              0.949             0.174              0.175            0.353                   0.428
                                         (0.017)            (0.020)           (0.015)            (0.014)          (0.022)                 (0.020)
 Pre-sample mean R&D expenditures                            -0.107
                                                            (0.012)
 Pre-sample mean publications                                                                     0.600
                                                                                                 (0.041)
 Pre-sample mean patents                                                                                                                   0.591
                                                                                                                                          (0.042)
 Sample years                           1980-2015          1993-2015         1980-2015          1993-2015        1980-2015            1993-2015
 Firm fixed effects                         Yes               No                 Yes               No                Yes                 No
 Year fixed effects                         Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                 Yes
 Weak identif. (Kleibergen-Paap)           11.41             14.70              13.48             15.76             13.48               16.41
 Firms                                    4,128                                4,303                               4,303
 Observations                             46,478             4,631             52,207             5,801            52,207                 5,801
 Adjusted R-squared                       -0.426             0.852             -0.342             0.303             0.023                 0.187

Notes: This table presents the estimation results for the relationship of non-defense R&D contracts with R&D expenditures,
publications, and patents. One is added to logged variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.



                           Table E6: Alternate Publication and Patent Equations

                                          (1)              (2)                (3)                   (4)         (5)               (6)
                                      Publications      Inv. hyperbolic sine(Publications)        Patents     Inv. hyperbolic sine(Patents)
                                                                         2nd stage IV,                                         2nd stage IV,
                                         Poisson          OLS          Ind. R&D funding           Poisson       OLS          Ind. R&D funding
 ln(R&D contracts)t-1                     0.010           0.012               0.071                0.018        0.013                -0.052
                                         (0.003)         (0.002)             (0.036)              (0.006)      (0.003)              (0.049)
 ln(Non-R&D contracts)t-1                 -0.004          0.005                                    0.004        0.008
                                         (0.006)         (0.002)                                  (0.004)      (0.002)
 ln(R&D stock)t-1                         0.586           0.227               0.211                0.506        0.395                0.406
                                         (0.049)         (0.016)             (0.016)              (0.063)      (0.021)              (0.023)
 Sample years                          1980-2015        1980-2015           1980-2015           1980-2015     1980-2015           1980-2015
 Firm fixed effects                       Yes              Yes                  Yes                Yes           Yes                  Yes
 Year fixed effects                       Yes              Yes                  Yes                Yes           Yes                  Yes
 Weak identif. (Kleibergen-Paap)                                               60.63                                                 60.63
 Firms                                   2,842           4,318                4,302               3,908        4,318                4,302
 Observations                            39,944          53,372               52,074              50,304       53,372               52,074
 Adjusted R-squared                                      0.852                0.017                            0.813                 0.069
Notes: This table presents the estimation results for the relationship between R&D contracts and publications and patents.
One is added to logged variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.




                                                                       52
                         Table E7: Publication Equation Using Different Lags

                                       (1)             (2)                  (3)                   (4)                (5)
                                                                         ln(Publications)
                                      Finite       Two-year lags       Three-year lags        Four-year lags     Five-year lags
                                   distributed     2nd stage IV,        2nd stage IV,         2nd stage IV,      2nd stage IV,
                                       lags      Ind. R&D funding    Ind. R&D funding       Ind. R&D funding   Ind. R&D funding
 ln(R&D contracts)t-1                0.007
                                    (0.002)
 ln(R&D contracts)t-2                0.005            0.072
                                    (0.001)          (0.031)
 ln(R&D contracts)t-3                0.004                                 0.086
                                    (0.001)                               (0.033)
 ln(R&D contracts)t-4                0.003                                                       0.090
                                    (0.001)                                                     (0.034)
 ln(R&D contracts)t-5                0.004                                                                          0.090
                                    (0.002)                                                                        (0.035)
 ln(R&D stock)t-1                    0.205
                                    (0.019)
 ln(R&D stock)t-2                                     0.159
                                                     (0.014)
 ln(R&D stock)t-3                                                          0.131
                                                                          (0.015)
 ln(R&D stock)t-4                                                                                0.113
                                                                                                (0.015)
 ln(R&D stock)t-5                                                                                                   0.094
                                                                                                                   (0.016)
 Sample years                      1980-2015        1980-2015           1980-2015              1980-2015          1980-2015
 Firm fixed effects                   Yes               Yes                 Yes                    Yes                Yes
 Year fixed effects                   Yes               Yes                 Yes                    Yes                Yes
 Weak identif. (Kleibergen-Paap)                       57.36               50.87                  46.69              42.18
 Firms                               3,059            3,925               3,595                  3,301              3,045
 Observations                        36,804           47,472              43,287                 39,476             36,001
 Adjusted R-squared                   0.880           -0.012              -0.068                 -0.092             -0.107
Notes: This table presents the estimation results for the relationship between R&D contracts and publications using different
time lags. One is added to logged variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.




                                                                53
                         Table E8: Measures of Publication and Patent Quality

                                               (1)                (2)                        (3)                (4)
                                          ln(Citation-weighted Publications)              ln(Citation-weighted Patents)
                                          2nd stage IV,         2nd stage IV,            2nd stage IV,       2nd stage IV,
                                        Industry funding      Ind. R&D funding         Industry funding    Ind. R&D funding
  ln(All contracts)t-1                        0.126                                         0.056
                                             (0.039)                                       (0.049)
  ln(R&D contracts)t-1                                                 0.089                                     -0.023
                                                                      (0.032)                                   (0.043)
  ln(R&D stock)t-1                            0.120                    0.166                0.306                0.333
                                             (0.026)                  (0.014)              (0.034)              (0.020)
  Sample years                             1980-2015                1980-2015             1980-2015            1980-2015
  Firm fixed effects                           Yes                      Yes                   Yes                  Yes
  Year fixed effects                           Yes                      Yes                   Yes                  Yes
  Weak identif. (Kleibergen-Paap)             11.93                    60.63                 11.93                60.63
  Firms                                      4,317                    4,302                 4,317                4,302
  Observations                               53,104                   52,074                53,104               52,074
  Adjusted R-squared                         -0.511                   -0.032                 0.020                0.068
Notes: This table presents the estimation results for the relationship between contracts and measures of publication and
patent quality. The publication flow is weighted by citations received from other publications, normalized by the journal-
year. The patent flow is weighted by citations received from other patents, normalized by International Patent Classification
(IPC) class-year. One is added to logged variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.



                                       Table E9: Non-linear Time Effects

                                                (1)           (2)               (3)        (4)            (5)
                                                         Contract value                    Contract composition
                                              ln(All        ln(R&D        ln(Comm.     Share R&D/      Share comm./
                                            contracts)     contracts)     contracts)   All contracts   All contracts
           Indicator for Decade = 1980s      Baseline       Baseline                      Baseline

           Indicator for Decade = 1990s        0.838         0.057        Baseline         -0.000         Baseline
                                              (0.128)       (0.080)                       (0.017)
           Indicator for Decade = 2000s        1.113         -0.103         1.968          -0.023           0.257
                                              (0.183)       (0.122)        (0.108)        (0.022)          (0.022)
           Indicator for Decade = 2010s        0.962         -0.336         2.452          -0.042           0.470
                                              (0.222)       (0.146)        (0.148)        (0.024)          (0.064)
           ln(R&D stock)t-1                    0.522         0.174          0.573          -0.002           -0.005
                                              (0.067)       (0.036)        (0.067)        (0.004)          (0.015)
           Sample years                     1980-2015      1980-2015      1995-2015      1980-2015        1995-2015
           Firm fixed effects                  Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes
           Firms                              4,322          4,323          3,620          1,838             1,461
           Observations                       53,534         53,679         37,011         17,936           12,204
           Adjusted R-squared                 0.660          0.590          0.632          0.298             0.081
Notes: This table presents OLS estimates for changes in procurement contract value and composition over time, accounting
for non-linear time effects. One is added to logged variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level.




                                                               54
E.2       "Ticket to Play"
Table E10 presents the relationship of all contracts with R&D contracts, estimated using the 2,247 con-
tractor firms in our sample. 2SLS coefficient estimates show that receiving R&D contracts has a positive
effect on the value of subsequent procurement contracts. In Column 3, the estimate implies that a $1 mil-
lion increase in R&D contracts is associated with a $14 million future increase in all contracts, evaluated
at the sample means.67
    Lichtenberg (1984) argues that "federal contracts do not descend upon firms like manna from heaven"
(p. 74), but rather respond to firms' own investments in R&D. Mowery (2012) provides a supporting
example from the semiconductor industry. He notes that the prospect of winning a large procurement
contract supplying semiconductor components for strategic missile guidance systems was the "prize" that
motivated Texas Instruments to develop the integrated circuit. Consistent with those arguments, we find
evidence to suggest that R&D contracts drive corporate science because they are the "ticket to play" in
the government procurement market.

                           Table E10: R&D Contracts Are the "Ticket to Play"

                                                               (1)               (2)                  (3)
                                                                             ln(All contracts)
                                                                          2nd stage IV,           2nd stage IV,
                                                              OLS       Ind. R&D funding         Cold War shock
              ln(R&D contracts)t-1                           0.256              0.157                0.946
                                                            (0.009)            (0.093)              (0.370)
              ln(R&D stock)t-1                               0.555              0.604                0.550
                                                            (0.042)            (0.050)              (0.086)
              Pre-sample mean, all contracts                                                         0.170
                                                                                                    (0.060)
              Sample years                                 1980-2015         1980-2015             1993-2015
              Firm fixed effects                              Yes               Yes                   No
              Year fixed effects                              Yes               Yes                   Yes
              Weak identification (Kleibergen-Paap)                            340.32                16.01
              Observations                                   34,278            32,740                4,130
              Adjusted R-squared                              0.593            -0.046                0.218
Notes: This table presents the estimation results for the relationship between R&D contracts and all contracts among
contractors. One is added to logged variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity.




  67
       Average values for All contracts and R&D contracts are $15 million and $1 million, respectively.


                                                               55
F       Additional Figures and Tables

                                Table F11: Largest Contractors Over Time

                                                  All         R&D                       R&D
                                               contracts    contracts     Sales      expenditures   Publications Patents
 Decade Company                                 ($ mm)       ($ mm)      ($ mm)        ($ mm)         (count) (count)
 1980     GENERAL DYNAMICS                     41,741       4,357        143,363     4,496          340          377
 1980     MCDONNELL DOUGLAS                    34,234       3,638        197,205     7,601          1,062        306
 1980     GENERAL ELECTRIC                     22,172       3,663        633,418     19,427         6,020        9,112
 1980     UNITED TECHNOLOGIES                  18,703       1,461        294,253     16,555         1,240        2,600
 1980     CBS                                  17,835       2,596        198,005     4,299          3,246        4,169
 1980     ROCKWELL AUTOMATION                  16,470       7,117        184,839     5,600          2,794        1,804
 1980     RAYTHEON                             14,379       1,690        124,707     4,302          514          630
 1980     LOCKHEED MARTIN                      11,778       1,377        153,254     6,314          2,141        410
 1980     LITTON INDUSTRIES                    9,009        1,106        89,381      1,931          863          507
 1980     MARTIN MARIETTA                      8,944        3,893        80,362      2,441          738          131
 1990     LOCKHEED MARTIN                      67,135       21,572       271,608     10,494         3,984        1,423
 1990     MCDONNELL DOUGLAS                    48,293       8,295        157,802     4,248          803          276
 1990     GENERAL DYNAMICS                     41,054       6,930        76,350      1,466          219          217
 1990     CBS                                  32,272       3,060        125,330     1,484          1,078        2,457
 1990     BOEING                               32,231       5,468        470,980     21,286         1,851        1,779
 1990     GENERAL ELECTRIC                     30,589       6,470        1,036,285   19,978         4,440        8,798
 1990     NORTHROP GRUMMAN                     26,393       4,911        98,814      2,298          750          882
 1990     UNITED TECHNOLOGIES                  23,243       2,733        321,761     16,093         1,091        3,454
 1990     RAYTHEON                             21,418       5,019        173,796     4,939          1,247        1,138
 1990     ROCKWELL AUTOMATION                  16,356       3,181        146,157     7,983          1,877        1,706
 2000     LOCKHEED MARTIN                      254,423      77,477       400,471     11,186         2,871        3,013
 2000     BOEING                               183,829      36,725       667,733     32,370         2,387        3,832
 2000     RAYTHEON                             74,966       14,171       230,652     5,769          1,986        1,898
 2000     UNITED TECHNOLOGIES                  49,878       11,261       463,339     16,029         1,033        3,219
 2000     GENERAL DYNAMICS                     43,384       8,826        233,535     3,807          567          272
 2000     NORTHROP GRUMMAN                     35,109       7,304        289,648     5,413          1,373        2,454
 2000     HONEYWELL INTERNATIONAL              20,417       881          322,527     12,423         1,685        6,381
 2000     GENERAL ELECTRIC                     20,312       1,130        1,711,577   29,423         6,322        12,774
 2000     OSHKOSH                              17,858       1,019        37,816      459            4            110
 2000     L3 TECHNOLOGIES                      15,018       1,183        96,598      2,784          115          323
 2010     LOCKHEED MARTIN                      183,614      31,787       274,906     4,088          1,241        2,352
 2010     BOEING                               113,308      9,719        483,246     20,721         1,167        5,003
 2010     RAYTHEON                             62,844       9,603        143,825     3,606          1,084        2,203
 2010     GENERAL DYNAMICS                     47,548       621          189,298     2,656          274          136
 2010     UNITED TECHNOLOGIES                  40,706       5,484        351,065     13,492         889          4,902
 2010     MCKESSON                             31,960       0            854,633     2,553          812          154
 2010     OSHKOSH                              14,773       113          46,093      757            11           107
 2010     HONEYWELL INTERNATIONAL              14,251       294          223,770     10,579         872          6,608
 2010     GENERAL ELECTRIC                     12,644       510          833,862     26,122         5,425        11,476
 2010     L3 TECHNOLOGIES                      10,685       700          79,029      1,834          93           252
Notes: This table displays the 10 largest contractors (by total value of contracts won) in each decade. Contracts, sales, R&D
expenditures, publications, and patents are aggregated at the firm-decade level. The 2010s present aggregate data for just
seven years.




                                                             56
                           Table F12: Distribution of Firms by SIC2 Industry

 SIC2 industry       Number of firms      SIC2 industry       Number of firms        SIC2 industry      Number of firms
 28                  757                  32                  29                     58                 5
 36                  650                  22                  26                     60                 4
 38                  645                  49                  24                     21                 4
 73                  532                  27                  23                     63                 4
 35                  527                  29                  22                     10                 3
 37                  140                  51                  20                     75                 3
 34                  96                   59                  14                     76                 3
 30                  77                   79                  12                     61                 3
 87                  68                   1                   12                     12                 2
 20                  63                   65                  11                     42                 2
 48                  63                   23                  10                     45                 2
 33                  59                   24                  9                      54                 2
 99                  57                   16                  7                      7                  2
 39                  56                   31                  7                      64                 2
 26                  47                   78                  7                      72                 2
 67                  44                   82                  6                      47                 2
 13                  44                   15                  6                      2                  1
 25                  31                   17                  6                      70                 1
 50                  30                   62                  5
 80                  29                   14                  5
Notes: This table displays the distribution of sample firms by two-digit SIC code.




                               Table F13: Classification Codes for Services

 Code Service category                                         Code Service category
 A      Research and development                               N      Installation of equipment
 B      Special studies and analyses ­ not R&D                 P      Salvage services
 C      Architect and engineering services ­ construction      Q      Medical services
 D      Automatic data processing and telecommunica-           R      Professional, administrative and management
        tion services                                                 support services
 E      Purchase of structures and facilities                  S      Utilities and housekeeping services
 F      Natural resources and conservation services            T      Photographic, mapping, printing, and publica-
                                                                      tions services
 G      Social services                                        U      Education and training services
 H      Quality control, testing, and inspection services      V      Transportation, travel and relocation services
 I      Maintenance, repair and rebuilding of equipment        W      Lease or rental of equipment
 K      Modification of equipment                              X      Lease or rental of facilities
 L      Technical representative services                      Y      Construction of structures and facilities
 M      Operation of government owned facility                 Z      Maintenance, repair or alteration of real property
Notes: This table displays the 24 high-level categories used to classify the services purchased by the federal government.




                                                            57
                             Table F14: Classification Codes for Products

 Code Product group                                               Code Product group
 10    Weapons                                                    53    Hardware and Abrasives
 11    Nuclear Ordinance                                          54    Prefabricated Structures and Scaffolding
 12    Fire Control Equipment                                     55    Lumber, Millwork, Plywood, and Veneer
 13    Ammunition and Explosives                                  56    Construction and Building Materials
 14    Guided Missiles                                            58    Communications, Detection and Coherent Radia-
                                                                        tion Equipment
 15    Aircraft and Airframe Structural Components                59    Electrical and Electronic Equipment Components
 16    Aerospace Craft Components and Accessories                 60    Fiber Optics Materials and Components, Assem-
                                                                        blies and Accessories
 17    Aerospace Craft Launching, Landing, and Ground             61    Electric Wire, and Power and Distribution Equip-
       Handling Equipment                                               ment
 18    Space Vehicles                                             62    Lighting Fixtures and Lamps
 19    Ships, Small Craft, Pontoons, and Floating Docks           63    Alarm, Signal and Security Detection Systems
 20    Ship and Marine Equipment                                  65    Medical, Dental, and Veterinary Equipment and
                                                                        Supplies
 22    Railway Equipment                                          66    Instruments and Laboratory Equipment
 23    Ground Effect Vehicles, Motor Vehicles, Trailers,          67    Photographic Equipment
       and Cycles
 24    Tractors                                                   68    Chemicals and Chemical Products
 25    Vehicular Equipment Components                             69    Training Aids and Devices
 26    Tires and Tubes                                            70    ADP Equipment Software, Supplies and Support
                                                                        Equipment
 28    Engines, Turbines, and Components                          71    Furniture
 29    Engine Accessories                                         72    Household and Commercial Furnishings and Appli-
                                                                        ances
 30    Mechanical Power Transmission Equipment                    73    Food Preparation and Serving Equipment
 31    Bearings                                                   74    Office Machines
 32    Woodworking Machinery and Equipment                        75    Office Supplies and Devices
 34    Metalworking Machinery                                     76    Books, Maps, and Other Publications
 35    Service and Trade Equipment                                77    Musical Instruments, Phonographs, and Home Ra-
                                                                        dios
 36    Special Industry Machinery                                 78    Recreational and Athletic Equipment
 37    Agricultural Machinery and Equipment                       79    Cleaning Equipment and Supplies
 38    Construction, Mining, Excavating, and Highway              80    Brushes, Paints, Sealers, and Adhesives
       Maintenance Equipment
 39    Materials Handling Equipment                               81    Containers, Packaging, and Packing Supplies
 40    Rope, Cable, Chain, and Fittings                           83    Textiles, Leather, Furs, Apparel and Shoes, Tents,
                                                                        Flags
 41    Refrigeration, Air Conditioning and Air Circulating        84    Clothing, Individual Equipment, and Insignia
       Equipment
 42    Fire Fighting, Rescue, and Safety Equipment                85    Toiletries
 43    Pumps and Compressors                                      87    Agricultural Supplies
 44    Furnace, Steam Plant, and Drying Equip, Nuclear            88    Live Animals
       Reactors
 45    Plumbing, Heating and Sanitation Equipment                 89    Subsistence (Food)
 46    Water Purification and Sewage Treatment Equip-             91    Fuels, Lubricants, Oils, and Waxes
       ment
 47    Pipe, Tubing, Hose, and Fittings                           93    Nonmetallic Fabricated Materials
 48    Valves                                                     94    Nonmetallic Crude Materials
 49    Maintenance and Repair Shop Equipment                      95    Metal Bars, Sheets, and Shapes
 51    Hand Tools                                                 96    Ores, Minerals, and Their Primary Products
 52    Measuring Tools                                            99    Miscellaneous
Notes: This table displays the 78 high-level groups used to classify the products purchased by the federal government.
Groups 21, 27, 33, 50, 57, 64, 82, 86, 90, 92, 97, and 98 are currently unassigned.




                                                             58
                                  Table F15: Classification into Main Industries

 Main industry          Included SIC2/SIC3 codes               Description
 Transportation         37, 40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 47             Firms manufacturing equipment and furnishing services for trans-
                        and all subordinate SIC3               portation of passengers and cargo by land, air, and water. Sample
                        codes                                  products include motor vehicles, aircraft, guided missiles and space
                                                               vehicles, ships, and railroad equipment.
 Chemicals              28 and all subordinate                 Firms producing basic chemicals (e.g., acids, alkalies, salts, and or-
                        SIC3 codes except 283                  ganic chemicals), chemical products used in manufacturing (e.g., syn-
                                                               thetic fibers, plastics materials, dry colors, and pigments), and fin-
                                                               ished chemical products used for ultimate consumption (e.g., cos-
                                                               metics, and soaps) or as supplies in other industries (e.g., paints,
                                                               fertilizers, and explosives).
 Drugs                  283                                    Firms producing medicinal chemicals, pharmaceutical preparations,
                                                               biological products, and diagnostic substances.
 Electronics            35, 36 and all subordinate             Firms manufacturing industrial and commercial machinery, equip-
                        SIC3 codes                             ment, supplies, and computers (e.g., engines and turbines, office
                                                               equipment, radio and television equipment, communications equip-
                                                               ment, and electronic components and accessories).
 Business services      73, 87 and all subordinate             Firms engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a
                        SIC3 codes                             contract or fee basis, such as computer programming and data pro-
                                                               cessing; engineering, architectural, and surveying services; research,
                                                               development, and testing services; and management and public rela-
                                                               tions services.
Notes: This table displays the classification scheme used to group sample firms into several main industries. Industries not
specifically listed were classified as "Others".


                              Table F16: Descriptive Statistics by Main Industry

                                   (1)      (2)         (3)     (4)          (5)         (6)       (7)       (8)        (9)      (10)        (11)       (12)
                                   Transportation         Chemicals                 Drugs            Electronics       Business services            Others
                                  Mean     Std. Dev.   Mean     Std. Dev.   Mean      Std. Dev.   Mean    Std. Dev.   Mean     Std. Dev.     Mean     Std. Dev.
 Publications                       25         62       34         104       76          211        9         47       26         183         12         74
 Patents                            56        150       51         107       26          73        38        155       49         370         23         93
 All contracts ($ mm)               760      3,350       10         67        7           69        11       102        12        119          45        417
 R&D contracts ($ mm)               148       781        1           8        1            5         2        29         2         19          5          68
 Non-R&D contracts ($ mm)           612      2,675       9          62        6           68        9         84        11        104         40         359
 R contracts ($ mm)                  20       129        0           5        0            2         0         5         1          5          1          14
 D contracts ($ mm)                 128       676        0           6        0            5        1         25        1          16          4          56
 Commercial contracts ($ mm)         23       120        1           6        4           61        1         12        2          30          6          83
 Noncommercial contracts ($ mm)     589      2,600       8          62        2           20        8         82        9          86         33         334
 Sales ($ mm)                     13,013    34,774     5,790     11,488     2,541       7,723     1,954     7,400     2,133     10,612       4,972     19,427
 R&D stock ($ mm)                  2,300     7,934      818       2,199     1,463       5,142      547      2,305      848       4,186        293       1,216

Notes: This table displays descriptive statistics over the sample period of 1980-2015 by main industry. The unit of analysis
is a firm-year. Statistics are only provided for contractors.


                   Table F17: R&D Contractors vs. Other Firms by Main Industry

                                                      (1)     (2)       (3)    (4)        (5)     (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)          (11)    (12)
                                                    Transportation      Chemicals           Drugs          Electronics     Business services          Others
                                                      Diff.       t      Diff.     t      Diff.     t       Diff.     t      Diff.      t         Diff.       t
 R&D expenditures ($ mm)                            735.807    12.72   277.671   20.8   438.370   20.5    198.311   25.9   375.524    16.2      116.817     28.9
 R&D expenditures normalized by sales (in $ mm)      -0.561    -1.42    -0.225   -2.0   -25.983   -2.3     -0.272   -1.5    -2.948    -1.2        0.082      0.2
 Publications per $1 mm in sales                      0.046     1.25    0.000    0.0      0.255    1.5      0.439    6.0    0.224     0.9         0.160      3.3
 Patents per $1 mm in sales                          -0.885    -3.96    0.630    2.1     -0.178   -0.7     -0.982   -0.7    0.099     1.3        -0.685     -3.6

Notes: This table displays mean comparison tests between R&D contractors and other firms within the same main industry.
The two-sample t-tests use unequal variances.


                                                                            59
        Figure F2: Changing Composition of Contracts Over Time by Main Industry




Notes : This figure presents the trend in the share of R&D contracts in all the contracts obligated by the DoD, DoE, HHS,
and VA to our sample firms by main industry (solid lines). It also presents the trend in the share of commercial contracts
in all contracts (dashed lines). The vertical lines mark the passage of the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994.



                                                           60
                Table F18: Government Procurement Contracts by SIC4 Industry

 Rank    SIC4         1988 Contracts      1992 Contracts        Industry description
 1       7373         $1,962              $2,953                Computer integrated systems design
 2       4832         $1,189              $2,080                Radio broadcasting stations
 3       2411         $3                  $843                  Logging
 4       2833         $1,079              $1,773                Medicinal chemicals and botanical products
 5       3446         $758                $1,198                Architectural and ornamental metal work
 6       7375         $200                $583                  Information retrieval services
 7       8099         $109                $418                  Health and allied services, not elsewhere classified
 8       8742         $122                $401                  Management consulting services
 9       4581         $2,403              $2,668                Airports, flying fields, and airport terminal services
 10      4911         $383                $599                  Electric services
 ...     ...          ...                 ...                   ...
 822     3669         $4,757              $3,095                Communications equipment, not elsewhere classified
 823     3795         $2,329              $559                  Tanks and tank components
 824     5171         $6,042              $4,168                Petroleum bulk stations and terminals
 825     2394         $3,081              $1,082                Canvas and related products
 826     3812         $5,146              $2,209                Search, detection, navigation, guidance, aeronautical,
                                                                and nautical systems and instruments
 827     3281         $4,908              $1,573                Cut stone and stone products
 828     3721         $16,211             $12,295               Aircraft
 829     3511         $7,347              $3,327                Steam, gas, and hydraulic turbines, and turbine gener-
                                                                ator set units
 830     3769         $7,681              $3,501                Guided missile space vehicle parts and auxiliary equip-
                                                                ment, not elsewhere classified
 831     3761         $7,253              $2,862                Guided missiles and space vehicles
Notes: This table displays the total procurement contracts (in constant 2012 millions of dollars) awarded by the DoD, DoE,
HHS, and VA in 1988 and 1992 to each SIC4 industry. The observations are sorted in descending order of the difference
between the pre (1988) and post (1992) period.




                                                           61
