                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 BACK TO SCHOOL:
                   THE EFFECT OF SCHOOL VISITS DURING COVID-19
                            ON COVID-19 TRANSMISSION

                                          Dena Bravata
                                      Jonathan H. Cantor
                                          Neeraj Sood
                                     Christopher M. Whaley

                                      Working Paper 28645
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28645


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




Funding provided by NIA K01AG061274 and the Conrad N. Hilton Foundation. We thank
Castlight Health and SafeGraph for access to the data used in this study. Russell Hanson, Aaron
Kofner, David Kravitz, Megan Pera, and Adrian Salas provided helpful data assistance. We thank
Daniel Arnold, Timothy Brown, Dhaval Dave, Chrissy Eibner, Bryant Hopkins, Paul Koegel,
Jonathan Ketcham, Maria Agustina Laurito, and Christine Mulhern for helpful comments. We
also thank seminar participants at the RAND Education and Labor Brownbag. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Dena Bravata, Jonathan H. Cantor, Neeraj Sood, and Christopher M. Whaley. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Back to School: The Effect of School Visits During COVID-19 on COVID-19 Transmission
Dena Bravata, Jonathan H. Cantor, Neeraj Sood, and Christopher M. Whaley
NBER Working Paper No. 28645
April 2021
JEL No. I1,I12,I24

                                         ABSTRACT

Schools across the United States and the world have been closed in an effort to mitigate the
spread of COVID-19. However, the effect of school closure on COVID-19 transmission remains
unclear. We estimate the causal effect of changes in the number of weekly visits to schools on
COVID-19 transmission using a triple difference approach. In particular, we measure the effect of
changes in county-level visits to schools on changes in COVID-19 diagnoses for households with
school-age children relative to changes in COVID-19 diagnoses for households without school-
age children. We use a data set from the first 46 weeks of 2020 with 130 million household-week
level observations that includes COVID-19 diagnoses merged to school visit tracking data from
millions of mobile phones. We find that increases in county-level in-person visits to schools lead
to an increase in COVID-19 diagnoses among households with children relative to households
without school-age children. However, the effects are small in magnitude. A move from the 25th
to the 75th percentile of county-level school visits translates to a 0.3 per 10,000 household
increase in COVID-19 diagnoses. This change translates to a 3.2 percent relative increase. We
find larger differences in low-income counties, in counties with higher COVID-19 prevalence,
and at later stages of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Dena Bravata                                    Neeraj Sood
Castlight Health                                Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics
Stanford University                             Sol Price School of Public Policy
150 Spear                                       University of Southern California
San Francisco, CA 94105                         University Park Campus
United States                                   Los Angeles CA 90089
dbravata@gmail.com                              and NBER
                                                nsood@healthpolicy.usc.edu
Jonathan H. Cantor
RAND Corporation                                Christopher M. Whaley
1776 Main Street                                RAND Corporation
Santa Monica, CA 90401                          1776 Main Street
jcantor@rand.org                                Santa Monica, CA 90401
                                                cwhaley@rand.org
1. INTRODUCTION

   The COVID-19 pandemic has the potential to expose everyone to a deadly virus. One

potentially important vector of transmission that has been under increasing scrutiny is within-

and between-household viral transfer from school reopenings (Kim et al. 2020; Ludvigsson

2020; Lessler et al. 2021). Early in the pandemic, school closures were seen as a mitigation and

containment strategy to prevent the spread of COVID-19 (Donohue and Miller 2020). By April

2020, all 50 states closed elementary and secondary public schools for the remainder of the

academic year to slow COVID-19 transmission (Kaufman et al. 2021), although many schools

eventually reopened. There were two primary rationales for the enactment of these closures.

First, the risk of COVID-19 infection to children was not known during the initial stage of the

pandemic. Second, children were assumed to be important vectors for the spread of COVID-19

(Christakis, Cleve, and Zimmerman 2020). Both factors were critical given that between 33.9

million and 44.2 million adults with risk factors for severe COVID-19, as defined by the Centers

for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), have direct or within-household connections to

schools (Selden, Berdahl, and Fang 2020).

   The extent to which school reopenings contribute to COVID-19 transmission among both

children and adults remains unclear. As discussed below, the social proximity of in-person

schools creates opportunities for disease spread. At the same time, schools and households may

respond to increased risks of school transmission by reducing other sources of COVID-19 risk

(Arrow 1951; Peltzman 1975; Arrow et al. 1996; Becker 1976). For example, households

exposed to risk of COVID-19 infection in schools might be more likely to limit social gatherings,

wash hands more frequently, and wear masks more consistently. Likewise, school-based

gatherings are likely to occur in regulated settings that may be less risky than some unregulated




                                                                                                    2
settings, such as at home child care (Doolittle 2020). In addition, knowledge of the virus has

improved over time, and mitigation measures by schools have been responsive to this new

information (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2020).

   Despite potential increased risk of COVID-19 transmission, in-person school creates

substantial benefits (Levinson, Cevik, and Lipsitch 2020). First, prolonged school closures will

hurt long-term human capital formation and exacerbate disparities in educational attainment

between high- and low-income areas (Chetty et al. 2020; Bacher-Hicks, Goodman, and Mulhern

2021; Psacharopoulos et al. 2020; Kuhfeld and Tarasawa 2020). Second, schools are a critical

food source and provider of nutrition assistance for children (Poole, Fleischhacker, and Bleich

2021; Sharfstein and Morphew 2020; Masonbrink and Hurley 2020). Third, schools are an

important source of health care for children, and school-based health centers are associated with

improved health care and preventive services and better health outcomes (Martin and Sorensen

2020; Sharfstein and Morphew 2020; Masonbrink and Hurley 2020). Finally, schools provide

critical childcare functions that allow parents to engage in the workforce (National Academies of

Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2020). There are also critical equity concerns given that

children from low-income families often depend more on school-based services than higher-

income families (Donohue and Miller 2020).

   A challenge to examining the impact of school closure policies on COVID-19 risk is the non-

uniform nature of school closures and reopenings. Some schools have fully returned to in-person

instruction (Meckler 2021). Other schools have implemented hybrid models. Several large

school districts (e.g., Chicago, Seattle, and San Francisco) have not completely returned to in-

person instruction (Fuller and Taylor 2021; Gates 2021; Issa 2021). In addition, within many

school districts, public and private schools often operate differently, with some private schools




                                                                                                    3
reopening while public schools remain closed (Carpenter and Dunn 2021). To date there is no

national database of in-person school attendance rates, community testing, and case rates (Oster

2021). There is also no national database on the mitigation strategies employed by schools and

school districts (Goldhaber et al. 2021).

    In this paper, we leverage two large sources of national data to add to the knowledge base on

how school reopening might affect spread of COVID-19. We leverage mobile phone tracking

data provided by SafeGraph.1 SafeGraph collects global positioning system (GPS) data from

approximately 45 million U.S. mobile phones. The SafeGraph data has been used in several prior

studies to measure social distancing behaviors or trends in visits to specific locations during the

COVID-19 pandemic (Allcott et al. 2020; Dave, McNichols, and Sabia 2021; Gao et al. 2020;

Goolsbee and Syverson 2020; Jay et al. 2020; Nguyen et al. 2020; Gupta, Simon, and Wing

2020; Cantor et al. 2020; Cantor, Stein, and Saloner 2020; Lasry et al. 2020). A unique feature of

the SafeGraph data is the ability to identify the number of visits to specific locations, which are

mapped to industry codes (e.g., NAICS code 622110 identifies "General Medical and Surgical

Hospitals"). We use the industry code for schools to measure weekly county-level visit patterns

to primary and secondary schools, using an approach similar to that of Goolsbee and Syverson

(2020).2 This approach allows us to identify geographic and temporal variation in visits to

schools during the COVID-19 pandemic. We use this linkage to construct visit measures for

approximately 131,000 U.S. schools.

    We then link the county-level schools visits data to medical claims data collected from a

nationwide sample of approximately 7 million individuals (3 million households) with employer-



1
 Safegraph. www.safegraph.com
2
 We do not consider visits to colleges and other post-secondary schools (M. S. Andersen et al. 2020; Mangrum and
Niekamp 2020).


                                                                                                               4
sponsored health insurance. The medical claims information allows us to identify the occurrence

and timing of individual COVID-19 diagnoses and tests. As of December 9, 2020, we observe

almost 93,000 patients with COVID-19 diagnoses, including 10,255 children and 82,180 adults.

We also observe each individual's county of residence, which allows us to link COVID-19

outcomes to measures of the number of weekly school visits. The data covers 99 percent of U.S.

counties. An important limitation of this data is that we do not observe households covered by

public insurance or without insurance. Those with public insurance in one health system were at

increased likelihood of being hospitalized with COVID-19 (Price-Haywood et al. 2020).

   Even with this linkage, measuring the causal effect of school visits on risk of COVID-19

infection is challenging given the endogenous nature of school reopenings. Schools may be less

likely to reopen when population-level COVID-19 cases and the risks of transmission are highest

or trending upwards. In addition, several school districts reopened but then closed following

increases in community cases (Shapiro 2020). Thus, measuring the effect of school reopenings

by comparing COVID-19 cases between reopened and non-reopened schools, or gradients of

reopening using school visits data, is likely to lead to biased results.

   Instead, we leverage a unique feature of the medical claims data that allows us to identify

households and household composition. The employer-sponsored insurance plans represented in

our data provide both individual and family health insurance coverage. For family coverage

policies, all covered individuals are linked to the same household plan. We use this linkage to

identify households. Under the assumption that families with school age children are more likely

to be exposed to school-based COVID-19 transmission, we use a triple-differences model to

compare how changes in school visits within a county over time lead to changes in household-




                                                                                                  5
level COVID-19 infection rates for households with and without school age children within the

same county.

   We find that increased school visits lead to increases in COVID-19 infections for households

with children, relative to households without children. However, the increase is modest in

magnitude. Our results imply that a one-log unit increase in school visits leads to a 0.4 per

10,000 (0.003 percentage point) increase in a household's risk of COVID-19 infection. Based on

the distribution of school visits and baseline infection rates during the COVID-19 pandemic,

these results imply that moving from the 25th percentile of school visits to the 75th percentile

leads to an approximately 3 percent increase in risk of COVID-19 infection in a household with

children. A change in school visit of the magnitude induced by county-level shelter-in-place

(SIP) policies leads to a 1.3 percent increase in household COVID-19 infection rates. As

secondary outcomes, we do not find changes in COVID-related medical spending and a 2.7%

increase in COVID-related hospitalizations.

   These results are robust to several additional tests, including controls for other policy

changes that may be correlated with restricted visits to schools (Courtemanche et al. 2020; Cook,

Newberger, and Smalling 2020), mobility for other sources of transmission (Pray et al. 2021),

variation in the intensity of the COVID-19 pandemic (Cantor et al. 2020), and unobserved

household-level differences that may impact risks of COVID-19 transmission (Goldstein,

Lipsitch, and Cevik 2020). In additional tests, we find that increased school visits were

associated with lower rates of transmission during the initial months of the COVID-19 pandemic

(March to June), when COVID-19 prevalence was lower, and that nearly all of the main effect is

driven by higher transmission rates during the later months (September to December). We also

find that school visits have larger effects on infection rates in counties with higher COVID-19




                                                                                                   6
prevalence. The increased infection rates in counties with higher COVID-19 prevalence is

important to highlight given that a recent CDC finding indicated that schools with proper

mitigation techniques can have reduced transmission where community transmission is high

(Falk et al. 2021; Doyle et al. 2021; Hershow et al. 2021; Dawson et al. 2021).

   We also find that the increase in school-based COVID-19 transmission is driven by

households that reside in counties in the bottom income quartiles. This finding is particularly

relevant, as it suggests that the socioeconomic disparities observed in other studies also exist for

school reopening policies (Panovska-Griffiths et al. 2020; Jay et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2021).

Because our data comes from households covered by employer-based insurance, our results

likely understate the income-based disparities in COVID-19 infections and hospitalizations. At

the same time, students from lower-income households are more likely to have learning

disruptions than students from higher-income households, leading to concerns about growing

disparities in childhood education (Bacher-Hicks, Goodman, and Mulhern 2021; Dorn et al.

2020; Engzell, Frey, and Verhagen 2020).

   In addition to within-household transmission originating from schools, another concern is

increased risk of infection for teachers and school staff following school reopenings (Gold et al.

2021; Vlachos, Hertegård, and B Svaleryd 2021). However, we find that increased school visits

are not associated with increased transmission rates for households in which the primary

insurance subscriber is employed by a firm in the education industry relative to other industries.

In addition to within-household transmission originating from schools, another concern is

increased risk of infection for teachers and school staff following school reopenings (Gold et al.

2021; Vlachos, Hertegård, and B Svaleryd 2021).




                                                                                                       7
   Finally, we leverage the medical claims data to estimate the health care spending impacts of

school reopenings. We do not find a change in health care costs following school reopenings.

   Our findings make two important contributions. First, our findings inform the ongoing policy

debate on school reopenings (Goldhaber-Fiebert, Studdert, and Mello 2020; Lordan, FitzGerald,

and Grosser 2020). Our findings suggest that school reopenings do contribute to COVID-19

transmission, but the magnitude of the effect is modest. When compared to other

epidemiological literature on school-related risks, our estimated effects are comparable to rates

of child emergency department admissions for school-related injuries (Zagel et al. 2019).

Likewise, on average the cost for administering school-based mitigation strategies to properly

combat COVID-19 transmission ranges from $55 to $442 per student (Rice et al. 2020).

Policymakers, households, and educators should weigh the modest risks of COVID-19

transmission combined with the limited costs of implementing mitigation strategies within

schools against the significant benefits of in-person schooling.

   Second, we also contribute to the broader economics literature on risky behaviors. An

important finding from related studies is how economic agents compensate for increased risk.

Most notably, the introduction of automobile safety laws lead to an increase in unsafe driving,

and thus more pedestrian deaths (Peltzman 1975; Cohen and Dehejia 2004). Related studies have

found that medical advances and expanded payment for health technology can lead to increases

in risky behavior (Lakdawalla, Sood, and Goldman 2006; Cawley and Ruhm 2011; Doleac and

Mukherjee 2018). School reopenings may have the opposite effect if increased risks of COVID-

19 transmission lead families and policymakers to reduce risks elsewhere. How economic agents

and institutions respond to risk of potentially deadly infection in the face of these benefits is not

clear. Further, the tradeoff between potential increased COVID-19 transmission and the




                                                                                                        8
education benefits of in-person schooling are also not clear, but depend on causally estimating

the effect of school reopenings on COVID-19 transmission.

   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the existing

evidence on school-related COVID-19 transmission. Section 3 describes the data used in the

study. Section 4 presents our empirical approach. Section 5 reports our main results, and Section

6 presents additional results that serve as robustness checks. Section 7 concludes.



2. BACKGROUND ON SCHOOL-RELATED COVID-19 TRANSMISSION

   COVID-19 infections are significantly less harmful for children when compared to adults

(Rabinowicz, Leshem, and Pessach 2020). For example, the CDC estimates that compared to

adults 40 to 49 years of age, children 5 to 17 years of age have 160 times lower risk of death

from COVID-19 and 27 times lower risk of hospitalization from COVID-19 (CDC 2020). Other

estimates suggest that younger children might be less likely to contract the virus. For example, a

recent meta-analysis of 32 studies concluded that children and adolescents younger than 20 years

had 44 percent lower odds of secondary infection with SARS-CoV-2 compared with adults 20

years and older. The study noted that data were insufficient to conclude whether transmission of

SARS-CoV-2 by children is lower than by adults (Viner, Mytton, et al. 2021).

   The lower harm from COVID-19 in children and the reduced risk of contracting COVID-19

has led to a larger policy debate on whether schools should continue to be closed in order to

reduce the transmission of COVID-19 (Christakis, Cleve, and Zimmerman 2020). Survey

estimates from June 2020 indicated that close to 49 percent of parents would send their child to

school in the fall, while roughly 31 percent stated they would not (Kroshus et al. 2020). Other

studies find that racial and ethnic minorities are more likely to be concerned with school

reopenings (Gilbert et al. 2020). The American Academy of Pediatrics has also encouraged in-


                                                                                                   9
person education during the pandemic (American Academy of Pediatrics 2021). Nevertheless, an

early report by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2020)

concluded that there is limited evidence as to how easily children and youth contract the virus,

how contagious they are once they do, and what strategies for limiting transmission within a

school setting are most effective. The limited evidence made it difficult to both assess the health

risks of opening schools and to develop strategies for limiting transmission of the virus once

open.

    More recently, CDC researchers have proposed that schools can reopen safely provided

actions are taken to reduce community transmission and the limiting of school-related activities

such as indoor sports practice that increase the risk of transmission (Honein, Barrios, and Brooks

2021), and the CDC has posted guidelines for school reopenings (CDC 2021).3 Other estimates

from the CDC find that COVID-19 cases in those aged 0-17 have increased since the summer of

2020 and that weekly incidence was higher in each older age group (Leidman et al. 2021; Leeb et

al. 2020).

    Existing empirical studies that have examined the impact of school reopenings or closures

are limited and have generally found mixed results. A study by Goldhaber et al. (2021) uses data

from Michigan and Washington to examine changes in county-level COVID-19 case rates due to

in-person schooling. The authors use a variety of ordinary least squares specifications that

include school district or county fixed effects. They find that school districts offering hybrid or

in-person instruction are not a significant contributor to COVID-19 spread in communities with

low case rates. It is only in communities with the highest case rate (95th percentile in Michigan

and 75th percentile in Washington) where the relationship was statistically significant (Goldhaber


3
 Similarly, one recent study in 17 rural Wisconsin schools was able to attribute that only approximately four percent
of cases were due to in-school spread of the virus (Falk et al. 2021).


                                                                                                                  10
et al. 2021). Second, a national study used interrupted time series analysis and found that school

closures in the United States between March and May 2020 were associated with a decline in

COVID-19 incidence and mortality, and that the magnitude of the effect varied based on the

cumulative incidence of COVID-19 (Auger et al. 2020). However, it is difficult to interpret

findings from an interrupted time series analysis as causal given the lack of a control group to

model the counterfactual course of the epidemic in the absence of school closure.

   Related work finds that school reopenings in both in-person and hybrid forms are not

associated with increases in COVID-19 hospitalizations (Harris, Ziedan, and Hassig 2021). A

study based in Japan also used a similar interrupted time series design and found that school

closure did not affect COVID-19 incidence (Iwata, Doi, and Miyakoshi 2020). A report by the

Public Health Agency of Sweden compared data on COVID-19 incidence in children from

Finland and Sweden, two similar countries who followed different strategies ­ schools were open

in Sweden, but Finland closed schools from March 18 until May 13. The report finds little or no

difference in overall incidence of COVID-19 in children as of June 14, 2020 with incidence in

Sweden being 49 per 100,000 children and incidence in Finland being 52 per 100,000 children.

A potential issue with the analysis is that Finland and Sweden are also different along other

dimensions. For example, Finland swiftly imposed a two-month lockdown after the emergence

of COVID-19, so the trajectory of the epidemic in Finland was likely different than Sweden,

which hardly imposed any restrictions (Höppner 2020). More recent work finds that the opening

of schools in Sweden increased the likelihood of a positive COVID-19 diagnosis. The effect was

found in teachers but weaker for parents and teachers' parents (Vlachos, Hertegård, and B

Svaleryd 2021). Similar work finds no change in COVID-19 infections following school

reopening in Germany (Isphording, Lipfert, and Pestel 2020). Finally, a recent study using




                                                                                                   11
national survey of U.S. adults in November-December 2020 and January-February 2021 found

that living in a household with a child who is in full-time in-person schooling is associated with

increased risk of having a positive COVID-19 test. The effect was larger for older children, and

separately was smaller for each mitigation technique employed by the child's school (Lessler et

al. 2021). However, the analysis was limited to a sample that self-selected into COVID-19

testing and exploited variation in school attendance across counties or geographies with different

COVID-19 prevalence and incidence. Also, it is important to note that this study is limited to two

data points of collection that do not capture the peak of childhood infections in the summer of

2020 (Leeb et al. 2020; Leidman et al. 2021). Several modelling studies have also estimated the

impact of school closures and other non-pharmaceutical interventions. We do not review this

literature here as modeling studies are suitable for generating hypotheses and do not directly

assess the impact of school closures. A related literature examines the impact of college openings

on transmission and finds that colleges reopening in-person college instruction leads to increases

in transmission. However, this evidence does not generalize to school reopenings given the large

differences in the number of visits, living conditions, and risk of infection for college versus

school student populations.



3. DATA


3.1. Number of School Visits to Measure School-Based Physical Mobility

   A challenge with examining the effect of school reopenings and COVID-19 transmission is

the lack of nationwide data on school reopenings. To address this limitation, we use phone

mobility data provided by SafeGraph. The SafeGraph data aggregates global positioning system

pings from 45 million mobile phones. The data are from mobile applications that obtain opt-in



                                                                                                   12
consent from its users to collect anonymous location data. These data have been used to track the

number of visits to businesses (Goolsbee and Syverson 2020), and health care professionals

(Cantor et al. 2020; Jay et al. 2020; M. Andersen, Bryan, and Slusky 2020; Kranz et al. 2021).

Within the SafeGraph data we identify elementary and secondary schools using NAICS code

611110 for "Elementary and Secondary Schools". This process identifies 131,080 U.S. schools.

Then, using the data, we collapse the total number of visits at the week-year level for each

county. We use all visits to schools to measure visits to schools. As a sensitivity test, we also

restrict visits to those lasting at least four hours.

    With the mobile phone data, we construct two measures of the number of visits to schools.

First, for each county  and week , we use a modified version of the approach outlined in

Goolsbee and Syverson (2020) and calculate the log-transformed county-level difference in the

number of visits to schools between each 2020 week and the same week in 2019.

                       ln                ln                 ln                                      1

    This approach effectively measures the weekly percent change in visits to schools for each

county relative to pre-pandemic level.

    We present distributions of each measure across counties in Figure 1, using kernel density

plots for the weeks of March 1, May 10, and September 27, 2020. The distribution of the main

measure, the difference in the natural log number of visits in 2020 and 2019, looks clustered

around zero for the week of March 1, 2020 (mean=0.35, SD=0.57) given that we would not

expect there to be significant changes in the number of visits to schools prior to declaration of

COVID-19 as a public health emergency on March 13, 2020. By the week of May 10, 2020, the

distribution is significantly skewed, showing large declines in the difference in the number of




                                                                                                    13
visits (mean=-1.48, SD=0.62). By September 27, 2020 the number of visits is again distributed

around zero (mean=-0.30, SD=0.62).

    Figure 3 maps geographic variations in the school visit measure. There is substantial

geographic variation in the county-level visits measures for the three weeks of March 1, May 10,

and September 27, 2020. Areas shaded in blue exhibited the largest declines in school visits,

which would indicate school closures.


3.2. Medical Claims Data

    Our data on COVID-19 related outcomes comes from medical claims data from

approximately seven million people collected by Castlight Health, which provides a health

benefits and price transparency platform to approximately 200 employer-sponsored insurance

plans. For participating employers, the data includes medical and pharmacy claims for all

employees and their dependents. A unique feature of the data is that it allows for a linkage of

members to households for households with a family insurance plan. Participating employers

represent a wide range of industries, including education, transportation, retail, and financial

services, and employees are located in all U.S. states. These data have been previously used to

track health care utilization during the pandemic (Cantor et al. 2021; McBain et al. 2021; C. M.

Whaley et al. 2021), and existing studies have found that this population is representative of the

broader U.S. population with employer-sponsored insurance (Cantor et al. 2020; C. M. Whaley

et al. 2020).

    For each household, we identified any COVID-19 diagnoses in that week using ICD-10

codes U07.1, B34.2, and B97.29. Other studies have found that the sensitivity and specificity of

these administrative diagnosis codes for COVID-19 is 98.0 percent and 99.0 percent,

respectively (Kadri et al. 2020). An important limitation of using clinical diagnoses for COVID-



                                                                                                   14
19 is that we potentially missed asymptomatic cases or infections that do not require interactions

with health care providers. Thus, our results should be interpreted as the effect of county-level

school visits on moderate-to-severe COVID-19 infections.

   Table 1 describes characteristics of households with (N=84,494, 2.8 percent of sample) and

without (N= 2,892,046, 97.2 percent of sample) a COVID-19 diagnosis. For each characteristic,

we report the standardized difference between the two household types (Rosenbaum and Rubin

1985; Austin 2009). The geographic and industry composition of households with and without a

COVID-19 diagnosis are relatively similar, with most standardized differences below a 0.1

standard deviation difference. Households with a COVID-19 diagnosis are more likely to have a

child in the household, have a mean of 0.7 additional household members, and are likely to live

in areas with lower overall changes in visits to schools. Households with a COVID-19 diagnosis

incur a mean $2,320 in COVID-19 related medical costs, with a standard deviation that is

approximately an order-of-magnitude larger than mean spending. This variance is due to the

wide variation of patients impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Some patients can be treated in

a low-intensity outpatient setting, while a small number of patients require hospitalization, and in

some cases ventilatory support and critical care.

   Due to a lag period of when a medical event occurs and the completeness of the medical

claims data, we used data through the 46th week of 2020, ending on November 15, 2020. The

claims data were pulled in March 2021.


3.3. COVID-19 Social Distancing Policies and Exposure Data

   We used data on county-level shelter-in-place policies that was collected by Cook et al.

(2020). First, the authors collected the dates for statewide orders from the New York Times (The

New York Times 2020). Second, for states that lacked a state-wide order, the authors determined



                                                                                                    15
whether an individual county had a shelter-in-place policy by searching local news and

government sites. Finally, the counties for which the authors did not find information on a

shelter-in-place policy were assumed to have followed the state's guidance (Cook, Newberger,

and Smalling 2020).

   However, given that many of these policies were enacted in response to COVID-19 cases and

deaths, we also collected data on COVID-19 incidence rates. The data come from USAFacts and

have been frequently used by researchers (Cantor et al. 2020; Adhikari et al. 2020; Brown and

Ravallion 2020). The USAFacts data come from the CDC, which collects the number of cases

and deaths from state public health websites. The USAFacts data has the total number of cases

and deaths in each county for each day. From these data, we calculated the week of the first

COVID-19 case and of the first COVID-19 death for each county.



4. EMPIRICAL APPROACH

   With these data, we estimate the effect of school reopenings using within-county variation in

household structure. We estimate the effects of changes in school visits on COVID-19 outcomes

using a triple-differences model of the form:



                                                                       
                                                                                                3



   In this model,           represents the dichotomous COVID-19 related outcome of interest--

a COVID-19 diagnosis for household  in county  during week . The  term indicates that

the household has a school-age child. The               represents the week and county-specific

measure of visits to schools from the SafeGraph data. Given the incubation period of the SARS-


                                                                                                16
CoV-2 virus, we use a two-week lag between changes in the number of visits to schools and

household-level outcomes. As a sensitivity test, we also use a one-week lag and find similar

results (Appendix Table A2).

   Our primary coefficient of interest,  , captures the differential change in COVID-19

outcomes between households with and without children following changes in county-level visits

to school. In all specifications, we include fixed effects for week and county. Thus, the 

coefficient measures the change in COVID-19 infections between households with and without

children in the same county, and relative to all other households in that week. Due to these fixed

effects and because our school visits measures are county and week specific, we do not include

main post-reopening or treatment county indicators. We estimate all models using ordinary least

squares and cluster standard errors at the county level.

   Across all specifications, the  coefficient measures the intent-to-treat effect of changes in

county-level school visits on COVID-19 diagnoses and other COVID-19 related outcomes. We

are unfortunately unable to link data on household-specific school visits and infections, which

would allow us to fully estimate the first-stage effect that would allow for a local-average

treatment effect calculation of school visits on COVID-19 cases. We are also unable to account

for differences in school-specific policies designed to limit infection spread (e.g., mask and

social distancing stringency), which are important contributors to mitigating the spread of

COVID-19 (Falk et al. 2021; Lessler et al. 2021; Dawson et al. 2021; Volpp et al. 2021). Instead,

this estimate captures both the direct effect of school-related COVID-19 transmission (e.g.,

children becoming infected at school) and the potential indirect effect of risk avoidance by

households and schools.




                                                                                                   17
   Our identification strategy compares trends in COVID-19 diagnoses for household with and

without children, which we measure using household insurance enrollment structures. To adjust

for differences based on household composition, we control for the number of people enrolled on

a household's insurance plan. As a sensitivity test, we also estimate a specification that includes

a household fixed effect to control for time invariant differences in COVID-19 risk across

households. A potential challenge with this approach is that some households with private

insurance may also have children covered by Medicaid or other forms of public insurance. For

such households, the household will be misclassified as not being exposed to school visits. In the

Appendix, we provide additional support that these cases are likely rare and do not appear to be

driving our main results. As an additional sensitivity test, we decompose the triple-differences

estimate into separate difference-in-differences regressions for households with and without

children. As discussed in the Appendix, doing so allows us to assess the validity of our triple-

differences approach, and test for potential contamination of the control group, which will lead to

a downward bias on our estimates. In the separate difference-in-differences regressions, we find

much larger changes in COVID-19 diagnoses for households classified as having child

household members than without child members.

   A key empirical challenge is the potential endogeneity of changes in school visits. Schools

may be less likely to reopen in areas with high COVID-19 prevalence as measured by positivity

rates or where contact tracing is difficult (Vogel and Couzin-Frankel 2020). To address this

concern, we perform several additional tests. First, we control for the introduction of county-

level shelter-in-place policies. These policies are designed to slow COVID-19 spread, and may

impact the rate of infection in a county (Courtemanche et al. 2020; Berry et al. 2021). Second,

we follow the approach outlined in previous work and non-parametrically control for the




                                                                                                   18
variations in the trajectory of the COVID-19 pandemic (Cantor et al. 2020). For each county and

week, we include separate fixed effects for the number of weeks since the first COVID-19 case

and death in that county, under the assumption that counties with earlier exposure are at higher

risk of transmission.

    Third, we control for visits to other locations--bars and restaurants- associated with COVID-

19 risk. We construct similar measures of number of visits to bar and restaurant locations in the

Safegraph data. Social gatherings at bars and restaurants are an important potential source of

COVID-19 infection transmission (Pray et al. 2021). Fourth, we construct measures of weekly

changes in visits to all locations in a county, excluding schools. We define these as any location

without the NAICS code 611110. We believe this is an accurate measure of total movement that

is occurring within the county for a given week.

    Fifth, we add fixed effects for county-by-week interactions, which account for time-varying

trends at the county level. This specification absorbs any broader changes in policies, COVID-19

spread, or physical mobility. This measure also absorbs our main effect of school-related visits.

Within a given county, it isolates the differential impact of changes in school-related visits

between households with and without children. Finally, we use a similar approach and interact

fixed effects for the industry of the primary insurance subscriber's employer with week fixed

effects. These industry-by-week fixed effects control for industry-specific shocks that lead to

differences in COVID-19 transmission, such as ability to work remotely.4 Each of these

additional controls address potential confounders that are related to both county-level school-

related visits and COVID-19 diagnoses.




4
 For example, the trajectory of work-related infection risks is likely higher for retail workers than it is for office
workers.


                                                                                                                         19
   As discussed below, we also estimate several additional tests that examine differences within

counties and between different types of households. We estimate models that non-linearly test

the effects of changes in county-level school visits on COVID-19 infections. We also test for

differences based on COVID-19 prevalence in a county. We separately estimate event studies

that test for trends in COVID-19 infections based on county-level school visits.



5. RESULTS


5.1. Effect of School Visits on COVID-19 Diagnoses

   Table 2 presents our main results that measure the effect of visits to schools on COVID-19

cases. Panel A uses the modified Goolsebee and Syverson (2020) log-transformed measure as

our main measure of school visits. To allow for an easier comparison with epidemiological

studies of the COVID-19 pandemic, we express probabilities in per 10,000 units. In column 1,

which is the most parsimonious model and does not include the full set of controls, we estimate

that a one-log unit increase in visits to schools leads to a 0.4 per 10,000 household increase in the

weekly likelihood of COVID-19 infection for households with children relative to households

without children. The two main effects of being a household with a child and an increase in

county-level school visits are both positive, and at 3.6 and 2.2 per 10,000, respectively, much

larger than the interaction term of interest. The main effect coefficient of school reopenings is

challenging to interpret causally, as school reopenings are endogenously related to the trajectory

of the COVID-19 pandemic.

   In column 2, we control for the number of people in the household. Because this variable is

correlated with the child indicator variable, doing so changes the sign of the child indicator

variable, but the magnitudes of the interaction term is similar, 0.4 per 10,000. In column 3, we



                                                                                                    20
add household fixed effects, which is our most restrictive specification. When accounting for all

household-level variation, the magnitude of the school visits-child interaction decreases to 0.2

per 10,000 but remains statistically significant.

   In columns 4 to 9, we perform additional robustness tests and add additional controls to

address potential confounders for visits to schools. In column 4 we add an indicator for county-

level shelter-in-place policies and also find a 0.4 per 10,000 increase. Column 5 adds fixed

effects for the county-level weeks since the first COVID-19 case and death, which does not

change the school visits-child interaction. The result is similar when adding controls for non-

school visits (column 6), bar and restaurant visits (column 7), county-week fixed effect

interactions (column 8), and industry-week fixed effect interactions (column 9).

   Across the different specifications, the household indicator and school visits interaction

coefficients are stable, suggesting that the potential threats to validity may be limited. While

these results show a positive increase in COVID-19 cases, the relative magnitude is limited.

Using our main result of 0.4 per 10,000 and relative to the weekly median household diagnosis

rate between the 10th and 46th weeks of 2020 of 8.3 cases per 10,000 households, the increase in

household diagnoses from Panel A translates to a 4.8 percent relative increase. During the same

period, the median difference between the 75th and 25th percentiles of school visits is 0.67 log

units. Thus, a move from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile of school reopenings is

associated with a 3.2 percent increase in COVID-19 cases.




                                                                                                   21
6. ROBUSTNESS TESTS


6.1. Differences Between Children and Adults

   Our main results pool children and adults, but the impacts of county-level school visits on

COVID-19 outcomes may differ between children and adults. Children may be more susceptible

to school-related COVID-19 transmission, but are more likely to be asymptomatic carriers

(Vermund and Pitzer 2020). Adults may be less likely to receive school-related infections, but

may also be vulnerable to an infection due to school reopenings (Vlachos, Hertegård, and B

Svaleryd 2021). Thus, as an additional test, we estimate separate models that examine age-

specific diagnoses. We test for change in diagnoses among all children (ages 0 to 18) and all

adults (ages 19 to 64) and among specific age groups (ages 0 to 4, 5 to 18, 19 to 29, 30 to 39, 40

to 49, 50 to 59, and 60 to 64).

   As shown in Table 3, we find slightly larger increases in pediatric diagnoses. A one-unit

increase in visits to schools leads to a 0.3 per 10,000 increase in the likelihood of a child

COVID-19 diagnosis. We find no change in COVID-19 diagnoses among children under age 5,

and the entirety of the effect is concentrated among children ages to 5 to 18. For adult diagnoses,

we find an overall increase of 0.2 per 10,000. However, the increase is concentrated among

adults ages 19 to 29 and 30 to 39 (approximately 0.1 per 10,000 increase for both).

   These results are consistent with school reopenings leading to both between household

transmission to children, but also within household transmission from children to adults.

However, the direct effect of between household transmission (e.g., children infecting other

children) is approximately three times larger than the indirect effect of within-household

transmission (e.g., children infecting adult household members).




                                                                                                 22
6.2. Differences Based on Intensity of COVID-19 Pandemic

   School-based COVID-19 transmission is likely to have a larger effect in areas with higher

underlying rates of COVID-19 transmission. As a test of this assumption, we add the weekly

number of new COVID-19 cases per 10,000 population,  , to our regression model and

interact COVID-19 prevalence with our DDD treatment effect in a quadruple-differences model:



                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                                     4



   As shown in Table 4, we find that, perhaps unsurprisingly, county-level increases in new

COVID-19 cases leads to increases in household COVID-19 cases, and these increases are

higher for households with children than households without children. When interacting all

measures, we find that the one-unit increase in mobility to schools and a 1-person per 10,000

increase in new county-level cases leads to a 0.2 per 10,000 household increase in household-

level COVID-19 diagnoses for households with children, relative to households without children.

The primary                             interaction is small and is not statistically significant,

suggesting that our overall effect is driven by variations in COVID-19 prevalence.




6.3. Differences Across the COVID-19 Pandemic

   As a similar test, we next examine differential impacts across the evolution of the COVID-19

pandemic. Changes in visits to schools during the early phases of the pandemic, when baseline

infection rates are low, are less likely to contribute to transmission than changes in school visits

when infection rates are high. Risk-mitigation approaches have been developed and changed


                                                                                                     23
over the course of the pandemic (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2021), and so the

net effect of increased exposure to the pandemic on school-based transmission is unclear.

   To capture these changes, we separately estimated equation (3) for each week of 2020,

through week 46. This test allows us to examine temporal trends in the triple-differences

treatment effect and if the difference in COVID-19 infection rates between households with and

without children is different between early weeks of the pandemic and later weeks.

   As shown in Figure 3, we find that most of the differences in household transmission occur

in later weeks. In the first portion of 2020, we find that changes in county-level visits to schools

do not lead to changes in household infection. This null finding is consistent with the previous

sensitivity test that found increased transmission rates in counties with higher COVID-19

prevalence. We find that the DDD coefficients are driven by changes that occur starting in week

40, which corresponds to the last week of September. The number of school visits is measured

with a one-week lag, and so school-based visits beginning in mid-September 2020 drives our

main results. By the 46th week of 2020, which corresponds to the second week of November, the

estimated DDD implies that a one-unit increase in log school visits leads to an 8.5 increase per

10,000 households in COVID-19 transmission for households with children, relative to those

without. This effect is more than an order-of-magnitude larger than our main results in Table 2.

   This result, paired with the results in Table 4, suggests that the impact of school-based

transmission interacts with the intensity of the COVID-19 pandemic. Not surprisingly, when

overall COVID-19 risks are low, the risks of school-based transmission are also low. When

community cases are high, schools are another mode of transmission, and higher levels of

community spread enable higher levels of school-based spread.




                                                                                                   24
6.4. Differences for Households with Education Workers

   Additionally, an important consideration is the potential differential impact among teachers,

administrators, and other school workers. To test for differences among education workers, we

identify households in which the primary insurance subscriber works within the education sector.

We are unable to account for households in which an education worker receives insurance

coverage from a non-education family member. We are also unable to identify education worker

job type, and changes in mobility for the worker.

   We estimate a similar model to equation (3) but interact county-level school visits with an

indicator for the household receiving insurance coverage from an organization in the education

sector. As shown in Table 5, we do not find that households in which the primary insurance

subscriber is employed by an educational organization are disproportionally likely to have a

COVID-19 diagnosis after school reopening.




6.5. Differences by County-Level Income Composition

   A substantial literature documents race and income disparities in the health and non-health

impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic (Ogedegbe et al. 2020; Jay et al. 2020; Khazanchi, Evans,

and Marcelin 2020; Moore 2020; Lee et al. 2021). The effects of school reopenings on COVID

transmission may also show similar disparities. To test for disparities, we also examined

differences based on the income composition of the county in which patients live. We lack

information on household-level income. For income, we categorize county-level household

income into quartiles using the pooled 2013 to 2018 American Community Survey (ACS).

   As shown in Table 6, we find that the                         coefficient for households in the

bottom quartile of the income distribution is 1.3 per 10,000 households, compared to 0.7 per



                                                                                                 25
10,000 households for the second quartile, 0.5 per 10,000 households among the third quartile,

and a non-statistically significant 0.2 per 10,000 among the top quartile. When interacting the

income quartiles with the                            coefficient, similar to equation (4), the effects of

school visits are statistically different at the p=0.05 level between the first and second quartiles,

and at the p<0.01 level between the first quartile and both the third and fourth quartiles.



7. IMPACTS ON HEALTH CARE SPENDING AND COVID-19 HOSPITALIZATIONS

     Our primary results use COVID-19 diagnoses as the outcome of interest. A potential

challenge for using diagnoses as the outcome is the possibility that school reopening policies

include testing strategies to mitigate COVID-19 spread. Such testing is likely to catch

asymptomatic COVID-19 cases that would have remained undiagnosed in the absence of

increased testing. In such a case, it is challenging to test if our results reflect increased COVID-

19 transmission or simply more accurate diagnoses. As a solution to this challenge, we use

COVID-19-related medical spending and hospitalizations as an alternative dependent variable.

Measuring impacts on spending allows an approximation of the health care costs of school

reopenings. While there are some estimates of COVID-19 spending, they are mainly focused on

total nationwide aggregates (Miller et al. 2020), or at the state-level (McWilliams, Russo, and

Mehrotra 2021). We follow the same empirical approach outlined in equation (3), but measure

household COVID-19 related health care costs by summing costs for all medical claims with a

COVID-19 diagnosis or procedure code. We include all COVID-related spending, including

spending by patients and spending by the employer/insurer. To account for skewness, we also

estimate models that use log-transformed spending.5 Likewise, hospitalizations are unlikely to



5
    We use ln           1 for household  in week .


                                                                                                      26
reflect testing strategies, as COVID-19 cases that require hospitalization are unlikely to be

induced by increasing testing.

   As shown in Table 7, we do not find that school reopenings lead to changes in COVID-19

related medical spending, when measured in raw dollars (Panel A). When measured in log-

dollars, we find a small increase in spending. A full log-unit change in school visits leads to a

0.01 percent increase in household COVID-19 spending. While statistically significant in all

specifications, the effect is small in magnitude. Thus, our results suggest that school reopenings

are unlikely to lead to meaningful changes in COVID-19-related health care costs.

   As shown in Table 8, we find that increased number of school-based visits leads to higher

rates of COVID-19 hospitalizations among households with children, relative to households

without children. The estimated DDD coefficient is approximately 0.03 per 10,000 households.

Based on the mean COVID-related hospitalization rate of 0.8 per 10,000, this effect translates to

an approximately 4% relative increase. These results imply that a move from the 25th to the 75th

percentile of visits to schools leads to a 2.7% increase in COVID-related hospitalizations.

   For both outcomes, we also estimate event studies that examine how the DDD estimates have

changed over the COVID-19 pandemic. In Figure A1, we do not find a change in COVID-19

related medical spending. However, in Figure A2, we find that log-transformed COVID-19

medical spending increased in following week 40. In Appendix Figure A3, consistent with the

small magnitude of the hospitalization regression results, we find small effects in each week. In

most weeks, the confidence intervals overlap zero.



8. IMPACT OF SOCIAL DISTANCING POLICIES ON SCHOOL VISITS

   We finally examine how changes in the number of school visits has responded to policies

designed to limit social interactions. Understanding the behavioral responses to these policies


                                                                                                    27
allows for a "first stage" estimate that shows the size of the change in the number of weekly

visits to schools after a shelter-in-place policy went into effect. To do so, we use the SafeGraph

data and estimate the effect of social distancing policies on school visits using a two-way fixed

effect model of the form:



            ln                                                                                      6



This regression measures the change in log-transformed mobility to school  in week  before

and after the implementation of a social distancing policy in county . We include fixed effects

for week and for the 131,000 schools identified in the SafeGraph data based on their NAICS

code. Unlike the other analyses, where we use just 2020 data and measure week-level changes in

2020 school visits relative to the same week in 2019, we use school visit data for both 2019 and

2020. We include a fixed effect for 2020, which allows us to estimate the changes in within-

school visits between 2019 and 2020 for each calendar week.

   As shown in Table 9, the introduction of county-level social distancing policies leads to a

0.28 log-unit change in school visits. This estimate is unchanged when including fixed effects for

year-by-week interactions to control for week-specific changes in school visits and state-by-

week fixed effects to control for temporal changes within states (e.g., state-level exposure to the

COVID-19 pandemic). Tying these results to our earlier results suggests that the level of school

visits induced by the introduction of social distancing policies leads to a 0.08 per 10,000 (0.0008

percentage point) decrease in the risk of household-level COVID-19 infection. Based on the

baseline mean of nine COVID-19 diagnoses per 10,000 households, our results imply that

county-level social distancing policies led to a 1.3 percent decrease in COVID-19 infections.



                                                                                                    28
9. DISCUSSION

   The COVID-19 pandemic has upended nearly all aspects of life. In response to concerns of

COVID-19 infection, many schools have moved to remote instruction (Malkus and Christensen

2020). Remote instruction can lead to reductions in COVID-19 cases, but the effectiveness is not

well quantified or understood (Christakis, Cleve, and Zimmerman 2020). Remote instruction is

also likely to impose disproportionate costs on socioeconomically disadvantaged families

(Kaufman et al. 2021). These families in particular may have less access to important resources

that include high-speed Internet access, computers, and job flexibility (Kroshus et al. 2020;

Reeves, Kneebone, and Rodrigue 2016). Remote instruction also imposes costs to parents, many

of whom are also balancing remote work and childcaring responsibilities (Adams and Todd

2020; Amuedo-Dorantes et al. 2020), and preliminary results indicate that it leads to an increase

in stress for parents (Verlenden et al. 2021).

   Despite the large costs of school closure, the impacts of school reopenings on COVID-19

cases has not been well estimated. In this study, we leverage variations in household composition

and apply novel data on both COVID-19 diagnoses and county-level visits to schools to estimate

the effects of school reopenings on COVID-19 transmission. We find that a one-log unit change

in visits to schools leads to an approximately 0.4 per 10,000 increase in COVID-19 cases. Our

results further imply that moving from the 25th percentile of school reopenings to the 75th

percentile translates to an approximately 3 percent increase in cases. These results are robust to

several specifications. In addition, we find that the modest increase in cases impacts both

children and adults, does not differentially impact households with education-industry workers,

and has little impact on medical spending. However, the effect is largest for households in lower-

income counties and is larger during the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic.




                                                                                                 29
   This study is not without limitations. For one, while broadly representative of the U.S.

population with private insurance, we use a subset of the U.S. population. Importantly, our

sample only includes those with employer-sponsored private insurance, and thus we do not

include more economically vulnerable populations, such as uninsured individuals or those on

public insurance, of which the pandemic has a disproportionately larger impact. We believe our

estimates are a likely underestimate of the effect of school reopenings on more vulnerable

populations. Likewise, we do not include individuals ages 65 and older, who are at increased risk

to COVID-19 (Viner, Bonell, et al. 2021). Our models do not account for changes in the

education labor force that may impact the number of visits to schools. Many educators have quit

due to stresses of the COVID-19 pandemic (Diliberti, Schwartz, and Grant 2021). Finally, we do

not include measures of school-level mitigation measures that have been shown to impact

COVID-19 transmission (Falk et al. 2021; Lessler et al. 2021; Volpp et al. 2021; Dawson et al.

2021). This is a common challenge in the literature given there is no national database collecting

data on schools (Oster 2021; Goldhaber et al. 2021). Only recently has the Department of

Education announced a campaign to collect detailed survey data on schools during the pandemic

(United States Department of Education 2021). In addition, recommendations for mitigation

strategies have changed over the course of the pandemic given new research. For example,

recommendations on minimum student distancing may be changing from six feet to three feet

(van den Berg et al. 2021).

   Despite these limitations, this study demonstrates that among the population we study, school

reopenings lead to a small increase in COVID-19 cases. The key question for policymakers is the

tradeoff between the costs of school reopenings and the costs of remote learning. It is important

to place these results in context with other risks of daily life and social distancing. Recent




                                                                                                 30
estimates using similar physical mobility data from Unacast data have found that living in

communities with the greatest social distancing leads to a 31 percent reduction in COVID-19

cases (Kwon et al. 2020). Research using the same data as this paper finds that household

birthdays, which likely lead to social gatherings, lead to an approximately 30 percent increase in

COVID-19 transmission (C. Whaley et al. 2021). In non-COVID contexts, other studies find that

injuries received at school account for 21 percent of non-intentional emergency department visits

and approximately 14 children per 10,000 receive a school injury per year (Zagel et al. 2019).

Spread across 40 weeks, this risk rate translates to an approximately 0.4 per 10,000 child risk

rate, which is comparable in magnitude to our main estimate of 0.4 per 10,000 households. The

effects of school reopening on COVID-19 risk were estimated when COVID-19 vaccines were

not available to teachers and the general population. With increased vaccine uptake the risk of

school reopening on COVID-19 risk may be further diminished.




                                                                                                  31
10. REFERENCES

Adams, Gina, and Margaret Todd. 2020. "Meeting the School-Age Child Care Needs of
        Working Parents Facing COVID-19 Distance Learning." Urban Institute.
        https://www.urban.org/research/publication/meeting-school-age-child-care-needs-
        working-parents-facing-covid-19-distance-learning.
Adhikari, Samrachana, Nicholas P. Pantaleo, Justin M. Feldman, Olugbenga Ogedegbe, Lorna
        Thorpe, and Andrea B. Troxel. 2020. "Assessment of Community-Level Disparities in
        Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Infections and Deaths in Large US Metropolitan
        Areas." JAMA Network Open 3 (7): e2016938­e2016938.
        https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.16938.
Allcott, Hunt, Levi Boxell, Jacob Conway, Matthew Gentzkow, Michael Thaler, and David
        Yang. 2020. "Polarization and Public Health: Partisan Differences in Social Distancing
        during the Coronavirus Pandemic." Journal of Public Economics 191 (November):
        104254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2020.104254.
American Academy of Pediatrics. 2021. "COVID-19 Planning Considerations: Guidance for
        School Re-Entry." 2021. http://services.aap.org/en/pages/2019-novel-coronavirus-covid-
        19-infections/clinical-guidance/covid-19-planning-considerations-return-to-in-person-
        education-in-schools/.
Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina, Miriam Marcén, Marina Morales, and Almudena Sevilla. 2020.
        "COVID-19 School Closures and Parental Labor Supply in the United States," IZA DP
        No. 13827, . https://www.iza.org/publications/dp/13827/covid-19-school-closures-and-
        parental-labor-supply-in-the-united-states.
Andersen, Martin, Sylvia Bryan, and David Slusky. 2020. "COVID-19 Surgical Abortion
        Restriction Did Not Reduce Visits to Abortion Clinics." Working Paper 28058. National
        Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/papers/w28058#fromrss.
Andersen, Martin S., Ana I. Bento, Anirban Basu, Chris Marsicano, and Kosali Simon. 2020.
        "College Openings, Mobility, and the Incidence of COVID-19 Cases." MedRxiv,
        September, 2020.09.22.20196048. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.22.20196048.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1951. "Alternative Approaches to the Theory of Choice in Risk-Taking
        Situations." Econometrica 19 (4): 404­37. https://doi.org/10.2307/1907465.
Arrow, Kenneth J., Maureen L. Cropper, George C. Eads, Robert W. Hahn, Lester B. Lave,
        Roger G. Noll, Paul R. Portney, et al. 1996. "Is There a Role for Benefit-Cost Analysis in
        Environmental, Health, and Safety Regulation?" Science 272 (5259): 221­22.
        https://doi.org/10.1126/science.272.5259.221.
Auger, Katherine A., Samir S. Shah, Troy Richardson, David Hartley, Matthew Hall, Amanda
        Warniment, Kristen Timmons, et al. 2020. "Association Between Statewide School
        Closure and COVID-19 Incidence and Mortality in the US." JAMA 324 (9): 859.
        https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.14348.
Austin, Peter C. 2009. "Balance Diagnostics for Comparing the Distribution of Baseline
        Covariates between Treatment Groups in Propensity-Score Matched Samples." Statistics
        in Medicine 28 (25): 3083­3107. https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.3697.
Bacher-Hicks, Andrew, Joshua Goodman, and Christine Mulhern. 2021. "Inequality in
        Household Adaptation to Schooling Shocks: Covid-Induced Online Learning
        Engagement in Real Time." Journal of Public Economics 193 (January): 104345.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2020.104345.



                                                                                               32
Becker, Gary S. 1976. The Economic Approach to Human Behavior. University of Chicago
       Press.
Berg, Polly van den, Elissa M Schechter-Perkins, Rebecca S Jack, Isabella Epshtein, Richard
       Nelson, Emily Oster, and Westyn Branch-Elliman. 2021. "Effectiveness of Three versus
       Six Feet of Physical Distancing for Controlling Spread of COVID-19 among Primary and
       Secondary Students and Staff: A Retrospective, State-Wide Cohort Study." Clinical
       Infectious Diseases, no. ciab230 (March). https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciab230.
Berry, Christopher R., Anthony Fowler, Tamara Glazer, Samantha Handel-Meyer, and Alec
       MacMillen. 2021. "Evaluating the Effects of Shelter-in-Place Policies during the
       COVID-19 Pandemic." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
       States of America 118 (15). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2019706118.
Brown, Caitlin S, and Martin Ravallion. 2020. "Inequality and the Coronavirus: Socioeconomic
       Covariates of Behavioral Responses and Viral Outcomes Across US Counties." Working
       Paper 27549. Working Paper Series. National Bureau of Economic Research.
       https://doi.org/10.3386/w27549.
Cantor, Jonathan, Ryan K. McBain, Megan F. Pera, Dena M. Bravata, and Christopher Whaley.
       2021. "Who Is (and Isn't) Receiving Telemedicine Care During the COVID-19
       Pandemic." American Journal of Preventive Medicine, March.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2021.01.030.
Cantor, Jonathan, Neeraj Sood, Dena M. Bravata, Megan Pera, and Christopher Whaley. 2020.
       "The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic and Policy Response on Health Care
       Utilization: Evidence from County-Level Medical Claims and Cellphone Data." Working
       Paper 28131. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cantor, Jonathan, Bradley D. Stein, and Brendan Saloner. 2020. "Telehealth Capability Among
       Substance Use Disorder Treatment Facilities in Counties With High Versus Low
       COVID-19 Social Distancing." Journal of Addiction Medicine 14 (6): e366.
       https://doi.org/10.1097/ADM.0000000000000744.
Carpenter, Dick, and Joshua Dunn. 2021. "We're All Teachers Now: Remote Learning During
       COVID-19." Journal of School Choice 0 (0): 1­28.
       https://doi.org/10.1080/15582159.2020.1822727.
Cawley, John, and Christopher J. Ruhm. 2011. "The Economics of Risky Health Behaviors." In
       Handbook of Health Economics, 2:95­199. Elsevier.
CDC. 2020. "COVID-19 Hospitalization and Death by Age." Centers for Disease Control and
       Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/covid-data/investigations-
       discovery/hospitalization-death-by-age.html.
------. 2021. "Operational Strategy for K-12 Schools through Phased Mitigation." Centers for
       Disease Control and Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-
       ncov/community/schools-childcare/operation-strategy.html.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2021. "Operating Schools during COVID-19:
       CDC's Considerations." Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2021.
       https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/schools-childcare/schools.html.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Michael Stepner, and The Opportunity
       Insights Team. 2020. "The Economic Impacts of COVID-19: Evidence from a New
       Public Database Built Using Private Sector Data." w27431. National Bureau of
       Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27431.




                                                                                         33
Christakis, Dimitri A., Will Van Cleve, and Frederick J. Zimmerman. 2020. "Estimation of US
        Children's Educational Attainment and Years of Life Lost Associated With Primary
        School Closures During the Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pandemic." JAMA Network Open
        3 (11): e2028786. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.28786.
Cohen, Alma, and Rajeev Dehejia. 2004. "The Effect of Automobile Insurance and Accident
        Liability Laws on Traffic Fatalities." The Journal of Law & Economics 47 (2): 357­93.
        https://doi.org/10.1086/422978.
Cook, Jonathan, Noah Newberger, and Sami Smalling. 2020. "The Spread of Social Distancing."
        Economics Letters 196 (November): 109511.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2020.109511.
Courtemanche, Charles, Joseph Garuccio, Anh Le, Joshua Pinkston, and Aaron Yelowitz. 2020.
        "Strong Social Distancing Measures In The United States Reduced The COVID-19
        Growth Rate." Health Affairs, May, 10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00608.
        https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00608.
Dave, Dhaval, Drew McNichols, and Joseph J. Sabia. 2021. "The Contagion Externality of a
        Superspreading Event: The Sturgis Motorcycle Rally and COVID-19." Southern
        Economic Journal 87 (3): 769­807. https://doi.org/10.1002/soej.12475.
Dawson, Patrick, Mary Claire Worrell, Sarah Malone, Sarah C. Tinker, Stephanie Fritz, Brett
        Maricque, Sadaf Junaidi, et al. 2021. "Pilot Investigation of SARS-CoV-2 Secondary
        Transmission in Kindergarten Through Grade 12 Schools Implementing Mitigation
        Strategies -- St. Louis County and City of Springfield, Missouri, December 2020."
        MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 70.
        https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7012e4.
Diliberti, Melissa Kay, Heather L. Schwartz, and David Grant. 2021. "Stress Topped the
        Reasons Why Public School Teachers Quit, Even Before COVID-19."
        https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1121-2.html.
Doleac, Jennifer, and Anita Mukherjee. 2018. "The Moral Hazard of Lifesaving Innovations:
        Naloxone Access, Opioid Abuse, and Crime." 11489. IZA Institute of Labor Economics.
Donohue, Julie M., and Elizabeth Miller. 2020. "COVID-19 and School Closures." JAMA 324
        (9): 845. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.13092.
Doolittle, David. 2020. "What's More Risky, Going to a Bar or Opening the Mail?" Texas
        Medical Association. 2020.
        https://www.texmed.org/TexasMedicineDetail.aspx?id=53977.
Dorn, Emma, Bryan Hancock, Jimmy Sarakatsannis, and Ellen Viruleg. 2020. "COVID-19 and
        Student Learning in the United States: The Hurt Could Last a Lifetime." McKinsey &
        Company.
Doyle, Timothy, Katherine Kendrick, Thomas Troelstrup, Megan Gumke, Jerri Edwards, Shay
        Chapman, Randy Popper, Scott A. Rivkees, and Blackmore Carina. 2021. "COVID-19 in
        Primary and Secondary School Settings During the First Semester of School Reopening
        -- Florida, August­December 2020." MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
        70. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7012e2.
Engzell, Per, Arun Frey, and Mark D. Verhagen. 2020. "Learning Inequality during the COVID-
        19 Pandemic."
Falk, Amy, Alison Benda, Peter Falk, Sarah Steffen, Zachary Wallace, and Tracy Beth Høeg.
        2021. "COVID-19 Cases and Transmission in 17 K­12 Schools -- Wood County,




                                                                                           34
        Wisconsin, August 31­November 29, 2020." MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
        Report 70. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7004e3.
Fuller, Thomas, and Kate Taylor. 2021. "In San Francisco, Turmoil Over Reopening Schools
        Turns a City Against Itself." The New York Times, March 29, 2021, sec. U.S.
        https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/29/us/san-francisco-schools-racism.html.
Gao, Song, Jinmeng Rao, Yuhao Kang, Yunlei Liang, Jake Kruse, Dorte Dopfer, Ajay K. Sethi,
        Juan Francisco Mandujano Reyes, Brian S. Yandell, and Jonathan A. Patz. 2020.
        "Association of Mobile Phone Location Data Indications of Travel and Stay-at-Home
        Mandates With COVID-19 Infection Rates in the US." JAMA Network Open 3 (9):
        e2020485­e2020485. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.20485.
Gates, Dominic. 2021. "As Seattle-Area Educators Get Vaccinated against Coronavirus, Concern
        Lingers over Back-to-School Plan." The Seattle Times. March 14, 2021.
        https://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/education/as-seattle-area-educators-get-
        vaccinated-against-coronavirus-concern-lingers-over-back-to-school-plan/.
Gilbert, Leah K., Tara W. Strine, Leigh E. Szucs, Tamara N. Crawford, Sharyn E. Parks,
        Danielle T. Barradas, Rashid Njai, and Jean Y. Ko. 2020. "Racial and Ethnic Differences
        in Parental Attitudes and Concerns About School Reopening During the COVID-19
        Pandemic -- United States, July 2020." MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
        69. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6949a2.
Gold, Jeremy A. W., Jenna R. Gettings, Anne Kimball, Rachel Franklin, Grant Rivera, Elana
        Morris, Colleen Scott, et al. 2021. "Clusters of SARS-CoV-2 Infection Among
        Elementary School Educators and Students in One School District - Georgia, December
        2020-January 2021." MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 70 (8): 289­92.
        https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7008e4.
Goldhaber, Dan, Scott A. Imberman, Katharine O. Strunk, Bryant Hopkins, Nate Brown, Erica
        Harbatkin, and Tara Kilbride. 2021. "To What Extent Does In-Person Schooling
        Contribute to the Spread of COVID-19? Evidence from Michigan and Washington."
        w28455. National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w28455.
Goldhaber-Fiebert, Jeremy D., David M. Studdert, and Michelle M. Mello. 2020. "School
        Reopenings and the Community During the COVID-19 Pandemic." JAMA Health Forum
        1 (10): e201294. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamahealthforum.2020.1294.
Goldstein, Edward, Marc Lipsitch, and Muge Cevik. 2020. "On the Effect of Age on the
        Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in Households, Schools, and the Community." The
        Journal of Infectious Diseases, no. jiaa691 (October).
        https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiaa691.
Goolsbee, Austan, and Chad Syverson. 2020. "Fear, Lockdown, and Diversion: Comparing
        Drivers of Pandemic Economic Decline 2020." w27432. National Bureau of Economic
        Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27432.
Gupta, Sumedha, Kosali I. Simon, and Coady Wing. 2020. "Mandated and Voluntary Social
        Distancing During The COVID-19 Epidemic: A Review." w28139. National Bureau of
        Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w28139.
Harris, Douglas N., Engy Ziedan, and Susan Hassig. 2021. "The Effects of School Reopenings
        on COVID-19 Hospitalizations." Working Paper. Tulane University.
        https://www.reachcentered.org/publications/the-effects-of-school-reopenings-on-covid-
        19-hospitalizations.




                                                                                            35
Hershow, Rebecca B., Karen Wu, Nathaniel M. Lewis, Alison T. Milne, Dustin Currie, Amanda
        R. Smith, Spencer Lloyd, et al. 2021. "Low SARS-CoV-2 Transmission in Elementary
        Schools -- Salt Lake County, Utah, December 3, 2020­January 31, 2021." MMWR.
        Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 70. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7012e3.
Honein, Margaret A., Lisa C. Barrios, and John T. Brooks. 2021. "Data and Policy to Guide
        Opening Schools Safely to Limit the Spread of SARS-CoV-2 Infection | Infectious
        Diseases." JAMA. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2021.0374.
Höppner, Stephanie. 2020. "Why Is Finland Coping so Well with the Coronavirus Crisis?"
        Deutsche Welle, September 11, 2020. https://www.dw.com/en/coronavirus-finland-
        sweden-role-model/a-55664117.
Isphording, Ingo, Marc Lipfert, and Nico Pestel. 2020. "School Re-Openings after Summer
        Breaks in Germany Did Not Increase SARS-CoV-2 Cases." Discussion Paper Series. IZA
        Institute of Labor Economics. https://www.iza.org/publications/dp/13790/school-re-
        openings-after-summer-breaks-in-germany-did-not-increase-sars-cov-2-cases.
Issa, Nader. 2021. "Less than Half of CPS Students -- Including 1 in 3 High Schoolers --
        Choose 4th Quarter in-Person Learning." Chicago Sun-Times. March 24, 2021.
        https://chicago.suntimes.com/education/2021/3/24/22348944/cps-public-schools-high-
        school-in-person-remote-teachers.
Iwata, Kentaro, Asako Doi, and Chisato Miyakoshi. 2020. "Was School Closure Effective in
        Mitigating Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)? Time Series Analysis Using
        Bayesian Inference." International Journal of Infectious Diseases 99 (October): 57­61.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.07.052.
Jay, Jonathan, Jacob Bor, Elaine O. Nsoesie, Sarah K. Lipson, David K. Jones, Sandro Galea,
        and Julia Raifman. 2020. "Neighbourhood Income and Physical Distancing during the
        COVID-19 Pandemic in the United States." Nature Human Behaviour 4 (12): 1294­
        1302. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00998-2.
Kadri, Sameer S., Jake Gundrum, Sarah Warner, Zhun Cao, Ahmed Babiker, Michael Klompas,
        and Ning Rosenthal. 2020. "Uptake and Accuracy of the Diagnosis Code for COVID-19
        Among US Hospitalizations." JAMA 324 (24): 2553­54.
        https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.20323.
Kaufman, Brystana G., Nirosha Mahendraratnam, Thuy-vi Nguyen, Laura Benzing, Jessica
        Beliveau, Christina Silcox, and Charlene A. Wong. 2021. "Factors Associated with Initial
        Public School Reopening Plans During the US COVID-19 Pandemic: A Retrospective
        Study." Journal of General Internal Medicine, January. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-
        020-06470-1.
Khazanchi, Rohan, Charlesnika T. Evans, and Jasmine R. Marcelin. 2020. "Racism, Not Race,
        Drives Inequity Across the COVID-19 Continuum." JAMA Network Open 3 (9):
        e2019933. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.19933.
Kim, Jieun, Young June Choe, Jin Lee, Young Joon Park, Ok Park, Mi Seon Han, Jong-Hyun
        Kim, and Eun Hwa Choi. 2020. "Role of Children in Household Transmission of
        COVID-19." Archives of Disease in Childhood, August.
        https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2020-319910.
Kranz, Ashley M., Annie Chen, Grace Gahlon, and Bradley D. Stein. 2021. "Trends in Visits to
        Dental Offices During the 2020 COVID-19 Pandemic." The Journal of the American
        Dental Association. https://doi.org/doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adaj.2021.02.016.




                                                                                             36
Kroshus, Emily, Matt Hawrilenko, Pooja S. Tandon, and Dimitri A. Christakis. 2020. "Plans of
       US Parents Regarding School Attendance for Their Children in the Fall of 2020: A
       National Survey." JAMA Pediatrics, August.
       https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2020.3864.
Kuhfeld, Megan, and Beth Tarasawa. 2020. "The COVID-19 Slide: What Summer Learning
       Loss Can Tell Us about the Potential Impact of School Closures on Student Academic
       Achievement." NWEA Research. https://www.nwea.org/research/publication/the-covid-
       19-slide-what-summer-learning-loss-can-tell-us-about-the-potential-impact-of-school-
       closures-on-student-academic-achievement/.
Kwon, Sohee, Amit D. Joshi, Chun-Han Lo, David A. Drew, Long H. Nguyen, Chuan-Guo Guo,
       Wenjie Ma, et al. 2020. "Association of Social Distancing and Masking with Risk of
       COVID-19." MedRxiv, November, 2020.11.11.20229500.
       https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.11.20229500.
Lakdawalla, Darius, Neeraj Sood, and Dana Goldman. 2006. "HIV Breakthroughs and Risky
       Sexual Behavior." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (3): 1063­1102.
       https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.121.3.1063.
Lasry, Arielle, Daniel Kidder, Marisa Hast, Jason Poovey, Gregory Sunshine, Kathryn Winglee,
       Nicole Zviedrite, Faruque Ahmed, and Kathleen A. Ethier. 2020. "Timing of Community
       Mitigation and Changes in Reported COVID-19 and Community Mobility  Four U.S.
       Metropolitan Areas, February 26­April 1, 2020." MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality
       Weekly Report 69. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6915e2.
Lee, Florence C., Laura Adams, Sierra J. Graves, Greta M. Massetti, Renee M. Calanan, Ana
       Penman-Aguilar, S. Jane Henley, et al. 2021. "Counties with High COVID-19 Incidence
       and Relatively Large Racial and Ethnic Minority Populations -- United States, April 1­
       December 22, 2020." MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 70.
       https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7013e1.
Leeb, Rebecca T., Sandy Price, Sarah Sliwa, Anne Kimball, Leigh Szucs, Elise Caruso, Shana
       Godfred-Cato, and Matthew Lozier. 2020. "COVID-19 Trends Among School-Aged
       Children -- United States, March 1­September 19, 2020." MMWR. Morbidity and
       Mortality Weekly Report 69. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6939e2.
Leidman, Eva, Lindsey M. Duca, John D. Omura, Krista Proia, James W. Stephens, and Erin K.
       Sauber-Schatz. 2021. "COVID-19 Trends Among Persons Aged 0­24 Years -- United
       States, March 1­December 12, 2020." MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
       70. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7003e1.
Lessler, Justin, M. Kate Grabowski, Kyra H. Grantz, Elena Badillo-Goicoechea, C. Jessica E.
       Metcalf, Carly Lupton-Smith, Andrew S. Azman, and Elizabeth A. Stuart. 2021.
       "Household COVID-19 Risk and in-Person Schooling." MedRxiv.
       https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.27.21252597.
Levinson, Meira, Muge Cevik, and Marc Lipsitch. 2020. "Reopening Primary Schools during the
       Pandemic." New England Journal of Medicine 383 (10): 981­85.
       https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMms2024920.
Lordan, Ronan, Garret A. FitzGerald, and Tilo Grosser. 2020. "Reopening Schools during
       COVID-19." Science 369 (6508): 1146­1146. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abe5765.
Ludvigsson, Jonas F. 2020. "Children Are Unlikely to Be the Main Drivers of the COVID-19
       Pandemic ­ A Systematic Review." Acta Paediatrica 109 (8): 1525­30.
       https://doi.org/10.1111/apa.15371.



                                                                                          37
Malkus, Nat, and Cody Christensen. 2020. "School District Responses to the COVID-19
        Pandemic: Round 5, Plateauing Services in America's Schools." American Enterprise
        Institute. https://www.aei.org/research-products/report/school-district-responses-to-the-
        covid-19-pandemic-round-5-plateauing-services-in-americas-schools/.
Mangrum, Daniel, and Paul Niekamp. 2020. "College Student Travel Contributed to Local
        COVID-19 Spread." Journal of Urban Economics, December, 103311.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2020.103311.
Martin, Erika G., and Lucy C. Sorensen. 2020. "Protecting the Health of Vulnerable Children
        and Adolescents During COVID-19­Related K-12 School Closures in the US." JAMA
        Health Forum 1 (6): e200724. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamahealthforum.2020.0724.
Masonbrink, Abbey R., and Emily Hurley. 2020. "Advocating for Children During the COVID-
        19 School Closures." Pediatrics 146 (3). https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2020-1440.
McBain, Ryan K., Jonathan H. Cantor, Anupam B. Jena, Megan F. Pera, and Christopher M.
        Whaley. 2021. "Decline and Rebound in Routine Cancer Screening Rates During the
        COVID-19 Pandemic." Journal of General Internal Medicine.
        https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11606-021-06660-5.
McWilliams, J. Michael, Ali Russo, and Ateev Mehrotra. 2021. "Implications of Early Health
        Care Spending Reductions for Expected Spending as the COVID-19 Pandemic Evolves."
        JAMA Internal Medicine 181 (1): 118. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.5333.
Meckler, Laura. 2021. "Nearly Half of Schools Are Open Full-Time, Survey Finds." Washington
        Post, 2021. https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/schools-reopen-
        data/2021/03/23/a7d10b42-8bed-11eb-9423-04079921c915_story.html.
Miller, George, Corwin Rhyan, Ani Turner, and Katherine Hempstead. 2020. "COVID-19
        Shocks The US Health Sector: A Review Of Early Economic Impacts." Health Affairs
        Blog. 2020. https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hblog20201214.543463/full/.
Moore, Jazmyn T. 2020. "Disparities in Incidence of COVID-19 Among Underrepresented
        Racial/Ethnic Groups in Counties Identified as Hotspots During June 5­18, 2020 -- 22
        States, February­June 2020." MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 69.
        https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6933e1.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2020. "Reopening K-12 Schools
        During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Prioritizing Health, Equity, and Communities."
        Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Nguyen, Thuy D, Sumedha Gupta, Martin Andersen, Ana Bento, Kosali I Simon, and Coady
        Wing. 2020. "Impacts of State Reopening Policy on Human Mobility." Working Paper
        27235. National Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/papers/w27235.
Ogedegbe, Olugbenga, Joseph Ravenell, Samrachana Adhikari, Mark Butler, Tiffany Cook, Fritz
        Francois, Eduardo Iturrate, et al. 2020. "Assessment of Racial/Ethnic Disparities in
        Hospitalization and Mortality in Patients With COVID-19 in New York City." JAMA
        Network Open 3 (12): e2026881.
Oster, Emily. 2021. "Beyond Past Due: Data to Guide US School Reopenings." Nature 589
        (7840): 8. https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-03647-w.
Panovska-Griffiths, Jasmina, Cliff C. Kerr, Robyn M. Stuart, Dina Mistry, Daniel J. Klein,
        Russell M. Viner, and Chris Bonnell. 2020. "Determining the Optimal Strategy for
        Reopening Schools, the Impact of Test and Trace Interventions, and the Risk of
        Occurrence of a Second COVID-19 Epidemic Wave in the UK: A Modelling Study."
        Lancet Child Adolesc Health 4 (11): 817­27.



                                                                                              38
Peltzman, Sam. 1975. "The Effects of Automobile Safety Regulation." Journal of Political
        Economy 83 (4): 677­725.
Poole, Mary Kathryn, Sheila Fleischhacker, and Sarah N. Bleich. 2021. "Addressing Child
        Hunger When School Is Closed -- Considerations during the Pandemic and Beyond."
        New England Journal of Medicine. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp2033629.
Pray, Ian W., Anna Kocharian, Jordan Mason, Ryan Westergaard, and Jonathan Meiman. 2021.
        "Trends in Outbreak-Associated Cases of COVID-19 -- Wisconsin, March­November
        2020." MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 70.
        https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7004a2.
Price-Haywood, Eboni G., Jeffrey Burton, Daniel Fort, and Leonardo Seoane. 2020.
        "Hospitalization and Mortality among Black Patients and White Patients with Covid-19."
        The New England Journal of Medicine 382 (26): 2534­43.
        https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa2011686.
Psacharopoulos, George, Harry Patrinos, Victoria Collins, and Emiliana Vegas. 2020. "The
        COVID-19 Cost of School Closures." Brookings (blog). 2020.
        https://www.brookings.edu/blog/education-plus-development/2020/04/29/the-covid-19-
        cost-of-school-closures/.
Rabinowicz, Shira, Eyal Leshem, and Itai M. Pessach. 2020. "COVID-19 in the Pediatric
        Population--Review and Current Evidence." Current Infectious Disease Reports 22 (11).
        https://doi.org/10.1007/s11908-020-00739-6.
Reeves, Richard V., Elizabeth Kneebone, and Edward Rodrigue. 2016. "Five Evils:
        Multidimensional Poverty and Race in America." Washington, DC: The Brookings
        Institution. https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/
        ReevesKneeboneRodrigue_MultidimensionalPoverty_FullPaper.pdf.
Rice, Ketra L., Gabrielle F. Miller, Fátima Coronado, and Martin I. Meltzer. 2020. "Estimated
        Resource Costs for Implementation of CDC's Recommended COVID-19 Mitigation
        Strategies in Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 12 Public Schools - United States, 2020-21
        School Year." MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 69 (50): 1917­21.
        https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6950e1.
Rosenbaum, Paul R., and Donald B. Rubin. 1985. "Constructing a Control Group Using
        Multivariate Matched Sampling Methods That Incorporate the Propensity Score." The
        American Statistician 39 (1): 33­38. https://doi.org/10.2307/2683903.
Selden, Thomas M., Terceira A. Berdahl, and Zhengyi Fang. 2020. "The Risk Of Severe
        COVID-19 Within Households Of School Employees And School-Age Children." Health
        Affairs 39 (11): 2002­9.
Shapiro, Eliza. 2020. "New York City to Close Public Schools Again as Virus Cases Rise." The
        New York Times, November 18, 2020, sec. New York.
        https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/18/nyregion/nyc-schools-covid.html.
Sharfstein, Joshua M., and Christopher C. Morphew. 2020. "The Urgency and Challenge of
        Opening K-12 Schools in the Fall of 2020." JAMA 324 (2): 133­34.
        https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.10175.
The New York Times. 2020. "See How All 50 States Are Reopening (and Closing Again)."
        2020. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/states-reopen-map-coronavirus.html.
United States Department of Education. 2021. "ED Announces National Survey to Gather
        Critical Data on School Reopening." 2021. https://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/ed-
        announces-national-survey-gather-critical-data-school-reopening.



                                                                                            39
Verlenden, Jorge V., Sanjana Pampati, Catherine N. Rasberry, Nicole Liddon, Marci Hertz,
       Greta Kilmer, Melissa Heim Viox, et al. 2021. "Association of Children's Mode of
       School Instruction with Child and Parent Experiences and Well-Being During the
       COVID-19 Pandemic -- COVID Experiences Survey, United States, October 8­
       November 13, 2020." MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 70.
       https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7011a1.
Vermund, Sten H, and Virginia E Pitzer. 2020. "Asymptomatic Transmission and the Infection
       Fatality Risk for COVID-19: Implications for School Reopening." Clinical Infectious
       Diseases, no. ciaa855 (June). https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa855.
Viner, Russell M., Christopher Bonell, Lesley Drake, Didier Jourdan, Nicolette Davies,
       Valentina Baltag, John Jerrim, Jenny Proimos, and Ara Darzi. 2021. "Reopening Schools
       during the COVID-19 Pandemic: Governments Must Balance the Uncertainty and Risks
       of Reopening Schools against the Clear Harms Associated with Prolonged Closure."
       Archives of Disease in Childhood 106 (2): 111­13. https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-
       2020-319963.
Viner, Russell M., Oliver T. Mytton, Chris Bonell, G. J. Melendez-Torres, Joseph Ward, Lee
       Hudson, Claire Waddington, et al. 2021. "Susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 Infection
       Among Children and Adolescents Compared With Adults: A Systematic Review and
       Meta-Analysis." JAMA Pediatrics 175 (2): 143­56.
       https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2020.4573.
Vlachos, Jonas, Edvin Hertegård, and Helena B Svaleryd. 2021. "The Effects of School Closures
       on SARS-CoV-2 among Parents and Teachers." Proceedings of the National Academy of
       Sciences of the United States of America 118 (9).
       https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2020834118.
Vogel, Gretchen, and Jennifer Couzin-Frankel. 2020. "As COVID-19 Soars in Many
       Communities, Schools Attempt to Find Ways through the Crisis." Science. 2020.
       https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/11/covid-19-soars-many-communities-schools-
       attempt-find-ways-through-crisis.
Volpp, Kevin G., Bruce H. Kraut, Smita Ghosh, and John Neatherlin. 2021. "Minimal SARS-
       CoV-2 Transmission After Implementation of a Comprehensive Mitigation Strategy at a
       School - New Jersey, August 20-November 27, 2020." MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality
       Weekly Report 70 (11): 377­81. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7011a2.
Whaley, Christopher, Jonathan Cantor, Megan Pera, and Anupam B. Jena. 2021. "Birthdays and
       Covid-19 Risk." Working Paper.
Whaley, Christopher M., Jonathan Cantor, Megan F. Pera, and Dena M. Bravata. 2021. "Industry
       Variation in Risk of Delaying Care During COVID-19." Journal of General Internal
       Medicine, March. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-021-06694-9.
Whaley, Christopher M., Megan F. Pera, Jonathan Cantor, Jennie Chang, Julia Velasco, Heather
       K. Hagg, Neeraj Sood, and Dena M. Bravata. 2020. "Changes in Health Services Use
       Among Commercially Insured US Populations During the COVID-19 Pandemic." JAMA
       Network Open 3 (11): e2024984. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.24984.
Zagel, Alicia L., Gretchen J. Cutler, Amy M. Linabery, Alicen B. Spaulding, and Anupam B.
       Kharbanda. 2019. "Unintentional Injuries in Primary and Secondary Schools in the
       United States, 2001-2013." Journal of School Health 89 (1): 38­47.
       https://doi.org/10.1111/josh.12711.




                                                                                           40
11. TABLES AND FIGURES/
Figure 1: Distribution of Log-Transformed School Visit Measures
                                            (A) Week 10




                                            (B) Week 20




                                            (C) Week 40




                                                                  41
Figure 2: Geographic Distribution of Log-Transformed School Visits
                                      (A) Week 10




                                     (B) Week 20




                                     (C) Week 40




                                                                     42
Table 1: Descriptive Characteristics of Study Population

                                       Households without     Households with
                                       COVID Diagnosis        COVID Diagnosis
                                                                                Standardized
                                      Mean       SD         Mean     SD         difference
 Child in household (%)               28.5%      45.1%      37.7%    48.5%      -0.20
 Number of household members          2.3        1.5        3.0      1.7        -0.44
 COVID-related medical spending
 ($)                                  $0         $0         $2,320   $21,901    -0.15
 log-transformed school visits
 change                               -0.54      0.48       -0.45    0.48       -0.19
 Census region (%)
  Pacific                             19.5%      39.6%      20.0%    40.0%      -0.01
  Mountain                            5.6%       23.0%      6.5%     24.6%      -0.04
  West north central                  5.8%       23.4%      5.1%     22.0%      0.03
  West south central                  3.2%       17.5%      2.8%     16.6%      0.02
  East north central                  20.3%      40.2%      10.2%    30.3%      0.28
  East south central                  29.6%      45.6%      33.1%    47.1%      -0.08
  New England                         6.2%       24.1%      8.5%     27.9%      -0.09
  South Atlantic                      9.9%       29.8%      13.8%    34.5%      -0.12
 Industry of primary subscriber (%)
    Aerospace & Defense               10.9%      31.2%      7.0%     25.6%      0.14
    Apparel                           0.1%       3.4%       0.0%     0.0%       0.05
    Automotive                        4.2%       20.1%      5.6%     23.0%      -0.06
    Chemicals                         0.2%       4.7%       0.3%     5.7%       -0.02
    Construction                      0.6%       8.0%       1.0%     9.9%       -0.04
    Education                         2.4%       15.2%      1.9%     13.8%      0.03
    Electronics                       1.2%       11.1%      1.3%     11.3%      0.00
    Engineering                       0.3%       5.2%       0.3%     5.7%       -0.01
    Entertainment & Hospitality       0.4%       6.2%       0.4%     6.5%       -0.01
    Financial Services                8.3%       27.6%      10.3%    30.4%      -0.07
    Food & Beverage                   4.2%       20.1%      6.3%     24.3%      -0.09
    Government                        9.7%       29.6%      14.7%    35.4%      -0.15
    Grocery                           3.0%       17.1%      3.1%     17.3%      0.00
    Hospitals & Healthcare            5.3%       22.4%      5.9%     23.5%      -0.02
    Insurance                         4.5%       20.7%      6.3%     24.2%      -0.08
    Legal Services                    0.0%       2.0%       0.0%     2.2%       0.00
    Manufacturing                     6.8%       25.1%      8.6%     28.1%      -0.07
    Media                             0.0%       2.1%       0.0%     1.8%       0.01
    Medical Devices                   0.6%       7.4%       0.6%     7.7%       -0.01
    Missing                           0.4%       6.6%       0.3%     5.6%       0.02
    Non-Profit                        0.2%       4.8%       0.3%     5.5%       -0.01
    Oil, Energy, & Utilities          2.3%       15.1%      3.7%     19.0%      -0.08
    Other                             0.4%       6.0%       0.4%     6.3%       0.00
    Pharmaceuticals & Biotech         0.8%       8.8%       1.1%     10.3%      -0.03
    Professional Services             1.5%       12.0%      1.3%     11.5%      0.01
    Real Estate                       0.1%       2.8%       0.1%     3.3%       -0.01
    Retail                            16.1%      36.7%      3.9%     19.4%      0.41
    Security                          0.4%       6.3%       0.4%     6.5%       0.00
    Semiconductors                    1.1%       10.4%      1.0%     10.1%      0.00
    Software & Technology             0.8%       9.0%       0.6%     7.9%       0.02
    Telecommunications                11.6%      32.0%      11.7%    32.1%      0.00
    Transportation                    1.5%       12.3%      1.2%     11.0%      0.03




                                                                                               43
Table 2: DDD Estimates on the Effect of School Visits on Household COVID-19 Diagnoses
                                                         (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)           (9)
 Log-transformed Visits
 Child in household X school visits                    0.395***       0.390***      0.166**       0.389***       0.401***      0.390***     0.387***      0.369***       0.486***
                                                       (0.0836)       (0.0835)      (0.0675)      (0.0834)       (0.0853)      (0.0840)      (0.0852)      (0.0863)       (0.0816)
 Child in household                                    3.589***      -2.546***                   -2.546***      -2.536***     -2.545***     -2.548***     -2.563***      -2.281***
                                                        (0.190)        (0.150)                     (0.150)        (0.151)       (0.150)       (0.151)       (0.148)        (0.155)
 School visits                                         2.218***       2.219***     2.291***       2.227***       1.009***      2.242***     2.270***                     2.526***
                                                        (0.360)        (0.360)      (0.371)        (0.360)        (0.221)       (0.308)       (0.300)                      (0.344)
 Number of household members                                         2.853***                     2.853***       2.853***      2.853***     2.853***       2.853***      2.645***
                                                                      (0.1000)                    (0.1000)       (0.1000)      (0.1000)      (0.1000)      (0.1000)       (0.0884)
 SIP policy                                                                                       2.039***
                                                                                                   (0.454)
 Bar mobility                                                                                                                 -0.848***
                                                                                                                                (0.296)
 Restaurant mobility                                                                                                             0.731
                                                                                                                                (0.981)
 Non-school mobility                                                                                                                          -0.504
                                                                                                                                             (1.286)
 Observations                                        127,601,976    127,601,976   127,601,976   127,601,976    127,601,976   127,601,976   127,601,976   127,601,976    127,601,976
 HH FE                                                                                 X
 SIP policy                                                                                          X
 Weeks since first COVID case/death FE                                                                             X
 Bar/restaurant mobility                                                                                                         X
 Non-school mobility                                                                                                                            X
 County-week FE                                                                                                                                               X
 Industry-week FE                                                                                                                                                           X
This table presents regression results from equation 3 and measures effect of county-level school visits on the weekly change in household COVID-19 diagnoses between
household with and without children. Standard errors clustered at the county-level in parentheses. Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 10,000 and can be interpreted
as the change in weekly diagnosis rates per 10,000 households. ** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                                                                                  44
Table 3: DDD Estimates on Effect of School Visits on Age-Specific Household COVID-19 Diagnoses
                                             Any child       Age 0-4        Age 5-18      Any adult      Age 19-29      Age 30-39      Age 40-49      Age 50-59       Age 60+
 Log-transformed Visits
                                                0.269***        0.00567        0.267***        0.172***     0.0905***       0.108***        0.00921       -0.0636**        0.0295
 Child in household X school visits
                                                (0.0499)        (0.0140)        (0.0519)       (0.0596)      (0.0203)       (0.0363)       (0.0519)        (0.0258)       (0.0222)
 Observations                                 127,601,976 127,601,976 127,601,976 127,601,976 127,601,976 127,601,976 127,601,976 127,601,976 127,601,976
This table presents results that measure the effect of county-level school visits on age-specific COVID-19 diagnoses between household with and without children. Standard errors
clustered at the county-level in parentheses. Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 10,000 and can be interpreted as the change in weekly diagnosis rates per 10,000
households. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                45
Table 4: Differences Based on County-Level COVID-19 Prevalence

                                                                                     (1)


                                                                       Log-transformed school visits

                                                                                   -0.0377
 Child in household X school visits
                                                                                  (0.0924)
 Child in household                                                              -5.851***
                                                                                   (0.238)
 School visits                                                                      -0.144
                                                                                   (0.261)
 Number of household members                                                     3.047***
                                                                                   (0.107)
                                                                                 0.614***
 New weekly cases per 10,000
                                                                                  (0.0410)
                                                                                 0.196***
 New weekly cases per 10,000 X school visits
                                                                                  (0.0271)
                                                                                 0.562***
 Child in household X new weekly cases per 10,000
                                                                                  (0.0378)
                                                                                 0.192***
 Child in household X new weekly cases per 10,000 X school visits
                                                                                  (0.0283)

  Observations                                                                    127,601,976
This table presents regression results from equation 4 and measures how the effect of county-level school visits on
the weekly change in household COVID-19 diagnoses between household with and without children varies based on
the prevalence of COVID-19 in that county. Standard errors clustered at the county-level in parentheses.
Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 10,000 and can be interpreted as the change in weekly diagnosis
rates per 10,000 households. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                46
Figure 3: DDD Estimates of the Impact of School Visits on COVID-19 Infection Rates by
Week




                                                                                        47
Table 5: DD Estimates of COVID-19 Infection Rates Among Households with Education
Workers
                                              (1)
                                       Log-transformed
                                         school visits

 School visits                             2.343***
                                            (0.373)
 Education industry                         0.0626
                                            (0.529)
                                             -0.185
 Education industry X school visits
                                            (0.305)

 Observations                             127,601,976
This table presents results that measure the effect of county-level school visits on household-level COVID-19
diagnoses, and how the relationship varies among households in which the primary insurance subscriber is in the
education industry. Standard errors clustered at the county-level in parentheses. Coefficients and standard errors are
multiplied by 10,000 and can be interpreted as the change in weekly diagnosis rates per 10,000 households. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                    48
Table 6: DDD Estimates of the Impact of School Visits on COVID-19 Infection Rates by
County Income Quartile
                                                               (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
 Income quartile                                               1st           2nd           3rd           4th

                                                            1.269***      0.669***      0.462***       0.181*
 Child in household X school visits
                                                             (0.303)       (0.175)       (0.164)      (0.0999)

 Observations                                                 7,217,722 16,199,682 24,960,658 79,223,270
 p-value of difference relative to first quartile            -                    0.059        0.011 <0.01
This table presents results that measure the effect of county-level school visits on household-level COVID-19
diagnoses between household with and without children. Separate models test for differences in the first quartile
(column 1), second quartile (column 2), third quartile (column 3), and fourth quartile (column 4) of county income.
County income is measured using data from the American Community Survey. Standard errors clustered at the
county-level in parentheses. Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 10,000 and can be interpreted as the
change in weekly diagnosis rates per 10,000 households. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                  49
Table 7: Effect of School Visits on Household COVID-19 Medical Spending
                                                      (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)
 Panel A: COVID medical spending (Log-transformed visits)
                                                   -0.0867      -0.0880       0.0117        -0.0884       -0.0833       -0.0847       -0.0864        -0.112       -0.0627
 Child in household X school mobility
                                                   (0.129)      (0.129)       (0.127)       (0.129)       (0.129)       (0.129)       (0.129)       (0.134)       (0.129)
 Panel B: Ln(COVID spending +1) (Log-transformed visits)
                                                0.000125***   0.000131***   0.000137***   0.000130***   0.000129***   0.000157***   0.000149***   0.000112***   0.000138***
 Child in household X school mobility
                                                 (3.89e-05)    (3.88e-05)    (3.59e-05)    (3.88e-05)    (3.94e-05)    (4.08e-05)    (4.03e-05)    (3.96e-05)    (3.90e-05)
 Observations                                   127,601,976   127,601,976   127,601,976   127,601,976   127,601,976   127,601,976   127,601,976   127,601,976   127,601,976
 Number of HH members                                              X
 HH FE                                                                          X
 SIP policy                                                                                   X
 Weeks since first COVID case/death FE                                                                      X
 Bar/restaurant mobility                                                                                                  X
 Non-school mobility                                                                                                                    X
 County-week FE                                                                                                                                       X
 Industry-week FE                                                                                                                                                   X
This table presents results that measure the effect of county-level school visits on COVID-19 related medical spending between household with and without
children. Standard errors clustered at the county-level in parentheses. Panel A uses COVID-19 related medical spending as the dependent variable. Panel B uses
log-transformed COVID-19 medical spending as the dependent variable. Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 10,000 and can be interpreted as the
change in weekly diagnosis rates per 10,000 households. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                                            50
Table 8: DDD Estimates on the Effect of School Visits on Household COVID-19 Hospitalizations
                                             (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)

 Child in household X school visits      3.16e-06**     3.10e-06**    4.81e-06***    3.09e-06**     3.20e-06**     3.16e-06**     3.22e-06**     2.87e-06**      3.60e-06**
                                          (1.40e-06)     (1.40e-06)    (1.36e-06)     (1.40e-06)     (1.39e-06)     (1.40e-06)     (1.40e-06)     (1.41e-06)     (1.42e-06)
 Child in household                      1.16e-05***   -4.79e-05***                 -4.79e-05***   -4.78e-05***   -4.78e-05***   -4.78e-05***   -4.81e-05***   -4.36e-05***
                                          (2.23e-06)     (3.32e-06)                   (3.32e-06)     (3.30e-06)     (3.31e-06)     (3.31e-06)     (3.34e-06)     (3.02e-06)
 School visits                           1.64e-05***    1.64e-05***   1.60e-05***    1.65e-05***     5.84e-06*     1.44e-05***    1.42e-05***                   3.44e-05***
                                          (3.89e-06)     (3.89e-06)    (3.93e-06)     (3.88e-06)     (3.51e-06)     (3.58e-06)     (3.65e-06)                    (5.00e-06)
 Number of household members                            2.77e-05***                  2.77e-05***    2.77e-05***    2.77e-05***    2.77e-05***   2.77e-05***     2.48e-05***
                                                         (1.55e-06)                   (1.55e-06)     (1.55e-06)     (1.55e-06)     (1.55e-06)    (1.55e-06)      (1.34e-06)
 SIP policy                                                                          2.98e-05***
                                                                                      (7.66e-06)
 Bar mobility                                                                                                     -6.63e-06**
                                                                                                                   (3.13e-06)
 Restaurant mobility                                                                                              2.26e-05**
                                                                                                                   (9.23e-06)
 Non-school mobility                                                                                                             2.17e-05**
                                                                                                                                  (1.05e-05)
 Observations                            127,601,976   127,601,976    127,601,976   127,601,976    127,601,976    127,601,976    127,601,976    127,601,976    127,601,976
 HH FE                                                                     X
 SIP policy                                                                              X
 Weeks since first COVID case/death FE                                                                  X
 Bar/restaurant mobility                                                                                               X
 Non-school mobility                                                                                                                  X
 County-week FE                                                                                                                                      X
 Industry-week FE                                                                                                                                                   X
This table presents regression results from equation 3 and measures effect of county-level school visits on the weekly change in household COVID-19-related
hospitalizations between household with and without children. Standard errors clustered at the county-level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                                                                         51
Table 9: Effect of Social Distancing Policies on School Visits
                                              (1)                         (2)                          (3)
 Social distancing policy                 -0.279***                   -0.282***                    -0.281***
                                           (0.0236)                    (0.0236)                     (0.0237)
 year 2020                                -0.422***                                                -0.421***
                                           (0.0188)                                                 (0.0188)

 Observations                             11,307,112                   11,307,112                  11,307,112
 R-squared                                   0.712                         0.763                      0.727
 School FE                                     X                             X                          X
 Week FE                                       X                             X                          X
 Year-week FE                                                                X
 State-week FE                                                                                          X
This table presents regression results from equation 6 and measures the effect of county-level social distancing
policies on school visits. Standard errors clustered at the county-level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.




                                                                                                                    52
12. APPENDIX


12.1.   Description and Representativeness of Study Sample

   This study used medical and pharmacy claims data from employers who purchased access to

the Castlight Health platform, which provides price transparency, wellness, and other health

benefits tools. This analysis did not include the digital tools provided by Castlight Health, but

instead used the medical claims data that participating employers provide to Castlight as a way to

implement the digital tools. This data has been used in several papers by the study team related

to the COVID-19 pandemic. For each of approximately 200 self-insured employers that provide

access to this tool, the claims data covers all in-network procedures that are reimbursed through

insurance. The claims data includes reimbursement amounts, procedure codes, and patient

diagnoses. The data also includes demographic (e.g., geographic location, age, gender) and

employer information (e.g., industry). We did not have access to individual-level data, but

instead data aggregated to the year-month-state-gender-age group category level. The employers

range in size (e.g., from a few thousand employees to over 50,000 employees) and industry,

including manufacturing, government, and education.

   One potential concern is that the population included in this sample may not be

representative of the broader U.S. population. To assess differences between our study

population and the broader commercially insured population, we used data from the American

Community Survey (ACS). 2018 is the most recent year available in the ACS, and so we limited

our comparison to 2018. We limited the ACS sample to individuals who receive insurance

through an employer or union and are under the age of 65. We applied the nationally

representative population weights in the ACS data. As shown in Table A1, the Castlight

population is similar in gender, age, and geographic distribution to the ACS population.



                                                                                                    53
Table A1: Comparison Between Castlight and ACS Populations
 Study year                 Castlight (2018)  ACS (2018)
 Number of enrolled persons 5,608,888         162,136,077
 Gender, percent female (%) 50.0%             50.0%
 Average age                34.3              33.5
 Census region
  South                     40.6%             35.70%
  Midwest                   23.0%             22.80%
  Northeast                 10.4%             18.20%
  West                      26.0%             23.40%




                                                             54
12.2.   Alternative Lag Period

   Our main analysis uses a two-week lag period between school visits and household COVID-

19 diagnoses. As a sensitivity test, we also a one-week period. As shown in Table A2, this

alternative lag period produces similar results to our main analysis. When using a one-week lag

period, the estimated effect from a one-unit change in school visits on COVID-19 diagnoses

between households with and without children is approximately 0.5 per 10,000 households. This

effect is consistent, regardless of the additional controls.




                                                                                              55
Table A2: DDD Estimates on the Effect of One-Week Lagged School Visits on Household COVID-19 Diagnoses
                                                   (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)
 Log-transformed Visits
 Child in household X school visits             0.492***      0.486***      0.243***      0.485***      0.496***      0.357***      0.476***      0.458***      0.568***
                                                (0.0836)      (0.0835)      (0.0676)      (0.0833)      (0.0851)      (0.0856)      (0.0852)      (0.0852)      (0.0818)
 Child in household                             3.763***     -2.508***                   -2.509***     -2.499***     -2.666***     -2.517***     -2.533***     -2.252***
                                                 (0.195)       (0.156)                     (0.156)       (0.156)       (0.162)       (0.156)       (0.154)       (0.162)
 School visits                                  1.689***      1.691***      1.772***      1.673***       0.505**      1.748***      1.895***                   2.188***
                                                 (0.358)       (0.358)       (0.370)       (0.357)       (0.215)       (0.332)       (0.302)                     (0.345)
 Number of household members                                 2.916***                     2.916***      2.916***      2.894***      2.916***      2.916***      2.705***
                                                               (0.102)                     (0.102)       (0.102)       (0.110)       (0.102)       (0.102)      (0.0904)
 SIP policy                                                                              1.885***
                                                                                           (0.448)
 Bar mobility                                                                                                          -0.661*
                                                                                                                       (0.370)
 Restaurant mobility                                                                                                    -1.080
                                                                                                                       (1.118)
 Non-school mobility                                                                                                                 -2.281
                                                                                                                                     (1.429)
 Observations                                  124,824,681   124,824,681   124,824,681   124,824,681   124,824,681   124,824,681   124,824,681   124,824,681   124,824,681
 HH FE                                                                          X
 SIP policy                                                                                  X
 Weeks since first COVID case/death FE                                                                     X
 Bar/restaurant mobility                                                                                                 X
 Non-school mobility                                                                                                                   X
 County-week FE                                                                                                                                      X
 Industry-week FE                                                                                                                                                  X
This table presents regression results from equation 3, but uses a one-week lag, and measures effect of county-level school visits on the weekly change in
household COVID-19 diagnoses between household with and without children. Standard errors clustered at the county-level in parentheses. Coefficients and
standard errors are multiplied by 10,000 and can be interpreted as the change in weekly diagnosis rates per 10,000 households. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                                                                         56
12.3.   Differences-in-Differences by Household Type

   Our main results use a triple-differences approach that compares changes in COVID-19

diagnoses following county-level changes in school visits, between households with and without

children. This approach faces two potential threats to validity. First, our linkage of members to

households relies on the household insurance purchasing decisions. Purchasing an insurance

policy that covers all household members is less expensive than purchasing separate individual

policies. However, some households may have members, and in particular, children, who are

eligible for public insurance, for example Medicaid or the Children's Health Insurance Program

(CHIP). Such households will be lower-income than the mean household, and thus may be

particularly exposed to the COVID-19 pandemic. Second, our triple-differences identification

assumption is that families with children will be more exposed to school-based visits than

households without children. However, households with and without children may differentially

interact following changes in school visits. If school-based COVID transmission also impacts

households without children, then our results will be underestimated.

   To test the potential magnitude of downward bias, we used data from the 2017 Medical

Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). Overall, about 25% of households that have a member with

employer or union sponsored insurance also have a child on CHIP/Medicaid, and there is a clear

income gradient. While the Castlight data does not have income data, the employers in the data

are likely higher-income than the general MEPS population. In the MEPS data, among

households above the median household income, the share of dual employer-CHIP enrollment is

about 13%. If 13% of the control group is exposed to school visits, and thus mis-classified due to

our data construction, then the downward bias will still be small in absolute magnitude.




                                                                                                    57
   As an additional test of this mechanism, we decompose the triple-differences regression into

two separate difference-in-differences regressions for households with and without children. As

shown in Table A3, we find substantially large increases in COVID-19 diagnoses among

households with children than households without children. The regression constants indicate

that baseline diagnosis rates are also substantially higher for households with children than

households without children. These regressions do not include the control for children in

household or number of people in the household. The larger effect among households with

children suggests that if school-based transmission spills over to then non-child household

control group, the extent of the bias is limited.




                                                                                                58
Table A3: DD Estimates on the Effect of Lagged School Visits on Household COVID-19
Diagnoses, by Households with and Without Children
                                              (1)                (2)                 (3)                  (4)
                                           HH without          HH with            HH without            HH with
                                            children           children            children             children
 Panel A: Log-transformed Visits
 School visits                               1.837***          3.368***            1.858***             3.547***
                                              (0.296)           (0.589)             (0.250)              (0.499)
 Non-school mobility                                                                 -0.217               -1.820
                                                                                    (1.093)              (1.896)
 Constant                                    7.273***          11.98***            7.229***             11.65***
                                              (0.255)           (0.506)             (0.422)              (0.777)
 Observations                                91,251,074         36,350,902          91,251,074           36,350,902
This table presents regression results that measure the effect of county-level school visits on the weekly change in
household COVID-19 diagnoses. Columns 1 and 3 present results for households without children and columns 2
and 4 present results for households with children. Columns 3 and 4 control for all non-school mobility. Standard
errors clustered at the county-level in parentheses. Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 10,000 and can
be interpreted as the change in weekly diagnosis rates per 10,000 households. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                   59
12.4.   Alternate COVID Outcomes: COVID-Related Hospitalizations and Medical Spending

Figure A1: DDD Estimates of the Impact of School Visits on COVID-19 Medical Spending
by Week




                                                                                    60
Figure A2: DDD Estimates of the Impact of School Visits on COVID-19 Log-transformed
Medical Spending by Week




                                                                                  61
Figure A3: DDD Estimates of the Impact of School Visits on COVID-19 Hospitalization
Rates by Week




                                                                                      62
