                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE LABOR EFFECTS OF PRO-LABOR BIAS IN BANKRUPTCY

                                        Aloisio Araujo
                                        Rafael Ferreira
                                       Spyridon Lagaras
                                        Flavio Moraes
                                       Jacopo Ponticelli
                                      Margarita Tsoutsoura

                                      Working Paper 28640
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28640


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             April 2021, Revised July 2021




We thank David Denis, Edith Hotchkiss, Hyunseob Kim, David Matsa, Gregor Matvos, Sean
Higgins, Julia Fonseca (discussant), Rui Silva (discussant), Qiping Xu (discussant), Ashwini
Agrawal (discussant) and seminar participants at University of Mannheim, Northwestern
Kellogg, University of Groningen, Cornell University, Penn State, CMU-Pitt-PSU Finance
Conference, Virtual Corporate Finance Seminar, Adam Smith, UofToronto Finance Conference,
FIRS, SFS Cavalcade, Labor and Finance Online Seminar, and London Business School for
valuable comments and suggestions. We thank Xinyu Cao and Ariza Gusti for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Aloisio Araujo, Rafael Ferreira, Spyridon Lagaras, Flavio Moraes, Jacopo Ponticelli,
and Margarita Tsoutsoura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Labor Effects of Pro-labor Bias in Bankruptcy
Aloisio Araujo, Rafael Ferreira, Spyridon Lagaras, Flavio Moraes, Jacopo Ponticelli, and
Margarita Tsoutsoura
NBER Working Paper No. 28640
April 2021, Revised July 2021
JEL No. G33,J30,K0,O16

                                         ABSTRACT

Judicial decisions in bankruptcy are often influenced by the goal of preserving employment.
Using the text of judicial decisions and the random assignment of cases across courts in the state
of São Paulo in Brazil, we construct a novel court-level measure of pro-labor bias and study its
effect on labor market outcomes. Employees of distressed firms assigned to high pro-labor courts
are more likely to stay with their employer; however, they experience a 4.5% decline in earnings.
This effect is driven by wage adjustments, it is stronger for workers with better outside options,
and concentrated in periods of economic expansion.


Aloisio Araujo                                  Flavio Moraes
IMPA and FGV EPGE Brazilian School              FGV EPGE, Brazilian School of
of Economics and Finance                        Economics and Finance
Praia de Botafogo 190                           Praia de Botafogo 190
Rio de Janeiro, RJ. 22250-900.                  Rio de Janeiro, RJ. 22250-900.
Brazil                                          Brazil
aloisio.araujo@fgv.br                           flavio.moraes@fgv.br

Rafael Ferreira                                 Jacopo Ponticelli
University of São Paulo (FEA-USP)               Kellogg School of Management
Av. Prof. Luciano Gualberto 908                 Northwestern University
Cidade Universitária. São Paulo, SP.            2211 Campus Drive
05508-010. Brazil                               Evanston, IL 60208
rafaelferreira@usp.br                           and NBER
                                                jacopo.ponticelli@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Spyridon Lagaras
University of Pittsburgh                        Margarita Tsoutsoura
Katz Graduate School of Business                SC Johnson College of Business
334 Mervis Hall                                 Cornell University
3950 Roberto Clemente Drive                     Ithaca, NY 14853
Pittsburgh, PA 15260                            and NBER
slagaras@katz.pitt.edu                          tsoutsoura@cornell.edu
I       Introduction

    Bankruptcy institutions play an important role in the reallocation of production fac-
tors of distressed firms and have broader implications for economic growth and aggregate
productivity. The objective of a well-functioning bankruptcy system is to prevent the
exit of viable firms and the inefficient continuation of non-viable ones, while facilitating
the reallocation of resources from distressed firms to more productive ones. However, nu-
merous frictions tend to characterize the reallocative efficiency of the bankruptcy process,
especially in developing countries. Courts are often congested, judges lack the specialized
knowledge necessary to deal with complex cases, and ­ in some instances ­ are subject
to political influence. A friction that, especially in the context of developing countries,
has received little attention is judicial bias in the interpretation of the law. In particular,
judges may favor the continuation of a non-viable firm ­ even if doing so means deviating
from the actual wording of the law ­ in order to protect workers' jobs. Although this type
of bias in bankruptcy is considered widespread, there is scarce direct empirical evidence
on how it affects workers' employment and earnings.1
    In this paper, we study the labor market effects of pro-labor bias in bankruptcy. We
focus on Brazil, which provides a well-suited setting for a number of reasons. First, Brazil
has relatively strict labor-protection laws, similar to the ones observed in several devel-
oping and EU countries (Botero, Djankov, Porta, Lopez-de Silanes, and Shleifer, 2004),
and a judicial system often described by local observers as biased in favor of debtors and
workers (Arida, Bacha, and Lara-Resende, 2005). Second, according to the data collected
for this paper, large variation exists in the degree of pro-labor bias across Brazilian courts
dealing with bankruptcy cases; whereas some courts consistently follow the wording of
bankruptcy regulations, others routinely deviate from it when adjudicating cases, often
with the declared intent of protecting workers' employment. Finally, this setting allows us
to combine manually-collected information on judicial decisions in bankruptcy cases with
a comprehensive employer-employee dataset in which we can follow all formal workers
over time.
    We start by constructing a measure of pro-labor bias using a new dataset covering the
universe of bankruptcy cases filed in the state of S~   ao Paulo, the largest state in Brazil,
between 2005 and 2017. For each case, we collect information on all intermediate decisions
taken by the judges in charge of the case, thus allowing us to observe whether judges
deviate from the letter of specific articles of the bankruptcy code in order to facilitate the
continuation of an insolvent firm. Although these decisions are effectively pro-debtor, we
    1
    Blazy, Chopard, Fimayer, and Guigou (2011) shows that in French bankruptcy courts, "social con-
siderations prevail in the arbitration," with the preservation of employment being a key consideration.
In the US, reorganization under Chapter 11 is viewed as favoring debtors and the continuation of the
firm (Franks, Nyborg, and Torous, 1996; Skeel, 2001). Pro-labor bias is evident outside of bankruptcy
as well. For example, Cahuc, Carcillo, and Patault (2019) analyzes the impact of pro-labor bias in labor
courts in France.

                                                   2
use the term "pro-labor" because judges frequently justify them on the basis of preserving
employment. We aggregate these intermediate decisions to create a measure of pro-labor
bias at the court level.
     Using this measure, we study how pro-labor bias in bankruptcy affects bankruptcy
resolution as well as the continuation of insolvent firms and of firm-employee relation-
ships. Moreover we examine how pro-labor bias shapes the earnings dynamics of workers
of financially distressed firms. The main identification challenge we face is the potential
correlation between pro-labor bias and the characteristics of a given region or the firms
operating in it. For example, regions with more pro-labor courts could also be charac-
terized by poorly functioning local labor markets. In this case, differences in workers'
outcomes after bankruptcy could be driven by differences in the characteristics of the
local labor market that workers face, rather than being the effect of judicial bias. To deal
with these challenges, we rely on two characteristics of our institutional setting. First,
Brazilian law requires bankruptcy cases to be filed in the judicial district where a firm's
primary establishment is located. Second, bankruptcy cases in the state of S~  ao Paulo are
randomly assigned across courts within a judicial district. These characteristics ensure
firms cannot choose which court will handle their case, and the degree of judicial bias
they face is plausibly orthogonal to their initial characteristics. Exploiting this feature,
our identification strategy compares the labor market outcomes of workers whose firms
filed for bankruptcy in the same judicial district and year, and whose cases were assigned
to courts with different degrees of pro-labor bias.
     We first document how pro-labor bias affects bankruptcy outcomes. We find courts
with higher pro-labor bias tend to facilitate the continuation of insolvent firms, by either
rejecting liquidation requests at a higher rate, or converting reorganization cases into
liquidations at a lower rate. Note that this occurs despite high- and low-pro-labor courts
face cases with comparable characteristics (same size of insolvent firm) and composition
(same share of initial reorganization vs. liquidation filings), and have similar levels of
court congestion. Next, we focus on employee-employer relationships. We document
that employees of insolvent firms whose cases were assigned to a high-pro-labor court
are more likely to stay with the same employer in the post bankruptcy period. Even
among employees that eventually took a job at a new firm, we find that those assigned
to high pro-labor courts stayed on average for longer with the current employer before
transitioning to the new employer.
     After we document that pro-labor bias in bankruptcy generates higher continuation
at the firm-level and a higher probability that workers remain with the same firm, we
investigate its impact on labor market outcomes. In a perfectly competitive market where
workers are paid their marginal product and there are no adjustment costs, there should
be no effect of pro-labor bias on workers' earnings as long as workers' productivity is
unchanged. If instead workers enter bankruptcy with contracted wages that are above


                                             3
their current market wage ­ i.e. they are "entrenched" (Berk, Stanton, and Zechner,
2010) ­ continuation with the same employer should have a positive impact on labor
earnings, because it prevents a contract termination that would make wages converge
to their market level. We document, instead, that being assigned to a pro-labor court
has a negative effect on average workers' earnings after bankruptcy. Specifically, workers
of firms facing high-pro-labor courts experience 4.5% lower annual labor earnings in the
post-bankruptcy period relative to those facing low pro-labor courts within the same
judicial district. The effect is primarily driven by differences in wages rather than in the
probability of employment.
     Our findings are consistent with workers' continuation at the same firm preventing a
better matching. More specifically, in a labor market in which better performing firms pay
higher wages to their employees (Card, Cardoso, Heining, and Kline, 2018), financially
distressed firms allowed to continue under pro-labor courts might have less rents to share
with their workers relative to other employers. Consistent with this interpretation, we
present a set of heterogeneous effects indicating that the impact of pro-labor bias on
earnings depends on the outside employment opportunities of employees of bankrupt firms.
In particular, high skilled workers and workers in white collar professional occupations
are those mostly affected by the adverse effects of pro-labor bias. Moreover, we find that
the negative impact of pro-labor bias on earnings is concentrated in periods of economic
expansions and in relatively thick labor markets, while it is small and non-significant
during recessions or in thin labor markets.
     The previous results raise the question of why do employees remain with the same
employer when ­ according to our estimates ­ they could potentially earn more if searching
for a new job. We discuss and empirically test potential barriers to reallocation that
can rationalize this result. First, workers searching for a new job might be exposed to
higher income volatility. Thus, a risk-averse worker would prefer to stay with the current
employer than face an uncertain outcome in the labor market. Second, workers starting a
new search might face adjustment costs due to geographical relocation or a change in sector
or occupation. Finally, workers might decide to remain with their current employer and
earn less than their market wage if the labor market is characterized by high information
costs. We test these mechanisms in the data. We find no significant evidence of an
increase in future income volatility for workers in low-pro-labor courts. We also find that,
although workers in high-pro-labor courts are less likely to change municipality in the
short-run, these effects are small and not statistically significant, indicating most workers
find another job within the same labor market. Similarly, we find no difference in the
probability of changing one's sector or occupation in the post-bankruptcy period. We
then explore the role of information costs by using local internet diffusion as a proxy
for information frictions in the local labor market. We find that the relative decline in
earnings is stronger in areas with limited internet coverage.


                                             4
    We perform several robustness tests. First, we present empirical evidence to corrob-
orate the random assignment of cases within judicial district. We show no significant
differences exist in terms of worker, firm, and case-characteristics across high-pro-labor
and low-pro-labor courts within a given judicial district and year of filing. Specifically,
we test for differences in education, gender, age, tenure, pre-bankruptcy wage and pre-
bankruptcy earnings growth, firm size, and share of liquidations. This evidence is consis-
tent with cases being randomly assigned across courts within judicial districts. Second,
we show that our results are not explained by workers deferentially leaving formal em-
ployment in cases assigned to courts with different degrees of pro-labor bias. We show the
degree of a court's pro-labor bias does not predict being in-sample in the post-bankruptcy
period. Finally, we show our results are robust to excluding the judicial district of S~  ao
Paulo. S~ao Paulo is the largest district in the state, has the highest volume of cases, and
has two courts that specialize in bankruptcy cases.

Related Literature
    Our paper is related to three main streams of the literature. First, it contributes
to the literature on distress resolution, and more specifically on the effect of financial
distress on employees.2 Graham, Kim, Li, and Qiu (2019) show bankruptcy is associated
with large employee costs and estimate that in the US, an employee's annual earnings
decrease by 10% in the year of bankruptcy and 67% over a five-year period after the
bankruptcy. Baghai, Silva, Thell, and Vig (2020) use Swedish administrative data and
documents that financially distressed firms lose their most skilled employees, although
they do not examine the effect on employee wages. Babina (2019) focuses on entry
to entrepreneurship for employees of distressed firms. Relative to this literature, our
contribution is twofold. First we provide novel evidence on the effect of bankruptcy on
employees in developing countries, where, unlike in the US, liquidations are often the
predominant type of bankruptcy resolution. Second, we document the causal effect of
pro-labor judicial bias on labor market outcomes.
    In addition, our results relate to the literature on the influence of judges' individ-
ual characteristics on the bankruptcy process. From a theoretical perspective, Posner
(2005) and Gennaioli and Shleifer (2008) examine how judicial policy preferences affect
judges' biases. In the growing empirical literature, Bris, Welch, and Zhu (2006) examine
bankruptcies in Arizona and New York from 1995 to 2001 and find evidence that the
particular judges drawn to handle a case differ in terms of the fractions they pay out to
creditors, the length of the proceedings, and how they adhere to absolute priority. Bern-
   2
     A related literature examines the effect of financial distress and bankruptcy on firm-level employment.
Hotchkiss (1995) shows firms downsize in terms of employment after Chapter 11 bankruptcy, Falato and
Liang (2016) document employment cuts following loan-covenant violations, Agrawal and Matsa (2013)
find employment decreases by approximately 27% after bond defaults. Relatedly, Caggese, Cu~         nat, and
Metzger (2019) show financial constraints distort firms' firing decisions, and Brown and Matsa (2016)
find that an increase in an employer's distress results in fewer and lower quality job applicants.


                                                     5
stein, Colonnelli, Giroud, and Iverson (2019) exploit judge heterogeneity in the propensity
to convert reorganization (Chapter 11) filings to liquidations (Chapter 7) to examine the
effect of liquidation and reorganization on the utilization of assets of distressed firms.
Iverson, Madsen, Wang, and Xu (2020) use large corporate Chapter 11 filings in the US
and document that judge experience affects the time spent in bankruptcy, the likelihood
of reorganization and refiling, and creditor recovery rates. Canayaz and Gustafson (2021)
show that liberal judges facilitate business turnover. Chang and Schoar (2013) use judge
fixed effects to create a measure of pro-debtor friendliness and estimate its impact on
bankrupt firms. Specifically, they show pro-debtor judges lead to worse firm outcomes in
terms of firm survival, sales, and employment growth. Our paper differs from the existing
work, because it is the first to examine the impact of judicial bias in the application of
the bankruptcy law on labor market outcomes at the employee level.
    Finally, our paper contributes to the literature that explores the impact of institu-
tional frictions in bankruptcy, with a particular emphasis on the experience of developing
countries. The existing literature has studied the financial and real effects of a lack of
judicial specialization (Visaria, 2009), court efficiency (Fonseca and Van Doornik, Fon-
seca and Van Doornik; Rodano, Serrano-Velarde, and Tarantino, 2016; Iverson, 2018;
Ponticelli and Alencar, 2016), and political influence (Li and Ponticelli, 2020). Our pa-
per contributes to this literature by introducing a measure of pro-labor judicial bias and
studying how it affects bankruptcy resolution and labor market outcomes.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II we present the institutional
background, describing the Brazilian bankruptcy system and survey evidence on the
diffusion of judicial bias. Section III introduces the new measure of pro-labor bias used
in the empirical analysis. Section IV describes the data. Section V discuss a simple
theoretical framework, lays out the identification strategy and presents the effects of pro-
labor bias on labor market outcomes. In Section V.E we present a set of heterogeneous
effects to shed light on potential mechanisms behind the key results.


II     Institutional Background

    In this section, we provide background information on two aspects of our institutional
setting: (i) the degree of pro-labor (or pro-debtor) bias characterizing the Brazilian
judiciary as evidenced by survey data, and (ii) how the Brazilian bankruptcy system
operates ­ including both its legal framework and rules regarding the assignment of cases
to courts.

II.A    Judicial Bias in Brazil

   Arida et al. (2005) argue that, potentially due to its pervasive income inequality,
Brazilian society is traditionally characterized by a diffused anti-creditor bias, especially

                                             6
when contrasted with the positive view of the debtor, who is often described as a job-
creator whose financial distress is more the product of unfortunate circumstances than of
misguided managerial decisions. Numerous surveys show this bias is deeply rooted in the
judicial system. Lamounier and De Souza (2002) conducted an opinion survey of about
500 Brazilian workers in the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government.
The survey results showed 61% of members of the judiciary agreed with the statement
that a "judge has to perform a social function, and the quest for social justice justifies
decisions in breach of contracts," whereas only 7% of them declared that "contracts
must be enforced independently of their social effects."3 By contrast, the majority of
respondents of the same survey who were not part of the judiciary said they were in favor
of contract enforcement being independent from social justice.
    In a similar survey presented in Pinheiro (2003), approximately 700 judges answered
the same question. The results showed 73.1% of judges were more in agreement with
the statement that social justice justifies decisions in breach of contracts than with the
statement that contracts should always be enforced.4 The latter survey also showed the
social justice view of the judiciary is broadly shared between both young and old judges
(with a higher percentage among younger judges) and tends to be stronger outside of the
richest and more industrialized states of S~ao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Federal District, and
Rio Grande do Sul. Because the data used in our paper focus on judicial decisions in
S~ao Paulo, our setting can be considered a lower bound of pro-debtor bias present in the
Brazilian context.

II.B      The Brazilian Bankruptcy System

II.B.1     Legal Framework

    Brazilian bankruptcy law shares important similarities with the US Bankruptcy Code
by allowing for two types of in-court formal proceedings for insolvent firms, namely,
judicial reorganization ("Recupera¸ c~
                                     ao Judicial") and liquidation ("Fal^encia").
    Liquidations are predominantly involuntary proceedings initiated by one of the firm's
creditors, although a debtor that experiences both financial and economic distress has the
opportunity to voluntarily request the commencement of formal liquidation proceedings.
The procedure is analogous to Chapter 7 of the US Bankruptcy Code. Once a petition for
involuntary bankruptcy is filed with the court, the debtor has the opportunity to submit
a defense, and/or file for an in-court restructuring within 15 days. If the liquidation case
is not dismissed and the court accepts the request, a court-appointed trustee replaces
the management, and the debtor's assets are sold though public auctions, sealed bids,
or public proclamations, based on guidance from the judicial trustee. The proceeds are
  3
      Statistics from Lamounier and De Souza (2002) are reported in Arida et al. (2005), Table 8.2, p. 271.
  4
      See Table 25, question 8 of the survey, Pinheiro (2003).



                                                     7
used to repay the existing liabilities pursuant to the statutory absolute priority order: (i)
labor-related claims (capped at 150 minimum wages per employee), (ii) secured credits,
(iii) tax liabilities, and (iv) unsecured claims.
     By contrast, reorganizations are initiated only voluntarily by the debtor, and the
underlying procedures are largely similar to the ones followed in Chapter 11 of the US
Bankruptcy Code. The reorganization process is a court-supervised procedure that was
formally introduced in Brazil as part of the 2005 Bankruptcy Law Reform in an attempt
to modernize and replace the previously inefficient and rarely used reorganization-like pro-
cess ("Concordata") that basically only postponed debt repayment with no renegotiation
between parties. The purpose of the judicial reorganization process is to enable econom-
ically viable (albeit financially distressed) firms to effectively restructure and overcome
insolvency so as to preserve production, employment, and the interests of creditors.5 The
stages and the time frame of the reorganization procedure are shown in Appendix Figure
A1.
     Following the filing of the reorganization request, the court decides its eligibility based
on a set of statutory requirements. In most cases, the decision is primarily based on
whether the firm has attached the required documentation to the petition, including
current and previous financial statements and a complete list of creditors. An assessment
of economic viability is done in a later stage with the participation of creditors. If the
request is accepted, the firm is granted an automatic stay on its assets, and creditors are
prevented from pursuing their claims or repossessing any collateral for a period of 180
days.6 In addition, the court appoints a trustee to oversee the proceedings and monitor
the debtors' activities.
     Within the first 60 days, the debtor is expected to present a reorganization plan
containing (i) a strategy7 for the recovery of the firm, (ii) estimates of the firm's long-
term economic and financial prospects under the proposed terms, and (iii) an independent
appraisal report with the estimated value of the firm's existing assets. Claims with voting
rights and subject to automatic stay are grouped together according to their types: labor
claims, secured credits, unsecured credits, and claims from small businesses.8 Debt-
renegotiation offers cannot discriminate between creditors in the same class.9
     After the reorganization plan is submitted, each creditor has 30 days to raise objec-
   5
     Article 47 of the Brazilian Bankruptcy Law No. 11.101/2005
   6
     Brazilian law allows some exceptions to automatic stay during reorganization. For example, claims
originated from lease contracts, chattel mortgages and accounts receivable lines of credit are not subject
to automatic stay. However, during the first 180 days of the automatic stay, creditors holding these types
of claims cannot sell "productive capital goods" (such as production plants, machinery or vehicles) that
are deemed essential to the firm's recovery.
   7
     The proposed strategies involve a mix of debt renegotiation, asset divestitures, workforce downsizing
and any attempt to obtain additional funding.
   8
     Creditors whose claims are not subject to automatic stay do not vote on the reorganization plan but
are allowed to veto the sale of any collateral supporting their claims.
   9
     The law makes an exception for trade creditors that keep supplying the firm during its reorganization.


                                                    8
tions. If no objections are raised, the plan is considered approved. Otherwise, the court
schedules a meeting that includes creditors with voting rights to vote on the proposed plan.
If the plan is rejected by creditors that hold more than 50% of the total value of claims
in any given class of claims, the firm is liquidated. If the plan is approved, reorganization
starts and the firm begins implementing the proposed restructuring plan.10
    During the next two years, the firm is expected to adhere to the reorganization plan,
and creditors must approve any major change that deviates from the initial proposed
plan. At the end of this two-year period, if everything has gone according to plan, the
court declares the end of the reorganization period and the firm is considered to have
recovered from insolvency. Otherwise, if at any point in this period, the firm is considered
to have failed to follow the reorganization plan, the court orders the conversion of its
reorganization into a liquidation.

II.B.2    Assignment of Cases to District Courts

     Bankruptcy cases are adjudicated in state courts. Any liquidation or reorganization
request has to be filed in the judicial district that has jurisdiction over the location of a
firm's primary establishment, which is predominantly where the firm's headquarters are
located. This restriction limits the ability of the debtor to engage in forum shopping by
filing the petition in jurisdictions perceived as consisting of pro-debtor courts. The same
restriction applies to any creditor that considers filing a liquidation request.
     Bankruptcy requests are collected by a central office in the debtor's judicial district
("Distribuidor Central"), which in turn randomly assigns cases to a district court within
the judicial district. The random-assignment process of judicial cases ("Distribui¸   c~ao Por
Sorteio") is established in the internal procedures of the justice department of the state of
S~ao Paulo. Judicial districts vary with regard to how many courts have jurisdiction over
bankruptcy cases. For instance, whereas a case filed in the judicial district of Santos will be
assigned to one of 12 general civil courts, bankruptcies filed in Serrana are automatically
assigned to its one and only district court.11


III      A New Measure of "Pro-labor" Bias in Bankruptcy

    In this section, we propose a new measure capturing the degree of pro-labor bias
of courts dealing with bankruptcy cases. The objective of this measure is to capture
the tendency of bankruptcy judges in a given court to issue decisions that favor the
preservation of employment in financially distressed firms.
  10
     The court can still allow the firm to continue with its reorganization even though the plan has been
voted down. The plan, however, must have been approved by (i) creditors in attendance representing at
least half of the total value of claims in all classes, (ii) half of the classes with creditors in attendance,
and (iii) more than a third of creditors in the classes in which it was rejected.
  11
     See Figure II, where each dot represents a court in the judicial district in the state of S~ ao Paulo.


                                                      9
    To construct the measure of pro-labor bias, we rely on the text of intermediate judicial
decisions in bankruptcy cases filed in the state of S~
                                                     ao Paulo. In particular, we collected the
text of all decisions made by bankruptcy courts until March 2020 regarding reorganization
and liquidation cases filed between 2005 and 2017.12 Bankruptcy judges typically have
some discretion when making these intermediate decisions, even when the article of the
law on a specific issue is very clear. This freedom leads to instances in which two judges
ruling on the same issue and referring to the same article of the law in their decision,
make different ­ and in some cases, opposite ­ rulings.13
    One example of a legal provision where courts exercise discretion is Article 49 of the
Brazilian bankruptcy law. This article explicitly excludes from the automatic stay spe-
cific types of secured claims, including claims originated from lease contracts, chattel
mortgages, and accounts-receivable lines of credit. However, judges can deviate from the
wording of this provision by considering the collateral of these secured loans a "produc-
tive capital good" (e.g., production plants, machinery, or vehicles) that the court deems
essential to the firm's recovery and that therefore cannot be sold by creditors. In these
instances, judges often cite Article 47 of the bankruptcy law, which states that a reor-
ganization has the general objective of "maintaining jobs and creditors interests while
promoting the preservation of the firm, its social function while stimulating economic ac-
tivity." Thus, when ruling against creditors seizing the collateral they are entitled to by
law, courts routinely refer to this general objective and argue that limiting bankruptcy
protection would harm the firm's chances of survival and generate job losses.
    Our methodology proceeds in two steps. First, we analyze the text of all decisions
and identify mentions of specific legal provisions or articles of the bankruptcy law and the
civil code that judges can use to exercise their discretion either in favor of or against the
continuation of the firm. Second, for each mention of one of these articles, we read the
ruling and classify it as being either pro-labor, pro-creditor, or neutral.14 In the example
above, for each mention of Article 49 by a judge in a reorganization case, we read the
decision and classify it as "pro-creditor" when the judge allows creditors to seize the assets
  12
      Especially in the course of the reorganization process, in several instances, a court is called to make a
decision. For example, in the early stages, courts decide whether to grant bankruptcy protection, rule on
the right of particular secured creditors to seize collateral, decide whether trade creditors are allowed to
discontinue supply during the stay period, and determine if the 180-days stay period should be extended.
In the later stages, it is up to the court to rule on any creditors objections to the proposed plan, decides
on whether to uphold the outcomes of creditors' votes, determines whether any particular actions taken
by the debtor's management merit their removal, and concludes if the reorganization should be resolved
or should be turned into a liquidation.
   13
      This relative flexibility in interpreting the law was in part granted by design by lawmakers to allow
judges to decide based on the specifics of each case while adhering to the general spirit of the law.
However, at least to some degree, this flexibility has traditionally allowed judges to make choices more
aligned with their preferences and beliefs.
   14
      The data collection process involved the creation of three apps that were used by the research
assistants to categorize: (a) the outcomes of liquidation cases; (b) the outcomes of reorganization cases;
(3) the intermediate judicial decisions into pro-creditor, pro-debtor or neutral. Figure A2 in the Appendix
of the paper shows examples of the interface for each of the three apps we created.


                                                      10
given as collateral (as the law prescribes), and as "pro-labor" when the request to seize
the collateral was denied. Although the pro-labor decisions are effectively pro-debtor, we
use this terminology because judges frequently justify this deviation from the letter of
the law by referring to the goal of preserving employment in their rulings. In Table A1
of the Appendix, we provide a detailed description of the legal provisions we searched for
and the criteria we used when categorizing the decisions. It also reports some illustrative
examples of pro-labor and pro-credit decisions for each article.
    Finally, we aggregate pro-labor and pro-creditor decisions at the court level by assign-
ing a value of 1 to pro-labor decisions and a value of -1 to pro-creditor ones, and then
normalize the outcome by the total number of decisions of the judicial district (including
neutral ones). Therefore, for a decision at time t pertaining to subject s in court c of
judicial district j , our pro-labor-bias index is computed as

                                                          1
                               Pro-Labor Biascj =                      Dcjts,
                                                         Ncj   t   s

in which Ncj is the number of total decisions of court c in judicial district j in our sample
and Dcjts is the sum of pro-labor and pro-creditor decisions. A pro-labor bias value of 1
implies a court always ruled in a pro-labor direction whenever one of the legal provisions
above was mentioned. On the other hand, a value of -1 implies a court always ruled in
a pro-creditor direction. We aggregate decisions as the court-level because that is the
level of randomization that we are going to exploit in the empirical analysis. Note that
mobility of judges is limited across courts in our sample, with 84% of judges only observed
in one court during the period under study.
    Figure I plots the distribution of the pro-labor measure, whereas Panel A of Table
I report summary statistics of the pro-labor measure for the 636 courts that handled
bankruptcy cases during the period under study. The pro-labor bias measure has a mean
of 0.12 and a median of 0.15, indicating the average court in the state of S~     ao Paulo is
relatively pro-labor. Figure II shows the geographical variation in pro-labor bias both
across and within judicial districts. The upper part of the figure reports a map of the
state of S~ao Paulo, with the level of pro-labor bias in each judicial district calculated as
the weighted-average of pro-labor bias across the courts in the district.15 In the lower
part of Figure II, we report the list of judicial districts in our sample. Each dot next to
the judicial districts' names represents a court, with the color of the dot indicating the
court's level of pro-labor bias (above vs. below the median in our sample). As shown,
substantial variation of the pro-labor bias measure exists within districts, and we exploit
this variation for the empirical analysis in Section V.C.

                                         [Insert Figure I Here]
 15
      Where the weights correspond to the share of bankruptcy cases filed in each court.



                                                    11
                                    [Insert Figure II Here]

    Next, in panel B of Table I, we document how our measure of pro-labor bias correlates
with other observable court characteristics, including measures of court efficiency and
incidences of different bankruptcy outcomes. As shown, we find no significant differences
between high- and low-pro-labor courts in terms of efficiency as measured by the backlog
of pending cases or the average length of reorganization cases.16 However, important
differences exist in other judicial outcomes at the court level. In particular, high-pro-
labor courts are more likely to dismiss a liquidation request by a creditor, and less likely
to convert a reorganization case into a liquidation. We investigate the relationship between
pro-labor bias and case outcomes more formally and exploit the random assignment of
cases across courts in Section V.C.

                                     [Insert Table I Here]


IV     Data

    We use two primary data sources in the empirical analysis. First, we manually con-
struct a dataset of bankruptcy requests in the state of S~
                                                         ao Paulo between 2005 and 2017.
Second, we use matched employer-employee records that consist of nearly the universe
of formal employment in Brazil from the Relac~  ao Anual de Informac~ oes Sociais (RAIS)
from the Brazilian Ministry of Labor (MTE).

IV.A    Bankruptcy Data

    We collected information on bankruptcy requests from the electronic records of the
Tribunal de Justica de S~   ao Paulo (TJSP), which include detailed information on court
decisions related to judicial cases filed and adjudicated in the state of S~   ao Paulo. We
collected information on the type of bankruptcy petition, the identity of the debtor, the
intermediate decisions and the outcome for 6,678 bankruptcy requests filed between 2005
and 2017.
    Specifically, the electronic records contain detailed case-level information that includes
the filing date, the type of bankruptcy request (liquidation or reorganization), the judicial
district and the court to which the case was assigned, the name of the judge responsible
for the case, and the names of the claimant and the defendant. Additionally, we collected
information on any intermediate court decisions, including the decision date and the deci-
sion outcome (e.g., decision to approve the reorganization or to convert the reorganization
to liquidation). We follow decision updates to the bankruptcy cases from the time they
are filed up to March 2020.
  16
     We can compute an accurate measure of duration for reorganization cases, while the closure of
liquidation cases is often not reported in our data.

                                               12
IV.B    RAIS Data

     Information on linked employer-employee relationships is obtained from RAIS, col-
lected by MTE since 1976. RAIS is a longitudinal administrative dataset that is compiled
annually from information collected by formally registered public or private firms and in-
cludes comprehensive information on labor contracts. The objective of the RAIS dataset
is to administer and monitor access to unemployment insurance and payment of benefits
to eligible employees; therefore, firms have strong incentives to provide comprehensive
and accurate information in MTE. In addition, control mechanisms are in place to ensure
mandatory compliance with the requirements of RAIS. Based on estimates of the MTE,
RAIS includes over 95% of formally employed individuals in Brazil. We obtained access
to RAIS for the period from 1985 to 2018.
     The unit of observation in RAIS is a job entry that is identified by an employee-level
identifier (CPF) and an establishment-level identifier (CNPJ), and enables us to track
individuals over time and across firms. The firm name has been used to identify firms
filing for a bankruptcy request, using information on the debtor's name extracted from
the TJSP. In addition, RAIS includes information regarding the start and end date of the
specific job entry, occupation type, wage level, and demographic characteristics. RAIS also
contains information on the terminations of labor contracts, which allows us to identify
exits from the labor force because of retirement or death. The occupation type is coded
according to the Classifica¸ c~
                              ao Brasileira de Ocupa¸  c~
                                                        oes (CBO). At the establishment-
level, RAIS contains information on the geographical location of the establishment, and
the sector in which the specific establishment operates. At the individual level, available
demographic characteristics include gender, age, race, and education level.

IV.C    Final Sample

    Because our employer-employee dataset ends in 2018, for our empirical analysis, we
focus on bankruptcy requests filed between June 2005 (after the bankruptcy law reform of
2005 was introduced) and December 2013, so that employee-level information is available
for five years before and at least five years after the bankruptcy request.
    We begin with 4,297 bankruptcy requests from June 2005 to 2013 and use debtor names
as reported in TJSP to determine their firm-level identifiers. Specifically, for liquidations
initiated by one of the creditors, we rely on the name of the defendant, whereas for
reorganizations (that are always initiated by the debtor), the relevant entity is identified
using the name of the claimant. Based on this information, we were able to collect the
firm identification number (or CNPJ) for 2,939 ­ around 70% ­ of the bankruptcy filings,
including 2,067 liquidation and 872 reorganization requests.
    Finally, we match bankrupt firms with the employer-employee dataset. Out of the
2,939 bankruptcy requests, we exclude cases in which the debtor has no employment


                                             13
information reported in RAIS in the year before the bankruptcy request. Additionally, to
identify firms that are economically active, we only include bankrupt firms with at least
five employees in RAIS one year before the bankruptcy request. As a result, our final
sample includes 1,042 bankruptcy requests.
    Table II provides summary statistics for firms filling for bankruptcy, as well as their
employees in the year before bankruptcy. The median firm in the sample has 32 employees
and a wage bill of R$547,536. The majority of firms are in the manufacturing and the
retail sectors.

                                    [Insert Table II Here]


V     Empirics

V.A    Framework and Hypotheses Development

    Before presenting the identification strategy and our empirical findings, in this section
we discuss a brief framework based on the existing literature to guide the empirical analy-
sis. We contribute to the existing empirical literature by measuring the effects of judicial
bias in bankruptcy on labor market outcomes. We start in Section V.C by document-
ing that, consistent with previous literature, pro-debtor judicial bias is associated with a
higher likelihood of firm continuation (Chang and Schoar, 2013). We also document that
workers of firms allocated to high pro-labor courts are more likely to keep working for the
same firm.
    After establishing this first stylized fact, in Section V.D, we study the effects of judicial
bias favoring firm and employee continuation on employees' earnings. The potential
impact of bias-induced continuation on labor market outcomes is far from obvious.
    First, pro-labor bias might have no effect on workers' earnings. This is the outcome
we expect in a setting in which workers are paid their marginal product and there are
no adjustment costs. In such setting, as long as a worker's productivity is unchanged,
an exogenous shock to her probability of continuation with the same employer would not
generate a differential change in earnings.
    Second, pro-labor bias might have a positive effect on workers' earnings. For example,
in a setting in which workers are entrenched, they enter bankruptcy with contracted wages
that are above their current market wage (Berk et al., 2010). This would predict that
being assigned to a high pro-labor courts has a positive impact on labor earnings, because
it prevents a contract termination that would make wages converge to their market level.
    Third, pro-labor bias might have a negative effect on workers' earnings if continuation
with the same firm prevents a better matching between the worker and another employer.
A large literature in labor economics, for example, has documented a strong connection



                                               14
between firm performance and wages paid to its employees.17 If low-productivity firms are
more likely to continue under pro-labor courts, these firms have less rents to share with
their workers relative to other employers in the market. Thus, by remaining employed
with the same firms, workers might earn lower wages than they would have by looking
for another employment.
    Empirically, the effect of judicial bias on employees' earnings is an open question in
the literature. In the next section we present the identification strategy that we are going
to use to address it.

V.B       Identification Strategy

     In this section, we introduce our identification strategy to estimate the causal effect of
the measure of pro-labor bias presented in Section III on the earnings' dynamics of workers
of financially distressed firms. The main challenge we face is that the degree of pro-labor
bias of courts in a given region might be correlated with other characteristics of that region
and of the firms that operate in it. For example, if regions with more pro-labor courts
are also characterized by poorly functioning local labor markets, differences in workers'
outcomes after bankruptcy could be driven by differences in the type of job opportunities
that workers face. Another potential concern is selection between firms and courts. In
particular, relatively less productive firms might decide to file for bankruptcy in courts
with a more pro-labor reputation, because doing so might lead to a higher probability of
continuation.
     To deal with these challenges, we rely on two characteristics of our institutional
setting. First, as described in Section II.B.2, Brazilian bankruptcy law requires any
liquidation or reorganization request to be filed in the judicial district where a firm's
primary establishment is located. Second, bankruptcy cases in the state of S~        ao Paulo
are randomly assigned across courts within a judicial district. These two characteristics
ensure that, when comparing cases filed within the same judicial district and year, firms
cannot choose which court will handle their case, and the degree of judicial bias they
are expected to face is plausibly orthogonal to their initial characteristics. Exploiting
these features, our identification strategy compares the labor market outcomes of workers
whose firms filed for bankruptcy in the same judicial district and year and whose cases
were assigned to courts with different degrees of pro-labor bias.
     To examine the impact of pro-labor bias on employees' labor market outcomes, we
employ a difference-in-differences specification, which uses the year of bankruptcy filing
as a source of time variation, and the degree of pro-labor bias of the court assigned
to each case within a district as a source of cross-sectional variation. To exploit the
random assignment of cases, we restrict our focus to judicial districts that have multiple
 17
      For example, see Card et al. (2018) for a review.



                                                     15
courts with at least one classified as high and one classified as low pro-labor.18 Our main
specification at the employee level is as follows:


                                                     HighP ro-Labor
       Yicjk,t = i + t + jk + 1 P ostk + 2 P ostk × Icj             + Xicjk,t + icjk,t,                 (1)

where Yicjkt is an outcome for individual i in calendar year t ­ for example, annual labor
earnings ­ which was employed by a bankrupt firm whose case was allocated to court
c in judicial district j in year k . Individuals are assigned to bankrupt firms based on
their employment in the year before the bankruptcy case was filed. Our main coefficient
of interest is 2 , which captures the effect of being assigned to a high-pro-labor court
relative to a low-pro-labor court on workers' outcomes in the post-bankruptcy period.
The specification in Equation (1) also includes individual fixed effects (i ), calendar-year
fixed effects (t ), and judicial district interacted with bankruptcy year fixed effects (jk ).
Thus, the relevant variation identifying the 2 coefficient derives from differences across
workers whose employers filed for bankruptcy in the same judicial district and year, but
whose cases were randomly assigned to courts with different levels of pro-labor bias. For
each worker, we focus on the five-year period before and the five-year period after the
bankruptcy event. In selecting the timing of the bankruptcy, we use the filing date as
provided by the TJSP.
    In Table III, we formally test whether workers whose employer got assigned to a high-
versus a low-pro-labor court differ in terms of observable characteristics. The results
reported in column (1) demonstrate that workers' characteristics ­ including years of ed-
ucation, gender, age, tenure, and wage level ­ do not predict whether a worker's employer
will face a high- or a low-pro-labor court. Note this specification includes judicial-district
interacted with bankruptcy year fixed effects. Thus, the small and non-significant coeffi-
cients on workers' characteristics are consistent with random assignment of cases across
courts within a district. In column (2), we show workers whose employers are assigned
to courts with different levels of pro-labor bias exhibit similar pre-existing trends in wage
growth in the five years before bankruptcy filings. Finally, in column (3), we include both
worker characteristics and pre-existing wage growth in a single regression. The magni-
tudes of all estimated coefficients are small, and none of them statistically significant at
standard levels. However, in the empirical analysis, we still augment Equation (1) with
(time-varying) individual characteristics and show such controls have virtually no impact
on the magnitude of the coefficient of interest.19 Moreover, column (4) shows firm size
  18
     Out of the 218 judicial districts in our sample, 127 have multiple courts and 91 have a single court in
charge of bankruptcy cases. Out of the 127 districts with multiple courts, 86 districts encompass courts
with high and low degrees of judicial bias. Note that these 86 districts tend to be the largest in our
sample both in terms of judicial decisions observed (85.6%) and in terms of bankruptcy cases they deal
with (87.9%).
  19
     Specifically, Xicjk,t in Equation (1) includes the following time-varying worker characteristics: Years


                                                    16
does not predict whether the firm will face a high- or low-pro-labor court, which further
supports the random assignment of cases to courts within judicial districts. Finally, col-
umn (5) shows the liquidation share is similar among high- and low-pro-labor courts; thus,
we do not observe any pattern that the type of bankruptcy filling predicts what type of
courts the case is assigned to.

                                      [Insert Table III Here]

V.C     The Effect of Pro-labor Bias on Bankruptcy Resolution and Firm
        and Workers' Continuation

    We start by studying the effect of pro-labor bias on bankruptcy resolution. As docu-
mented in Section III, courts with high-pro-labor bias tend to be less inclined to subse-
quently liquidate a firm in reorganization or to approve a liquidation request by creditors.
Therefore, we proceed to formally examine the effect of pro-labor bias on bankruptcy
resolution by estimating the following specification:

                                              HighP ro-Labor
                             Ybcjk = jk +  × Icj             + bcjk,                               (2)

where Ybcjd is a case-level outcome for case b, filed in court c of judicial district j in year
k . The coefficient of interest is  , which captures the impact of a high level of pro-labor
bias on bankruptcy resolution. Note Equation (2) includes judicial-district interacted
with bankruptcy year fixed effects (jk ). Thus, given the random allocation of cases
across courts within a district, we interpret the coefficient  as the causal effect of our
pro-labor-bias measure on case-level outcomes.
    Panel A of Table IV reports the results of estimating Equation (2). In columns (1),
(3), and (5), we use a continuous leave-one-out court-level measure of pro-labor bias, in
columns (2), (4), and (6), we use an indicator variable that is equal to one for courts with
a pro-labor-bias measure larger than the median value, and 0 otherwise.

                                      [Insert Table IV Here]

    We start by focusing on reorganization cases that were filed in S~ ao Paulo from 2005
to 2017. In particular, in columns (1) and (2), we examine the relation between pro-
labor bias and the probability that a reorganization case is converted into a liquidation.
We find reorganization requests allocated to high-pro-labor courts are associated with a
significantly lower incidence of conversions to liquidation. The magnitude of the coefficient
estimate in column (2) indicates reorganization cases filed in high-pro-labor courts are
of Experience (defined as Age - Years of Education - 4), Years of Experience × Years of Education, and
Years of Experience × Female indicator. Note the Education and Gender variables are not included in
the estimation, because they are constant at the individual level and thus absorbed by the worker fixed
effects.


                                                  17
9.1% less likely to be converted into liquidations. In columns (3) and (4), we focus on
case length, as measured by the logarithm of the number of days between the filing of
the reorganization request and resolution of the case. We find cases assigned to courts
with high-pro-labor bias have, on average, a similar duration to those assigned to low-
pro-labor-bias courts. That is, courts with different bias levels do not seem to differ in
terms of their efficiency (within a judicial district). Finally, in columns (5) and (6), we
focus on liquidation cases. We document that liquidation requests filed in pro-labor-bias
courts are more likely to be dismissed. Specifically, the coefficient estimate in column (6)
suggests the incidence of a liquidation-request dismissal is 30% higher in high-pro-labor
courts.

V.C.1   Firm and Workers' Continuation

    In the second step of our analysis, we explore the effect of pro-labor bias on firm and
employee continuation. Before presenting the multivariate analysis, we provide a set of
stylized facts that emerge from the raw data. Figure III shows the share of firms that
continue to operate in each post-bankruptcy year, splitting the sample into firms that were
assigned to low- versus high-pro-labor courts. As shown, the share of continuing firms
is higher in high-pro-labor courts (blue bars) than in low-pro-labor courts (red bars).
Five years after the bankruptcy filing, the share of continuing firms is 42% and 32%,
respectively.

                                  [Insert Figure III Here]

     The analysis in Panel B of Table IV shows a similar result. Columns (1)-(3) report the
effects of pro-labor bias on firm continuation using a firm-level version of Equation (2).
The outcome variable in columns (1)-(3) is an indicator that is equal to one in the year
in which firms report non-zero employment in RAIS, and zero otherwise. The estimates
show that firms whose bankruptcy case was assigned to high-pro-labor courts are less
likely to exit over the five-year post-bankruptcy period. In particular, the magnitudes of
the coefficient estimates indicate the effects are economically large, with firms in high-pro-
labor courts having around a 7% higher probability of continuation in the five-year period
after the bankruptcy filing. Moreover, the results hold both for liquidations (column (2))
and reorganizations (column (3)).
     Next, we examine the effect of pro-labor bias on employee continuation with the
bankrupt firm. As in the case of firms, we start from the raw data. Figure IV focuses on
workers that are still employed with the distressed firm in the year before the bankruptcy
filing. The figure reports the share of such employees who continue to be employed with
the firm each post-bankruptcy year, splitting the sample into firms that were assigned
to low- versus high-pro-labor courts. As shown, the share of employees who stay in the


                                             18
distressed firm is higher for firms assigned to high-pro-labor courts (blue bars) than for
firms assigned to low-pro-labor courts (red bars). This difference is larger in the early
years after the bankruptcy filing.

                                      [Insert Figure IV Here]

     We test the effect of pro-labor bias on the probability of staying with the current
employer in Table V. The results are reported in columns (1)-(3) and show that employees
of insolvent firms whose cases were assigned to a high-pro-labor court are more likely to
stay with the same employer in the post-bankruptcy period. The probability of staying
is about 9% higher in the first year, 8% in the first two years and declines to 3% ­ but
still statistically significant ­ five years after bankruptcy. In column (4) we look at the
number of months between the date of the bankruptcy filing and the first separation
from the current employer as an outcome. As shown, workers assigned to high-pro labor
courts stay on average about 4.5 months longer with the current employer before the first
separation. Column (5) shows that, even among employees that eventually took a job at
a new firm, those assigned to high pro-labor courts stayed on average about 2.5 months
longer with the current employer before transitioning to the new employer.

                                       [Insert Table V Here]

V.D     The Effect of Pro-labor Bias on Labor Market Outcomes

    Overall, the results presented in Section V.C document that pro-labor bias in bankruptcy
generates higher continuation at the firm-level and a higher probability that workers re-
main with the same firm. What is the impact of higher continuation on labor market
outcomes?
    The main results from estimating Equation (1) are reported in Table VI. We begin our
analysis in Panel A by examining the impact of pro-labor bias on workers' earnings in the
post-bankruptcy period.20 The estimated coefficient on the P ost indicator variable (1 )
reported in column (1) indicates that, on average, workers whose employers are assigned
to low-pro-labor courts experience a decline of 8.1 log points (or 8.4%) in annual earnings
in the five-year period after the bankruptcy request relative to their earnings in the pre-
bankruptcy period. The estimated coefficient on the interaction term (2 ) captures the
difference in the change in labor earnings between employees facing high- versus low-
pro-labor courts. The magnitude of the estimated coefficient on the interaction term
is -0.048, which indicates the decline in earnings for workers of firms assigned to high-
pro-labor courts is 4.9% larger than the one experienced by workers of firms assigned to
  20
     We measure earnings as the logarithm of an individual's aggregate annual earnings across all em-
ployers. Earnings include wages, bonuses, tips, commissions, and allowances for commuting costs, and
contributions to social security, pension plans, healthcare, and unemployment insurance. Private benefits
offered by firms (e.g. private retirement, healthcare) are not common in Brazil.

                                                   19
low-pro-labor courts. This finding indicates 13.5% lower annual earnings, on average, in
the post-bankruptcy period. Given the random assignment of cases across courts within
a judicial district, these estimates can be interpreted as the causal effect of our measure
of pro-labor bias on workers' earnings. In column (2), we augment the specification with
the set of individual characteristics described in Section V.B. As shown, the magnitude
of the coefficient is stable when including these additional controls.

                                   [Insert Table VI Here]

   In Figure V, we explore the timing of the effect. We find that the relative losses in
earnings from facing a high-pro-labor court materialize within the year of the bankruptcy
request, and are persistent in the first five years post bankruptcy.

                                   [Insert Figure V Here]

    Because bankruptcy requests are typically followed by a rigorous restructuring process
that potentially involves the liquidation of the firm, the observed post-bankruptcy earnings
decline likely reflects displacement and wage declines. Therefore, to identify the drivers of
this earnings adjustment, we decompose changes in earnings into a wage component and
a labor market participation component. The wage component captures any adjustment
driven by changes in average monthly wages.
    The results are reported in columns (3) to (6) of Table VI. The results indicate the
differential impact of pro-labor bias on earnings is primarily driven by employees in high-
pro-labor courts earning, on average, lower wages in the post-bankruptcy period. The
magnitude of the estimate of the interaction term in column (4) indicates a significantly
larger decline of 3.4 log points in average wages for employees facing high pro-labor bias
courts. Interestingly, the estimates in columns (5) and (6) indicate that, on average,
workers facing high-pro-labor courts actually experience a relative decline in the number
of employment months in the post-bankruptcy period; however, this coefficient is smaller
than the effect on wages, and not statistically significant. We think this negative coefficient
can be explained by a higher chance of failed reorganizations in high-pro-labor courts, as
documented in the dynamic effects discussed below.
    In Figures VI and VII, we explore dynamics of wages and employment, respectively,
around the bankruptcy filling. We find the relative losses in wages from facing a high-
pro-labor court begin during the year of the bankruptcy request and persist over the
next five-year horizon. In terms of employment, we do not observe relative differences in
dynamics in the five-year window around the bankruptcy request. We observe a relative
decline in the probability of employment in the second year after bankruptcy filing. Note
that companies that file for reorganization have two years to complete their reorganization
plan. At the end of the two years, the creditors can request the liquidation of the firm
if they consider the plan unsuccessful. In this sense, a potential interpretation of this

                                              20
pattern is that reorganization cases allocated to high-pro-labor courts are more likely to
be unsuccessful.

                                        [Insert Figure VI Here]

                                       [Insert Figure VII Here]

    One potential concern with the results reported in Table VI is that lower-quality (and
lower-paid) employees are more likely to exit the sample upon bankruptcy in low-pro-labor
courts. To explore the role of potential differences in selection between high- and low-pro-
labor courts, in Figure VIII, we focus on workers who were employed by the bankrupt
firms in the year before bankruptcy, and plot the share of them observed in our data
in each post-bankruptcy year. The figure shows employees whose employer is assigned
to high- vs low-pro-labor courts are equally likely to leave the sample. We test this
more formally in Appendix Table A2, which shows pro-labor bias does not predict being
in-sample at different horizons after bankruptcy.21 Finally, in Appendix Table A3, we
replicate our main results from Table VI, excluding the judicial district of S~
                                                                              ao Paulo. S~ao
Paulo is the largest district in the state and, more importantly, has two courts specialized
in bankruptcy cases.22 As shown, our results are robust to excluding this district.

                                       [Insert Figure VIII Here]

V.E     Heterogeneous Effects

    In the previous section, we document that workers of firms assigned to high-pro-labor
courts experience lower post-bankruptcy earnings, and that this effect is mostly driven by
wages. This result lends support to the idea that, by favoring continuation, judicial bias in
bankruptcy can prevent better matching for workers of financially distressed firms. In this
section, we present a set of additional heterogeneous effects, which are meant to capture to
what extent our results depend on the outside options of workers in financially distressed
firms. The rationale of these tests is that pro-labor bias that favors the continuation
of worker-firm relationships should be more costly for workers that ­ based on their
characteristics ­ have access to better alternative employment opportunities. First, we
study to what extent the results vary across workers with different initial skill-levels and
occupations. Second, we test whether the effects differ depending on the labor market
size, the business cycle or the size of the firm.
  21
     In Section V.E.1, we document that the negative effect of pro-labor bias on future earnings also
applies within skill-level categories of workers, which additionally eases the concern regarding differential
selection of workers across courts with different bias.
  22
     These two courts are classified as low pro-labor according to our measure.




                                                     21
V.E.1    Heterogeneous Effects by Skill and Occupation

   We start by studying heterogeneous effects by skill and occupation in Panel A of Table
VII. In columns (1) and (2) we compare the post-bankruptcy earnings effects of pro-labor
bias on high-skilled and low-skilled workers. To proxy for skill, we use information on
educational attainment of the individual as reported in RAIS. Specifically, we define as
high-skilled any employee that has completed at least high-school education.

                                      [Insert Table VII Here]

    Two main findings emerge from the analysis. First, the effect of bankruptcy on
employee earnings is negative and large for low-skilled employees (about 9.5 log points),
whereas it is small and statistically insignificant for high-skilled labor. These findings are
consistent with the fact that, absent pro-labor bias, or when courts are more likely to
stick to the wording of the law, the cost of bankruptcy in terms of employees' earnings
disproportionately falls on low-skilled labor, whereas high-skilled workers are better able
to absorb the shock and find employment that guarantees similar earnings. Second, pro-
labor bias imposes additional costs on both types of workers. In terms of magnitude,
the relative decline in earnings is larger for high-skilled employees than for low-skilled
workers (5.8 vs 3.7 log points), indicating that continuation with the same employer
might be particularly costly for individuals with higher human capital.
    Next, in columns (3) to (6), we focus on employees with different roles within the
firm. We classify employees into occupational categories by exploiting information on the
occupational code assigned to the labor contract at t = -1. Specifically, we categorize
employees into Managers, Professionals, Clerks, and Blue-Collar Workers.23
    We begin by examining earnings changes for managers. On the one hand, managers
are high-skilled individuals and are expected to have better outside options. On the other
hand, bankruptcies may lead to significant reputational costs for managers by holding
them responsible for the firm's distress. This implies that in the post-bankruptcy period,
managers may encounter adverse labor market outcomes, including increased displace-
ment, occupational downgrading, and non-employment due to negative signaling or a
stigma effect (e.g., Vishwanath, 1989). The results in column (3) show that managers ex-
perience the largest decline in average earnings after bankruptcy (-11.8 log points) among
all occupational categories. This finding is consistent with labor markets disciplining
managers who were displaced due to bankruptcy, pointing to the existence of a stigma ef-
fect.24 However, the degree of pro-labor bias does not play a role in their post-bankruptcy
earnings trajectory.
  23
     Each category corresponds to the following occupational categories in the RAIS data (numbers refer
to the first or the first two digits of the CBO occupation code): Managers: 12-13-14, White-Collar
Professionals: 2-3, White-Collar Clerks (4-5), Blue Collar Workers: 6-9.
  24
     In the first year of the bankruptcy, 53% of managers are displaced and 57% experience occupational
downgrade by reallocating to non-managerial positions.

                                                  22
    In columns (4) and (5) we focus on white collar workers, which we split into two
categories: professionals and clerks. The first category includes relatively high-skill indi-
viduals with white-collar jobs ­ such as engineers and specialized technicians ­ and the
second category includes more administrative positions, such as administrative assistants.
Finally, in column (6), we focus on blue-collar workers. Two findings emerge. First, the
average effect of bankruptcy when facing low-pro-labor courts is negative for all categories
of workers, and declining with the average skill level of workers within each category; blue-
collar workers experience larger declines than clerks, and clerks experience larger declines
than professionals. However, when studying the differential effect of pro-labor bias, we
find that white collar professionals experience the largest relative decline in earnings. No-
tice that professionals are also the category that plausibly has access to better alternative
employment opportunities relative to clerks and blue collar workers.

V.E.2    Heterogeneous Effects by Labor Market Size, Economic Cycle and Firm Size

    Next, we study how the effects of pro-labor bias on employee earnings depend on
features of the economy that capture the existence of better employment opportunities.
Specifically, we focus on cross-sectional variation stemming from labor market size, eco-
nomic cycles and firm size. The results are reported in Panel B of Table VII.
    In columns (1) and (2), we estimate Equation (1) separately for employees of bankrupt
firms operating in labor markets of different size. As a proxy for labor market size
we use the total number of workers in the microregion where the employee is located,
and consider as large those labor markets with number of workers above the median.25
The existing literature has documented that adjustment costs are lower in larger labor
markets (Diamond, 1982). Consistent with this idea, we find that the negative impact of
bankruptcy on the earnings of workers assigned to low-pro-labor courts is twice as large in
small labor markets than in large ones. However, consistent with continuation preventing
better matching, pro-labor bias in bankruptcy is relatively more costly for employees in
larger labor markets, which are likely to have better outside employment opportunities.
    In columns (3) and (4), we repeat the analysis for employees whose firms are located in
districts that experience positive versus negative GDP growth. First, the coefficients on
the P ost dummy show that the negative impact of bankruptcy on the earnings of workers
assigned to low-pro-labor courts are more than four times larger in recessions than in
periods with positive GDP growth (6.5-log-point decline in earnings in growth periods
versus 32-log-point decline in recessions). Second, the negative impact of being assigned to
a high-pro-labor bias court on earnings is only present during periods of positive economic
growth, while it is muted during recessions. This is consistent with higher continuation
negatively affecting employees' earnings when the outside employment opportunities are
  25
  Microregions are an administrative division of Brazil above municipalities. They are comparable to
MSAs in the US.


                                                23
better.
    Finally, in columns (5) and (6), we split our sample of employees in two groups based
on median firm size. Consistent with existing evidence using US data (Graham et al.,
2019), we find that employees of smaller firms assigned to low pro-labor courts experience
significantly larger declines in earnings after bankruptcy relative to employees of larger
firms (11.4 versus 4.3 log points). However, the negative effect of pro-labor bias on
earnings is concentrated among employees of large firms. In other words, remaining with
the same low-productivity firm is very costly for employees in large firms, who tend to
acquire general skills that can be deployed in other firms. On the other hand, employees of
smaller firms tend to benefit from higher pro-labor protection in bankruptcy, potentially
due to their limited job opportunities outside of their current employer.
    Overall, the results indicate that the effect of pro-labor bias can be different depending
on the outside employment opportunities of employees of bankrupt firms.

V.F    Barriers to Reallocation

    The results presented in the previous section raise the question of why employees
assigned to high-pro-labor courts would decide to stay with their current employer when
they could potentially earn more by moving to other firms. In this section, we discuss
and empirically test potential mechanisms that can rationalize this finding. First, workers
searching for a new job might be exposed to higher income volatility. Thus, a risk-averse
worker would prefer to stay with the current employer than face an uncertain outcome in
the labor market. Second, workers starting a new search might face adjustment costs due
to geographical relocation, or a change in sector or occupation. Finally, workers might
decide to remain with their current employer and earn less than their market wage if the
labor market is characterized by high information costs. We test these mechanisms in the
data.
    In Panel A Table VIII, we test whether workers in firms assigned to high-pro-labor-bias
courts face higher income volatility. In column (1), we measure income volatility as the
coefficient of variation of log earnings. In columns (2)-(4), the dependent variable is an
indicator equal to one if the change in the worker's earnings over different time windows is
in the lower 10th percentile, and zero otherwise. We find no significant evidence of higher
future income volatility for workers in low-pro-labor courts, nor that they are more likely
to experience more extreme declines in labor income.

                                  [Insert Table VIII Here]

   In Panel B of Table VIII we test whether workers in firms assigned to high-pro-labor
courts face higher adjustments costs. To measure adjustment costs, we examine whether
employees move across locations, change occupations, or change the industry in which they


                                             24
are employed. In columns (1) and (2), the dependent variable is an indicator equal to one
if the worker moves to a different region (municipality or micro-region, respectively), and
zero otherwise. We find that although workers of firms assigned to high-pro-labor courts
are less likely to change locations in the short-run, these effects are small and not statis-
tically significant, indicating most workers find another job within the same geographical
area. In columns (3) and (4), the dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if the
worker changes occupations or industries, respectively, and zero otherwise. We find no
difference in the probability of changing sectors or occupations in the post-bankruptcy
period. Of course, our analysis of adjustment costs is limited to job characteristics ob-
servable in the RAIS data. Thus, our measures cannot capture non-monetary costs that
individuals associate with job change.
    Finally, in Panel C of Table VIII, we explore the role of information costs. To this
end, we use local diffusion of the internet as a proxy for information frictions in the local
labor market. We repeat our main specification estimating Equation (1) for areas with
high internet diffusion and areas with low internet diffusion.26 We find the relative decline
in earnings is stronger in areas with limited internet coverage. In areas with low internet
diffusion, workers of firms assigned to high-pro-labor courts have 8.9% lower annual labor
earnings relative to workers in low-pro-labor courts in the post-bankruptcy period. This
difference is almost 4 times smaller in economic magnitude and not statistically significant
in areas with high internet diffusion. This finding is consistent with the idea that when
information costs are high, individuals limit their search and are more likely to stay
with their current employer, even when their market wage is higher than their wage
with the current employer. Of course, internet diffusion might be correlated with other
market characteristics, and might matter only in relatively thick labor markets. Thus, in
Appendix Table A4 we study the heterogeneous effects of internet diffusion conditional on
market size. As shown, scarce internet access is particularly costly in large labor markets,
while it has a small and non significant effect in small ones. Overall, our empirical findings
are consistent with workers in high-pro-labor courts being more likely to settle for wages
lower than their market wage, due to incomplete information.


VI     Concluding Remarks

    Bankruptcy institutions play an important role in the reallocation of production fac-
tors of financially distressed firms and have broader implications for economic growth and
aggregate productivity. An important friction that has received little attention in the
context of developing countries is judicial bias in the interpretation of the law. In partic-
ular, judges may disproportionately consider the adverse effects of liquidating a firm on
  26
     We measure internet diffusion at the judicial district level based on the number of municipalities that
are served by an internet provider using the 2005 municipality survey from IBGE.



                                                    25
employees and delay the liquidation of insolvent firms, even if doing so means deviating
from the actual wording of the law.
    In this paper, we used detailed hand-collected information on the universe of bankruptcy
cases filed in the state of S~
                             ao Paulo between 2005 and 2017 to understand how pro-labor
bias affects bankruptcy resolution and employees' labor market outcomes. We start by
constructing a measure of pro-labor bias based on all intermediate decisions taken by the
judges in charge of each bankruptcy case. This approach allows us to observe whether
judges deviate from the letter of specific articles of the bankruptcy code in order to facil-
itate the continuation of an insolvent firm. We aggregate these intermediate decisions to
create a measure of pro-labor judicial bias at the court level.
    Exploiting the random assignment of bankruptcy cases across courts within a judicial
district, we document that courts with higher pro-labor bias tend to facilitate the contin-
uation of insolvent firms and of firm-employee relationships. What is the effect of higher
continuation on employees' earnings? Our findings indicate that workers of firms facing
high-pro-labor courts experience 4.5% lower annual labor earnings in the post-bankruptcy
period relative to workers of firms facing low-pro-labor courts within the same judicial
district. Lower earnings are driven by relatively lower wages rather than by variation in
employment status.
    This result lends support to the idea that, by favoring continuation, judicial bias in
bankruptcy can prevent better matching for workers of financially distressed firms. Our
analysis also indicates that this negative effect of pro-labor bias on workers' earnings is not
present during recessions, when outside options in the labor market are plausibly scarcer.
This should be taken into account when using our results to evaluate recent temporary
changes in insolvency regimes adopted by governments to mitigate the economic impact
of COVID-19.27




  27
    These changes range from extending the automatic stay periods to temporarily preventing creditor
actions against firms and suspending the obligation to file for bankruptcy under certain conditions. For
example, the Brazilian government prohibited creditors from declaring a debtor bankrupt for a 60-day
period starting March 20, 2020, and introduced a 90-day suspension for all obligations established in
judicial reorganization plans.


                                                  26
References
Agrawal, A. K. and D. A. Matsa (2013). Labor Unemployment Risk and Corporate
  Financing Decisions. Journal of Financial Economics 108 (2), 449 ­ 470.

Arida, P., E. Bacha, and A. Lara-Resende (2005). Credit, Interest, and Jurisdictional
  Uncertainty: Conjectures on the Case of Brazil. Inflation targeting, debt, and the
  Brazilian experience, 1999 to 2003 , 265­293.

Babina, T. (2019, 11). Destructive Creation at Work: How Financial Distress Spurs
  Entrepreneurship. The Review of Financial Studies 33 (9), 4061­4101.

Baghai, R., R. Silva, V. Thell, and V. Vig (2020). Talent in Distressed Firms: Investigating
  the Labor Costs of Financial Distress. Journal of Finance Forthcoming.

Berk, J. B., R. Stanton, and J. Zechner (2010). Human Capital, Bankruptcy, and Capital
  Structure. The Journal of Finance 65 (3), 891­926.

Bernstein, S., E. Colonnelli, X. Giroud, and B. Iverson (2019). Bankruptcy Spillovers.
  Journal of Financial Economics 133 (3), 608­633.

Blazy, R., B. Chopard, A. Fimayer, and J.-D. Guigou (2011). Employment Preservation
  vs. Creditors' Repayment under Bankruptcy Law: The French Dilemma? International
  Review of Law and Economics 31 (2), 126 ­ 141.

Botero, J. C., S. Djankov, R. L. Porta, F. Lopez-de Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2004). The
  Regulation of Labor. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4), 1339­1382.

Bris, A., I. Welch, and N. Zhu (2006). The Costs of Bankruptcy: Chapter 7 Liquidation
  versus Chapter 11 Reorganization. The Journal of Finance 61 (3), 1253­1303.

Brown, J. and D. A. Matsa (2016). Boarding a Sinking Ship? An Investigation of Job
  Applications to Distressed Firms. The Journal of Finance 71 (2), 507­550.

Caggese, A., V. Cu~
                  nat, and D. Metzger (2019). Firing the Wrong Workers: Financing
  Constraints and Labor Misallocation. Journal of Financial Economics 133 (3), 589 ­
  607. JFE Special Issue on Labor and Finance.

Cahuc, P., S. Carcillo, and B. Patault (2019). Are Pro-Worker Judges Detrimental to
  Firm Survival and Employment? Working Paper .

Canayaz, M. and M. Gustafson (2021). Judicial Ideology and Business Dynamics. Working
  Paper .

Card, D., A. R. Cardoso, J. Heining, and P. Kline (2018). Firms and Labor Market
  Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory. Journal of Labor Economics 36 (S1), S13­S70.

Chang, T. and A. Schoar (2013). Judge Specific Differences in Chapter 11 and Firm
 Outcomes. Unpublished Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research .

Diamond, P. A. (1982). Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium. Journal
  of Political Economy 90 (5), 881­894.



                                            27
Falato, A. and N. Liang (2016). Do Creditor Rights Increase Employment Risk? Evidence
  from Loan Covenants. The Journal of Finance 71 (6), 2545­2590.

Fonseca, J. and B. Van Doornik. Financial Development, Labor Markets, and Aggregate
  Productivity: Evidence from Brazil. Journal of Financial Economics Forthcoming.

Franks, J. R., K. G. Nyborg, and W. N. Torous (1996). A Comparison of US, UK, and
  German Insolvency Codes. Financial Management 25 (3), 86­101.

Gennaioli, N. and A. Shleifer (2008). Judicial Fact Discretion. Journal of Legal Stud-
 ies 37 (1), 1­35.

Graham, J. R., H. Kim, S. Li, and J. Qiu (2019). Employee Costs of Corporate
  Bankruptcy. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hotchkiss, E. S. (1995). Postbankruptcy Performance and Management Turnover. The
  Journal of Finance 50 (1), 3­21.

Iverson, B. (2018). Get in Line: Chapter 11 Restructuring in Crowded Bankruptcy Courts.
  Management Science 64 (11), 5370­5394.

Iverson, B. C., J. Madsen, W. Wang, and Q. Xu (2020). Financial Costs of Judicial
  Inexperience: Evidence from Corporate Bankruptcies. Available at SSRN 3084318 .

Lamounier, B. and A. De Souza (2002). Las Elites Brasileiras e o Desenvolvimento
  Nacional: Fatores de Consenso e Dissenso, S~ao Paulo: Instituto de Estudos Economicos,
  Sociais e Politicos de S~
                          ao Paulo, October, 31 pp.

Li, B. and J. Ponticelli (2020). Going Bankrupt in China. Unpublished Working Paper,
  National Bureau of Economic Research .

Pinheiro, A. C. (2003). Judici´
                              ario, Reforma e Economia: a Vis~
                                                             ao dos Magistrados.

Ponticelli, J. and L. S. Alencar (2016). Court Enforcement, Bank Loans, and Firm
  Investment: Evidence from a Bankruptcy Reform in Brazil. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 131 (3), 1365­1413.

Posner, R. (2005). Judicial Behavior and Performance: An Economic Approach. Florida
  State University Law Review 32, 1259.

Rodano, G., N. Serrano-Velarde, and E. Tarantino (2016). Bankruptcy Law and Bank
  Financing. Journal of Financial Economics 120 (2), 363­382.

Skeel, D. A. (2001). Debt's Dominion: A History of Bankruptcy Law in America. Prince-
  ton University Press.

Visaria, S. (2009). Legal Reform and Loan Repayment: The Microeconomic Impact
  of Debt Recovery Tribunals in India. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics 1 (3), 59­81.

Vishwanath, T. (1989). Job Search, Stigma Effect, and Escape Rate from Unemployment.
  Journal of Labor Economics 7 (4), 487­502.



                                          28
Figures

                                   Figure I: Pro-labor-bias Measure



                         30
  Percentage of Courts




                         20




                         10




                         0
                              -1        -.5              0                    .5          1
                                               Pro-Labor Bias


Notes: The figure reports the percentage of courts by different bins of pro-labor bias.




                                                   29
                   Figure II: Pro-labor Bias by Judicial District




Notes: The upper part of the figure reports a map showing the geographical distribution of our measure
of pro-labor-bias across judicial districts in the state of S~
                                                             ao Paulo. The lower part of the figure reports
the number of courts in each judicial district (each court represented by a dot), with the measure of pro-
labor bias associated with each court. The blue color represents high-pro-labor judicial districts (upper
figure), or courts (lower figure). We classify as high-pro-labor courts those with pro-labor measures above
the median court-level pro-labor measure. The pro-labor-bias level of each district is calculated as the
weighted average of the bias of its courts, where the weights are the number of bankruptcy cases. We
classify as high-pro-labor districts those with pro-labor measures above the median.




                                                    30
        Figure III: Continuation of Firms with Bankruptcy Requests


                1

               .9

               .8

               .7

               .6

               .5

               .4

               .3

               .2

               .1

                0
                       -1       0         1           2     3         4            5

                                 Low Pro-Labor Bias          High Pro-Labor Bias



Notes: The figure reports the share of firms that continue to operate each post-bankruptcy period by
the level of pro-labor bias.



            Figure IV: Stayers in Firms with Bankruptcy Requests


                1

               .9

               .8

               .7

               .6

               .5

               .4

               .3

               .2

               .1

                0
                       -1       0         1           2     3         4            5

                                 Low Pro-Labor Bias          High Pro-Labor Bias



Notes: The figure reports the share of employees who continue be employed by bankrupt firms each
post-bankruptcy period by the level of pro-labor bias.




                                                  31
                                          Figure V: Earnings Dynamics


                              .15




                                .1




                              .05
               Log Earnings




                                0




                              -.05




                               -.1




                              -.15

                                     -5   -4   -3   -2   -1     0     1   2   3   4    5
                                                               Post



Notes: The figure reports the dynamics of earnings in the five-year window around the bankruptcy filing.




                                                          32
                                                       Figure VI: Wage Dynamics


                                      .15




                                        .1




                                      .05
              Log Wage




                                        0




                                      -.05




                                       -.1




                                      -.15

                                             -5   -4     -3   -2   -1     0     1   2   3   4   5
                                                                         Post



Notes: The figure reports the dynamics of wages in the five-year window around the bankruptcy filing.



                                       Figure VII: Employment-Months Dynamics


                                      .15




                                        .1
              Log Employment Months




                                      .05




                                        0




                                      -.05




                                       -.1




                                      -.15

                                             -5   -4     -3   -2   -1     0     1   2   3   4   5
                                                                         Post



Notes: The figure reports employment dynamics in the five-year window around the bankruptcy filing.




                                                                    33
                            Figure VIII: Employees in Sample


                1

               .9

               .8

               .7

               .6

               .5

               .4

               .3

               .2

               .1

                0
                       -1       0        1           2     3         4            5

                                Low Pro-Labor Bias          High Pro-Labor Bias



Notes: The figure reports the share of employees who remain in the sample by the level of pro-labor
bias.




                                                 34
Tables

              Table I: Pro-labor Bias and Court Characteristics


         Panel A: Pro-labor-bias Measure
     Variables                     Median          Mean             SD              N


     Pro-Labor Bias                  0.15           0.12            0.39           636


         Panel B: Court Characteristics
                                      High Pro-labor                 Low Pro-labor
                                         Courts                         Courts
     Variables                      Mean             SD            Mean            SD


     Pro-Labor Bias                  0.52           0.28           -0.09           0.25

     Log Backlog of Cases in
                                     8.32           0.65            8.33           0.63
     2009

     Share of Liquidation
                                     0.75           0.43            0.46           0.50
     Cases Dismissed

     Share of Reorganization
                                     0.18           0.38            0.25           0.43
     Cases Dismissed

     Share of Reorganizations
                                     0.26           0.44            0.32           0.46
     Converted to Liquidations

     Days to Resolution
                                     1,747          1,035          1,685           989
     in Reorganizations
      Notes: The table reports descriptive statistics related to the pro-labor-bias measure.
     Panel A provides descriptive statistics for the pro-labor-bias measure. Panel B reports
     court-level descriptive statistics based on the level of pro-labor bias.
     Significance levels: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                              35
                       Table II: Summary Statistics


 Panel A: Characteristics of Bankrupt Firms at t = -1
Variables                     Median                 Mean                   SD
Number of Employees               32                    96                  178
Total Wage Bill (R$)           547,536              2,409,186            6,065,350
Log Employment                   3.47                  3.58                 1.37
Log Total Wage Bill             13.21                 13.31                 1.67
High-Skilled Share              0.065                 0.109                0.147
Number of Firms                 1,042
 Panel B: Characteristics of Workers in Bankrupt Firms at t = -1
Variables                       p50                  Mean                   SD
Years of Education               12                   10.72                 2.95
Female                            0                    0.26                 0.44
Age                              33                   34.97                10.76
Tenure (in Months)               25                   46.57                57.03
Log(Wage)                       7.37                  7.43                 0.67
Number of Workers              99,917
 Panel C: Bankrupt Firms by Sector
 Sector                                           Number of             Percentage
                                                    Firms                 Share
 Agriculture/Mining                                     2                   0.00
 Low-Tech Manufacturing                                371                  0.36
 High-Tech Manufacturing                               176                  0.17
 Construction                                          54                   0.05
 Trade                                                 306                  0.29
 Services                                              54                   0.05
 Transportation/Utilities/Communications                79                  0.08
 Notes: The table reports descriptive statistics. In Panel A, the table reports descrip-
tive statistics for treated firms in the year prior to the bankruptcy event. In Panel B,
the table reports descriptive statistics for treated employees in the year prior to the
bankruptcy event. In Panel C, the table reports the number and percentage of firms
by sector for firms that file for bankruptcy.
Significance levels: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                          36
          Table III: Pro-labor Bias and Employee Characteristics
                            (Covariate Balance)


                              (1)             (2)                  (3)             (4)         (5)
                                                           High Pro-labor Court
Variables                                              1


Years of Education           -0.001                               -0.000
                            (0.002)                              (0.002)

Female                       -0.022                               -0.021
                            (0.014)                              (0.013)

Log Age                      -0.001                               0.001
                            (0.007)                              (0.010)

Log Tenure                   -0.002                               -0.002
                            (0.003)                              (0.003)

Log Wage at t = -1           0.012                                0.004
                            (0.014)                              (0.011)

Log Earnings (-5,-1)                          0.002               0.002
                                             (0.004)             (0.004)

Firm Size at t = -1                                                                0.003
                                                                                  (0.011)

Liquidation Share                                                                             0.018
                                                                                             (0.054)


Judicial District ×
                              Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes         Yes
Bankruptcy Year FE
Adjusted R2                   0.82            0.83                0.83            0.49        0.53
Observations                 99,895          60,054              60,044           1,042       2,961
 Notes: The table reports the correlation of employee characteristics across bankruptcies in high- and
low-pro-labor courts. The treatment variable 1High Pro-Labor Court is a dummy variable that is equal
to one for courts with a pro-labor-bias measure greater than the median value. Column (1) focuses
on the employee characteristics, including years of education, tenure, gender, age and wage in the
year prior to the bankruptcy request; column (2) on pre-trends in log earnings; column (3) considers
simultaneously the observable employee and pre-trend characteristics. Column (4) focuses on the case-
level sample and considers the effect of firm size. Column (5) uses a court-level panel and examines
selection in the type of bankruptcy. The specifications include Judicial District x Bankruptcy Year
fixed effects. The sample includes employees of bankrupt firms in the year prior to the filing. Standard
errors are clustered at the Judicial District and Bankruptcy Year.
Significance levels: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                  37
             Table IV: The Effect of Pro-labor Bias on Bankruptcy Resolution


                                  (1)                (2)            (3)                  (4)        (5)                (6)
 Panel A: Case Outcomes
                                                      Reorganizations                                 Liquidations
Variables                             Turned to                        Log Days to                    Liquidation
                                     Liquidation                        Resolution                     Dismissed


Pro-Labor Bias                 -0.148***                            -0.088                        0.110***
Measure                         (0.056)                            (0.141)                         (0.035)

IHigh
 cj
      Pro-Labor Bias
                                                   -0.091**                              -0.041                      0.303***
                                                    (0.043)                             (0.116)                       (0.024)


Judicial District ×
                                  Yes                Yes            Yes                  Yes        Yes                Yes
Bankruptcy Year FE
Adjusted R2                      0.07                 0.07          0.35                 0.36       0.10              0.13
Observations                     1,710               1,715          699                  702       4,864              4,963
 Panel B: Firm Continuation
                                           (1)                                 (2)                           (3)
 Variables                                                    Firm Continuation {0,1}
                                          Total                        Liquidations                 Reorganizations
                                         (-1,+5)                         (-1,+5)                       (-1,+5)


 Post                                    -0.175***                         -0.254***                      -0.047***
                                          (0.016)                           (0.023)                        (0.018)

 Post × IHigh
         cj
              Pro-Labor Bias
                                         0.074***                            0.087***                      0.044**
                                          (0.022)                             (0.032)                      (0.023)


 Firm FE                                   Yes                                 Yes                           Yes
 Year FE                                   Yes                                 Yes                           Yes
 Judicial District ×
                                           Yes                                 Yes                           Yes
 Bankruptcy Year FE
 Adjusted R2                               0.17                               0.20                           0.12
 Observations                              5,149                              2,757                          2,392
 Notes: The table reports the relation between pro-labor bias and the type of bankruptcy resolution. Panel A provides
estimates from Equation (2). In columns (1) and (2) of Panel A, the dependent variable is an indicator variable equal
to 1 for reorganization cases that were converted to liquidation, and 0 otherwise. In columns (3) and (4) of Panel A, the
dependent variable is the log of days each reorganization case took to be resolved. In columns (5) and (6), the dependent
variable is an indicator equal to one if a liquidation case is dismissed, and zero otherwise. Panel B reports firm-level
estimates for the probability of continuation. The dependent variable is an indicator that is equal to 1 in the year firms
report non-zero employment in RAIS, and 0 otherwise.
Significance levels: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                              38
    Table V: The Effect of Pro-Labor Bias on Employee Continuation


                             (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
                        Stay {0,1}      Stay {0,1}       Stay {0,1}      Separation      Separation
                           [0,1]           [0,2]            [0,5]          Time         Time Within
                                                                                        Re-Employed


IHigh
 cj
      Pro-Labor Bias
                           0.087*          0.083**         0.030**         4.573**         2.482**
                           (0.048)         (0.039)         (0.014)         (1.825)         (1.215)


Employee Controls            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Judicial District ×
                             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Bankruptcy Year FE
Adjusted R2                 0.21            0.20            0.15             0.24            0.22
Observations               99,913          99,913          99,913           61,374          41,503

 Notes: The table reports the relation between pro-labor bias and employee continuation. In Columns
(1) to (3), the dependent variable is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for employees that remained
in the distressed firm for different time windows around the bankruptcy request, and 0 otherwise. In
Columns (4) and (5), the dependent variable is the number of months it took for an employee to separate
from the distressed firm relative to the time of the bankruptcy request. In Column (5) we restrict the
sample only to the set of employees that were separated and eventually re-employed in the five-year
post-bankruptcy period.
Significance Levels: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                    39
            Table VI: The Effect of Pro-labor Bias on Labor Market Outcomes


                                 (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
Variables                          Log Earnings                         Log Wage                     Log Months


Post                          -0.081***       -0.080***         -0.034***      -0.035***       -0.162***        -0.161***
                               (0.014)         (0.014)           (0.008)        (0.008)         (0.020)          (0.020)

Post × IHigh
        cj
             Pro-Labor Bias
                              -0.048***       -0.044***         -0.037***      -0.034***          -0.022          -0.021
                               (0.015)         (0.015)           (0.010)        (0.010)          (0.019)         (0.019)


Employee Controls                No              Yes              No               Yes             No              Yes
Employee FE                      Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
Year FE                          Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
Judicial District ×
                                 Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
Bankruptcy Year FE
Adjusted R2                     0.78            0.78             0.89            0.89            0.13             0.14
Observations                   747,869         747,812          747,869         747,812         747,869          747,812
 Notes: The table reports estimates from Equation (1). The dependent variable is the log of employee earnings in
columns (1) and (2), the log of wage in columns (3) and (4), and the log of employment months in columns (5) and
(6). P ost in Equation (1) is an indicator variable equal to 1 for the five-year period after the bankruptcy request, and 0
                                                     HighP ro-LaborBias
for the five-year period prior to the bankruptcy. Ij                     in Equation (1) is an indicator function equal to 1
for employees of bankrupt firms in the year prior to the filing in high-pro-labor courts, and equal to 0 for employees of
bankrupt firms in low-pro-labor courts. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The sample period is from 2000
to 2018.
Significance levels: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                           40
                Table VII: The Effect of Pro-labor Bias on Labor Market Outcomes
                                      Heterogeneous Effects


                                 (1)                 (2)           (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)
 Panel A: Employee Characteristics
Variables                                                             Log Earnings
                                       Skill Level                                      Occupations
                                High                 Low       Managers        White-Collar      White-Collar      Blue-Collar
                                                                               Professionals       Clerks


Post                            0.033           -0.095***       -0.118***        -0.048***         -0.053***         -0.100***
                               (0.025)           (0.013)         (0.034)          (0.017)           (0.017)           (0.016)

Post × IHigh
        cj
             Pro-Labor Bias
                              -0.058***         -0.037**          -0.004         -0.070***            -0.026          -0.035**
                               (0.018)           (0.015)         (0.032)          (0.019)            (0.017)           (0.017)


Employee Controls                Yes                 Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
Employee FE                      Yes                 Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
Year FE                          Yes                 Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
Judicial District ×
                                 Yes                 Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
Bankruptcy Year FE
Adjusted R2                     0.80             0.75              0.82             0.79             0.77              0.75
Observations                   92,942           647,496           24,115           88,527           187,528           440,161
 Panel B: Labor Market, Business Cycle and Firm Characteristics
Variables                                                             Log Earnings
                                Labor Market Size                     GDP Growth                      Firm Employment
                              <= p50             > p50             <0                >0             <= p50            > p50


Post                          -0.112***         -0.049***       -0.320***        -0.065***         -0.114***          -0.043*
                               (0.021)           (0.016)         (0.017)          (0.013)           (0.010)           (0.024)

Post × IHigh
        cj
             Pro-Labor Bias
                                -0.024          -0.064***         0.021          -0.045***          0.026**          -0.112***
                               (0.020)           (0.018)         (0.079)          (0.013)           (0.011)           (0.025)


Employee FE                      Yes                 Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
Year FE                          Yes                 Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
Judicial District ×
                                 Yes                 Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
Bankruptcy Year FE
Adjusted R2                     0.76             0.79              0.74            0.78              0.78              0.78
Observations                   367,671          380,137           52,053          695,738           370,567           377,236
 Notes: The table reports estimates from Equation (1) for different sub-samples. Panel A reports estimates for different groups
of employees based on skill level and occupation. Panel B reports estimates for different types of labor markets, business cycles
and firms. The dependent variable is the log of employee earnings. P ost in Equation (1) is an indicator variable equal to 1 for
                                                                                                             HighP ro-LaborBias
the five-year period after the bankruptcy request, and 0 for the five-year period prior to the bankruptcy. Ij                   in
Equation (1) is an indicator function equal to 1 for employees of bankrupt firms in the year prior to the filing in high-pro-labor
courts, and equal to 0 for employees of bankrupt firms in low-pro-labor courts. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
The sample period is from 2000 to 2018.
Significance levels: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                              41
                          Table VIII: Barriers to Reallocation


                                  (1)                   (2)               (3)                  (4)
 Panel A: Risk Aversion
Variables                     CV of Log                     P10 {0,1} of Log(Earnings)
                              Earnings
                                                       [-1, 0]         [-1, 1]                [-1, 2]

 High-Pro-labor Bias
Icj                               -0.003                0.001          0.003                   -0.005
                                 (0.002)               (0.014)        (0.008)                 (0.012)


Employee Controls                 Yes                   Yes               Yes                  Yes
Judicial District ×
                                  Yes                   Yes               Yes                  Yes
Bankruptcy Year FE
Adjusted R2                       0.09                  0.12            0.11                   0.13
Observations                     73,504                99,913          99,913                 99,913
 Panel B: Adjustment Costs
Variables                                                  Log Earnings
                              Municipality         Microregion      Occupation               Industry
                               Change               Change           Change                   Change

 High-Pro-labor Bias
Icj                               -0.043                -0.038         0.001                   -0.017
                                 (0.054)               (0.060)        (0.024)                 (0.023)


Employee Controls                 Yes                   Yes               Yes                  Yes
Judicial District ×
                                  Yes                   Yes               Yes                  Yes
Bankruptcy Year FE
Adjusted R2                       0.16                  0.17            0.12                   0.23
Observations                     89,316                89,316          89,312                 89,316
 Panel C: Internet Diffusion
Variables                                                  Log Earnings
                                 High Internet Access                  Low Internet Access


Post                                       -0.074***                             -0.092***
                                            (0.015)                               (0.033)

Post × IHigh-Pro-labor
        cj
                       Bias
                                             -0.025                              -0.085***
                                            (0.016)                               (0.028)


Employee Controls                            Yes                                   Yes
Employee FE                                  Yes                                   Yes
Year FE                                      Yes                                   Yes
Judicial District ×
                                             Yes                                   Yes
Bankruptcy Year FE
Adjusted R2                                 0.78                                  0.76
Observations                               536,000                               211,809
 Notes: Panel A tests whether workers in firms assigned to high-pro-labor courts face higher income
volatility. In column (1), the dependent variable is the coefficient of variation of log earnings. In
columns (2)-(4), the dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if the change in the worker's
earnings over different time windows is in the lower 10th percentile, and zero otherwise. Panel B
tests whether workers in firms assigned to high-pro-labor courts face higher adjustments costs. In
columns (1) and (2), the dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if the worker moves to
a different municipality, and zero otherwise. In columns (3) and (4), the dependent variable is an
indicator equal to one if the worker changes occupation or industry, respectively, and zero otherwise.
Panel C repeats our main specification estimating Equation (1) for areas with high internet diffusion
and areas with low internet diffusion. The dependent variable is log of employee earnings. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level. The sample period is from 2000 to 2018.
Significance levels: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                   42
Appendix

                          Figure A1: Reorganization in Brazil




Notes: The figure reports the different stages and the timeline of the reorganization process in Brazil.




                                                   43
            Figure A2: Judicial Decisions: Data-Collection Process
Notes: The data-collection process involved the creation of three apps that the research assistants used
to categorize (a) the outcomes of liquidation cases, (b) the outcomes of reorganization cases, (3) the
intermediate judicial decisions into pro-creditor, pro-debtor, or neutral. This figure reports one example
of the interface for each of the three apps we created.

                             (a) Extraction of Liquidation Outcomes




                           (b) Extraction of Reorganization Outcomes




 (c) Categorization of Decisions on Specific Articles in Pro-creditor, Pro-debtor, Neutral




                                                   44
  Table A1: Articles, Subjects, Categorization Criteria, and Examples
Notes: The table provides information on the articles that have been used to identify
pro-labor and pro-creditor decisions, along with specific examples that clarify the
rationale used for the classification.

 Article 6, Paragraph 3, of Law 11,101/2005: The article limits automatic stay to a
 "non-extendable" period of 180 days, after which creditors, rights to collect their claims are
 reestablished. However, courts routinely allow the extension of the automatic stay period.
 Pro-creditor Decision: Court denies extension of 180 days period.
 Example from case 0003382-66.2015.8.26.0457
 The request deserves rejection. First, because the 180-day of the stay period is non-extendable (...). The
 legislators clearly determined that (...) the suspension under examination "shall under no circumstances
 exceed the non-extendable period of 180 days after the approval of reorganization processing." Secondly,
 in this specific case, there is no exceptional situation that justifies the granting of the extension prohibited
 by Law. Thus, it must be recognized that, even under the inspiration of the constitutional principle of
 the social function of the company (...), the extension of the legal term for suspension of enforcement
 is not legitimate (...).

 Pro-labor Decision: Court allows for the 180-day automatic stay period to be extended.
 Example from Case 1007014-08.2016.8.26.0309
 One should not forget that the purpose of reorganization is to make it possible for the debtor to overcome
 its economic and financial crisis in order to preserve its source of production, the employment of workers
 and the interests of creditors, thus promoting the preservation of the company, its social function and
 the stimulus of economic activity. In this regard, (...) I extend the period of suspension of individual
 actions against the recovering party by additional 120 days (totaling 300 days of suspension) (...).

 Article 49, Paragraph 3, of Law 11,101/2005: The article excludes from automatic stay
 certain types of secured claims.
 Pro-creditor Decision: Court allows creditors to seize collateral.
 Example from Case 0001589-66.2012.8.26.0629
 Despite the (...) arguments put forward by the company under reorganization, the request for suspension
 of the execution of collateral warranties regarding the industrial plant cannot be accepted. In fact,
 considering the information that the firm's industrial plant was given as collateral in a mortgage
 loan agreement, it is important to note that a possible lawsuit is not suspended due to the judicial
 reorganization action. In this sense, this court cannot prevent the filing of a search and seizure lawsuit
 founded on the mortgage contract signed by both parties (...)

 Pro-labor Decision: Court denies creditors' request to seize collateral.
 Example from Case 0006602-48.2014.8.26.0638
 (...) the measures [prohibition of collateral seizure] (...) are in line with the purpose of reorganization.
 Its refusal may result in the infeasibility of its commercial activity and, in consequence, of its recovery.
 Notwithstanding the controversy in the country^    as doctrine and jurisprudence regarding this request and
 whether or not the aforementioned contracts are subject to [automatic stay under] reorganization, it
 is evident that a reorganization must not only overcome the economic crisis of the company (...) but
 also [promote] the preservation of its social function, besides ensuring the continuity of the business,
 the preservation of jobs and payment of suppliers, as well as generating income for the solvency of
 past suspended debts. (...) I do not deny the existence of understandings that see provisions of Article
 49, Paragraph 3 of Law 11,101/05 as excluding such contracts from the effects of the reorganization.
 (...) Thus, the damage to the company under reorganization would be evident if the requested measure
 were not granted (...) I grant the requests (...) and I do so for the purpose of ordering (...) [banks]
 Bradesco and Santander the lifting of "account freeze"(...) granting free access to the values, in order
 to guarantee the activity of the restructuring firm (...).



                                                       45
 Table A1: Articles, Subjects, Categorization Criteria, and Examples
                                (cont.)

Article 73 or Article 61, Paragraph 1, of Law 11,101/2005: The articles list the
circumstances under which a reorganization can be converted into a liquidation.
Pro-creditor Decision: Court grants request to turn reorganization into liquidation.
Example from Case 0037381-82.2013.8.26.0100
At this point, it should be noted that the State must not try to recover companies that are unable to meet
their purpose and that, therefore, do not generate relevant social benefit. Free market structures would
condemn companies in unsustainable conditions, for the good of the economic system and for the healthy
survival of other companies. In this sense, there is no reason to use state intervention, through the
process of reorganization, to revive companies already doomed to bankruptcy. If the economic system is
not interested in maintaining nonviable companies, there is reason for the State, through the Judiciary,
to work in this direction, maintaining judicial reorganizations for nonviable companies. Once the plan
is not complied with, the hypothesis that justifies the bankruptcy judicial recovery. That said, I declare
today, under the terms of article 73, IV, of Law 11,101/05, the bankruptcy of (...)

Pro-labor Decision: Court denies request to turn reorganization into liquidation.
Example from Case 1001009-75.2016.8.26.0274
I reject the request to turn this reorganization into a liquidation, since the requirements of Article 73
(..) are not present, namely: a) deliberation of the General Assembly of Creditors, pursuant to Article
42: the Assembly was not yet summoned for such deliberation; b) failure by the debtor to submit its
reorganization plan within the 60-day period provided for in Article 53: the reorganization plan was
submitted to pages 2271/2336; c) rejection of the reorganization plan, pursuant to Paragraph 4 of
Article 56: the Assembly has not yet been called to deliberate on the reorganization plan; and d) non-
compliance with any obligation assumed in the reorganization plan, pursuant to Paragraph 1 of Article
61: given that judicial reorganization has not yet been granted by this court, pursuant to Article 58,
and that the reorganization plan has yet to be submitted to the General Meeting of Creditors. (...)

Article 64 of Law 11,101/2005: The article lists the circumstances under which creditors
can request the removal of the managers in charge of the firm.
Pro-labor Decision: Court grants request to remove managers.
Example from Case 1000226-37.2018.8.26.0299
The firms under reorganization have repeatedly failed to comply with court orders and failed to present
the necessary documents for the trustee to monitor compliance with the reorganization plan. Therefore,
under the terms of Article 64, V, of Law 11,101/2005, I remove the managers of the firms under
reorganization.

Pro-labor Decision: Court denies request to remove managers.
Example from Case 1080970-34.2018.8.26.0100
Under Article 64 of Law 11.101, there are indications that crimes were committed, which would permit
the dismissal of company directors. Considering that the activity has always been linked to the name
of said partners and managers, I believe their removal as directors would do more harm than good,
as it would remove from the conduction of the activity those who have more information about the
reorganization, which could compromise the business. On this point, a conciliatory solution to prevent
further damage by the managers to the firm and the creditors (...) would be to limit their powers
(...) Even though the law does not explicitly authorize such limitation, if Article 64 of the Bankruptcy
Law grants broad powers for removal, it also grants powers to limit their capacity. Accordingly, I
determine that the managers (...) should only be able to perform management (...) acts for the legal
entities ­ notably the contraction of new obligations, the payment of existing obligations and any form
of commitment of the company's cash or reallocation of its equity ­ with the agreement of the third
manager (...)




                                                   46
   Table A2: The Effect of Pro-labor Bias on In-Sample Probability


                                 (1)                 (2)               (3)                 (4)
Variables                                             In-Sample {0,1}
                               (-1, 1)            (-1, 2)             (-1, 3)            (-1, 5)

Post                          -0.378***          -0.360***          -0.350***           -0.343***
                               (0.030)            (0.019)            (0.021)             (0.017)

Post × IHigh
        cj
             Pro-labor Bias
                                0.018              0.019               0.019              0.017
                               (0.029)            (0.024)             (0.021)            (0.019)


Employee Controls                Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes
Employee FE                      Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes
Year FE                          Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes
Judicial District ×
                                 Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes
Bankruptcy Year FE
Adjusted R2                     0.32               0.34               0.36                0.38
Observations                   299,751            399,667            499,583             699,415
 Notes: The table reports the relation between pro-labor bias and the probability of exiting the RAIS
sample providing estimates from Equation (2) for different time windows around the bankruptcy
request. The dependent variable in columns (4) is an indicator variable equal to one if an employee
is in the RAIS sample this year, and 0 otherwise.
Significance levels: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                47
           Table A3: The Effect of Pro-labor Bias on Labor Market Outcomes
                                 Excluding Sa~ o Paulo


                                 (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)
Variables                          Log Earnings                        Log Wage                    Log Months


Post                          -0.067***       -0.067***        -0.027***      -0.027***       -0.154***       -0.152***
                               (0.018)         (0.017)          (0.011)        (0.010)         (0.025)         (0.025)

Post × IHigh
        cj
             Pro-Labor Bias
                              -0.057***       -0.054***        -0.042***      -0.041***         -0.022          -0.021
                               (0.016)         (0.016)          (0.011)        (0.011)         (0.021)         (0.020)


Employee Controls                No              Yes             No               Yes            No              Yes
Employee FE                      Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes
Year FE                          Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes
Judicial District ×
                                 Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes
Bankruptcy Year FE
Adjusted R2                    0.78             0.78            0.89            0.89            0.13            0.14
Observations                  591,718          591,677         591,718         591,677         591,718         591,677
 Notes: The table reports estimates from Equation (1) excluding firms that file bankruptcy requests in S~  ao Paulo. The
dependent variable is the log of employee earnings in columns (1) and (2), the log of wage in columns (3) and (4), and
the log of employment months in columns (5) and (6). P ost in Equation (1) is an indicator variable equal to 1 for the
                                                                                                        HighP ro-LaborBias
five-year period after the bankruptcy request, and 0 for the five-year period prior to the bankruptcy. Ij
in Equation (1) is an indicator function equal to 1 for employees of bankrupt firms in the year prior to the filing in
high-pro-labor courts, and 0 for employees of bankrupt firms in low-pro-labor courts. Standard errors are clustered at
the firm level. The sample period is from 2000 to 2018. Significance levels: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                          48
        Table A4: Information Costs and Local Labor Market Size


                                  (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)
Variables                                                Log Earnings
                               Labor Market Size <= p50              Labor Market Size > p50
                              Low Internet     High Internet       Low Internet       High Internet
                                Access            Access             Access              Access


Post                            -0.119***          -0.110***            0.024            -0.055***
                                 (0.036)            (0.026)            (0.054)            (0.016)

Post × IHigh
        cj
             Pro-Labor Bias
                                  -0.039             -0.003           -0.317***           -0.035**
                                 (0.027)            (0.026)            (0.078)             (0.017)


Employee Controls                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
Employee FE                       Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
Year FE                           Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
Judicial District ×
                                  Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
Bankruptcy Year FE
Adjusted R2                      0.77                0.76                0.75              0.79
Observations                    181,230             186,441             30,575            349,559
 Notes: The table reports estimates from Equation (1) for different local labor markets based on
internet access and thickness. The dependent variable is the log of employee earnings. P ost in
Equation (1) is an indicator variable equal to 1 for the five-year period after the bankruptcy request,
                                                              HighP ro-LaborBias
and 0 for the five-year period prior to the bankruptcy. Ij                        in Equation (1) is an
indicator function equal to 1 for employees of bankrupt firms in the year prior to the filing in high-
pro-labor courts, and equal to 0 for employees of bankrupt firms in low-pro-labor courts. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level. The sample period is from 2000 to 2018.
Significance levels: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                 49
