                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE PUBLIC HEALTH EFFECTS OF LEGALIZING MARIJUANA

                                        D. Mark Anderson
                                          Daniel I. Rees

                                       Working Paper 28647
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28647


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by D. Mark Anderson and Daniel I. Rees. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Public Health Effects of Legalizing Marijuana
D. Mark Anderson and Daniel I. Rees
NBER Working Paper No. 28647
April 2021
JEL No. I1,I12,I18,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

Thirty-six states have legalized medical marijuana and 14 states have legalized the use of
marijuana for recreational purposes. In this paper, we review the literature on the public health
consequences of legalizing marijuana, focusing on studies that have appeared in economics
journals as well as leading public policy, public health, and medical journals. Among the
outcomes considered are: youth marijuana use, alcohol consumption, the abuse of prescription
opioids, traffic fatalities, and crime. For some of these outcomes, there is a near consensus in the
literature regarding the effects of medical marijuana laws (MMLs). As an example, leveraging
geographic and temporal variation in MMLs, researchers have produced little credible evidence
to suggest that legalization promotes marijuana use among teenagers. Likewise, there is
convincing evidence that young adults consume less alcohol when medical marijuana is legalized.
For other public health outcomes such as mortality involving prescription opioids, the effect of
legalizing medical marijuana has proven more difficult to gauge and, as a consequence, we are
less comfortable drawing firm conclusions. Finally, it is not yet clear how legalizing marijuana
for recreational purposes will affect these and other important public health outcomes. We will be
able to draw stronger conclusions when more post-treatment data are collected in states that
have recently legalized recreational marijuana.


D. Mark Anderson
Department of Agricultural Economics & Economics
Montana State University
P.O. Box 172920
Bozeman, MT 59717
and NBER
dwight.anderson@montana.edu

Daniel I. Rees
Department of Economics
University of Colorado at Denver
Campus Box 181
Denver, CO 80217
and NBER
Daniel.Rees@ucdenver.edu
                                                    1. Introduction

         Figure 1 shows the number of articles related to the public health consequences of legalizing

marijuana appearing in economics journals and leading public policy, public health, and medical

journals during the period 2013-2020. Only 4 articles on this topic were published in 2013. By the

next year, the total count had more than doubled. By 2020, there were over 140 published articles

relating to the legalization of marijuana and public health. 1

         Clearly, interest in the public health consequences of marijuana legalization, at least among

academics, is not waning, nor does it seem likely to wane any time soon. One reason for this

continued interest is that policymakers and voters have been very active on the marijuana

legalization front. During the period 2010-2020, 23 state medical marijuana laws (MMLs) went into

effect and 12 state recreational marijuana laws (RMLs) went into effect. According to recent public-

opinion polls, two out of three Americans favor the legalization of marijuana (Gurley 2019; Lopez

2019). 2 Given this level of support, it seems likely that more states will legalize marijuana in

upcoming years. Several U.S. senators have recently said that they will push to pass a marijuana

reform bill in 2021 to end the federal prohibition. (Nunley 2021).

         Another reason why this literature has been growing so rapidly is that a wide variety of

public health outcomes are readily available at the state-year level. Moreover, measuring MMLs

(and, to a lesser extent RMLs) appears, at first blush, to be straightforward: the use of marijuana for

medical purposes is either legal or it is not, allowing researchers to estimate standard difference-in-

differences regression models without having to contend with the fact that not all MMLs are created



1The counts in Figure 1 are based on the journals listed in Combes and Linnemer (2010), the American Journal of Health
Economics, American Journal of Public Health, Pediatrics, Health Affairs, JAMA, JAMA Internal Medicine, JAMA Psychiatry, and
JAMA Pediatrics.
2 Americans also now perceive marijuana as less harmful than alcohol and most other drugs (De Pinto 2019). Support

for legalizing marijuana has been steadily growing since the late 1990s (Jones 2019).


                                                              1
equal. When deciding which studies to include in this review and which results are credible, we pay

special attention to whether the authors carefully thought about how best to measure legalization

and its effects. We also pay close attention to how much identifying variation is available. Too

often in this literature, only a few policy changes can be leveraged, raising the possibility of spurious

or non-generalizable estimates.

        Producing accurate, unbiased estimates of the effects of marijuana legalization is of obvious

importance to the making of sound policy. For instance, although the initial push to legalize the use

of marijuana for medicinal purposes was not in response to the opioid epidemic, several studies have

produced credible evidence of a negative relationship between MMLs and deaths involving opioids

(Bachhuber et al. 2014; Powell et al. 2018), and politicians across the ideological spectrum have

referred to these studies when explaining their support for legalizing both medical and recreational

marijuana (Sfondeles 2018; Wang 2018; Taylor 2019). Not only do published estimates appear to

inform the complicated process of crafting policy, but decisions at the state and local levels

ultimately determine whether legalization affects just a small portion of the population--for

instance, those who are suffering from cancer or diseases that affect the immune system (e.g.,

multiple sclerosis)--or whether it means that everyone over 21 years of age gains access.

        If producing accurate estimates is important, then interpreting and conveying these estimates

to a wider audience is equally important. Most policymakers have never heard of a difference-in-

differences regression model, have no idea what an event study is, and do not care whether state-

specific linear time trends were included on the right-hand side of the estimating equation. They

count on the academic community to effectively communicate which studies should be taken

seriously and which should be ignored. Given the large (and growing) number of studies on the

legalization of marijuana, and the fact that many of these studies appear in the medical and public




                                                    2
health literatures (which place less emphasis on credible causal identification strategies), the role of

interpreter has taken on added significance.

         We begin our review of the literature by providing readers with some background

information and institutional details on MMLs and RMLs. We then discuss the effects of

legalization on consumption and price. The subsequent six sections correspond to what we consider

to be the most pressing public health issues related to legalization. Specifically, based on published

research and a handful of notable (and publicly available) working papers, we try to gauge the effects

of legalization on the following outcomes:



                  1. Youth marijuana use

                  2. The use of other substances, including alcohol, opioids, and tobacco

                  3. Mental health

                  4. Traffic fatalities

                  5. Workplace health

                  6. Crime



         For each of these outcomes, we provide a table summarizing results from the relevant

publications.3 These tables include information on the data and identification strategy used, the

main findings, and any important heterogeneity by type of law (e.g., MML vs. RML) or affected

group (e.g., teenagers vs. adults). Our goal is to, as best we can, avoid phrases such as "the evidence




3In the tables provided below, we generally avoid listing unpublished working papers, but make the following three
exceptions: Dills et al. (2017), Hollingsworth et al. (2020), Smart and Doremus (2021). Our sense is that these papers
have already proven to be as influential as many of the published works we cite. Smart and Doremus (2021) is an
updated version of the previously circulated paper by Smart (2015).

                                                           3
is inconclusive" and the "jury is still out" while still being careful not to overreach. The final section

summarizes what we know and provides direction for future research.



                                            2. Background

        California became the first state to legalize medical marijuana in 1996, when voters passed

the Compassionate Use Act. Under this Act, patients, upon recommendation from a physician, can

possess and cultivate marijuana for medicinal use without fear of being arrested or fined. Patients

also have the option of designating a "primary caregiver," who can legally possess and cultivate

marijuana on their behalf.

        Since 1996, 35 additional states and the District of Columbia have legalized medical

marijuana. The strictest MMLs prohibit home cultivation and require that patients have a serious

health condition (e.g., Alzheimer's, cancer, HIV/AIDS, or multiple sclerosis); the only legal rout to

obtaining marijuana is through state-licensed dispensaries, which are highly regulated and limited in

number. The laxest MMLs permit home cultivation, allow patients to register based on medical

conditions that cannot be objectively confirmed (e.g., chronic pain or nausea), and place fewer

restrictions on dispensaries.

        Colorado and Washington passed RMLs in November 2012, but the first recreational

dispensaries in these states did not open until 2014 (Bush 2014; Ingold 2014). To date, a total of 15

states and the District of Columbia have passed RMLs, and voters in several other states appear

poised to legalize the use of marijuana for recreational purposes (McNamara 2020). In Table 1, we

report the effective dates for MMLs and RMLs adopted through 2021. Unlike MMLs, RMLs do not

require a doctor's recommendation, nor do they require registration with state authorities;

possession of a limited amount of marijuana (e.g., one or two ounces) by anyone 21 years of age or

older is legal and purchases of marijuana can be made at recreational dispensaries simply by showing

                                                    4
proof of age; residence within the state is not required. All but three RMLs allow marijuana to be

grown at home.4



2.1. The role of marijuana dispensaries and how (not) to measure their effect

         Dispensaries are an important feature of the medical and recreational marijuana landscape,

but researchers have struggled with how to measure their influence. 5 Anderson et al. (2013) used

data at the state-year level and a simple MML indicator (equal to 1 if the state had passed a MML

and equal to 0 otherwise) on the right-hand-side of a difference-in-differences (DD) regression.

This approach was criticized by Pacula et al. (2013, 2015), who, instead of using a single indicator,

distinguished between MMLs that explicitly allowed dispensaries and those that did not. Pacula et

al. (2013) argued that the opening of "legally protected" dispensaries facilitated access to, and the use

of, marijuana. Subsequent researchers have taken up this same argument, including Pacula and

Sevigny (2014), Powell et al. (2018), and Hollingsworth et al. (2020).

         Our view, however, is that focusing on the legal status of dispensaries is almost guaranteed

to produce misleading estimates. Comparing the medical marijuana programs in Colorado and New

Jersey, both of which were coded by Pacula et al. (2013) as having legally protected dispensaries,

illustrates the problem with adopting this focus.

         Before the "Colorado green rush" in the summer of 2009, two dozen medical marijuana

dispensaries were operating in Colorado, serving approximately 5,000 patients (Warner 2009); two

years later, hundreds of new dispensaries had opened and almost 120,000 patients were registered



4 In Illinois, New Jersey, and Washington, home cultivation of recreational marijuana is prohibited. In Washington,
D.C., home cultivation is allowed, but its RML prohibits the exchange of money, goods, or services for marijuana;
transfers of up to an ounce of marijuana, however, are legal.
5 The term "dispensary" refers to stores that are only allowed to sell to qualified medical marijuana patients and to stores

that sell marijuana for recreational use.


                                                             5
with the state (Schuermeyer et al. 2014). 6 By the end of 2014, immediately before recreational sales

began, medical marijuana patients in Colorado were being served by roughly 300 to 400 dispensaries

(Schuermeyer et al. 2014; Mitchell 2018).

         In New Jersey, enrollment in the medical marijuana program was initially restricted to

patients suffering from a specific, "debilitating" illness and the scale of the program was much

smaller than in Colorado. 7 The first New Jersey dispensary opened in December of 2012. Two

years later, only two dispensaries were in operation and fewer than 4,000 patients were registered

with the state; three years later, 5 dispensaries were in operation and fewer than 7,000 patients had

registered. 8 In 2017, the year before the medical marijuana program was expanded (Corasaniti

2018), there were still only 5 dispensaries operating in New Jersey, serving a total of 24,000

registered patients.

         Lumping the Colorado and New Jersey medical marijuana programs into one category (i.e.,

dispensaries legally protected) plasters over their stark differences in scale. It also ignores the fact

that quasi-legal dispensaries (often called clinics, clubs, co-ops, collectives, or compassion centers)

became commonplace in states such as Michigan, Montana, Oregon, and Washington after the

Ogden memorandum was issued in October of 2009 (Haskell 2010; Johnson and Korn 2010;

Keeping 2010; Rosevear 2010; Volz, 2010; Martin 2011; Crombie 2012; Smith 2020). 9 All of these


6 Data on registered medical marijuana patients comes from the Colorado Department of Public Health and

Environment (https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/cdphe/medical-marijuana-statistics-and-data).
7According to rules promulgated in November of 2011 by the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services,
qualifying conditions included amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig's disease), cancer, HIV/AIDS, glaucoma,
multiple sclerosis, seizure disorder, and severe muscle spasms.

8 Data on registered medical marijuana patients comes from the New Jersey Department of Health

(https://www.nj.gov/health/medicalmarijuana/).

9 Under federal law, it is illegal to use, possess, cultivate, or sell marijuana. However, the Ogden memorandum, issued
on October 19, 2009, directed United States attorneys not to "focus federal resources...on individuals whose actions are
in clear and unambiguous compliance with existing state laws providing for the medical use of marijuana" (United States
Department of Justice Archives 2017).


                                                           6
states were coded by Pacula et al. (2013) as not providing legal protections to dispensaries, yet their

enrollment rates (i.e., registered medical marijuana patients per 100,000 population) were much

higher than in states with state-licensed dispensaries such as Connecticut, Delaware, and New Jersey

(Williams et al. 2016). 10 It is difficult to believe that access to marijuana (and, by extension, diversion

from the medicinal to the recreational markets) was somehow more restricted in Montana--where, at

its height, almost 3 percent of the population participated in the medical marijuana program--than in

New Jersey. Even after the 2017 expansion of its medical marijuana program, only 0.6 percent of

New Jersey residents were registered patients (Maziarz 2019).



2.2. Alternative methods of distinguishing between MMLs

         Researchers interested in distinguishing between types of MMLs have to contend with the

fact that there is simply no data on quasi-legal dispensaries in early adopting states such as Michigan,

Montana, Oregon, and Washington. We do not know precisely when the first dispensaries opened

in these states, nor do we know how many patients they served or how much product was

dispensed, let alone how much was diverted to the recreational market.

         Anderson et al. (2013) responded to this lack of data by distinguishing between two types of

medical marijuana states: those that prohibited collective cultivation, also known as "group

growing," and those that did not. These authors argued that by limiting caregivers to one patient

and prohibiting them from establishing clinics, clubs, or collectives, states in the first category could




10Williams et al. (2016) compared enrollment rates as of October 2014 in "non-medical" versus "medicalized"
programs. The first category included states such as California, Colorado, Oregon, Michigan, Montana, and
Washington; the second category was entirely composed of programs that established licensed dispensaries (Connecticut,
Delaware, Illinois, New Jersey, and Washington D.C.). These authors found that enrollment rates in medicalized
programs were, on average, one-twentieth of those in nonmedical programs (58 per 100,000 population versus 1,030 per
100,000 population).


                                                          7
more readily enforce possession limits and identify illegal suppliers. 11 They found that the (negative)

relationship between MMLs and traffic fatalities was strongest in states that permitted collective

cultivation. 12 Smart and Doremus (2021) took a similar tack when estimating the effects of MMLs

on youth marijuana use, distinguishing between states that allowed caregivers to serve multiple

patients and those that did not.

         Powell et al. (2018) distinguished between states that passed MMLs before 2010 and those

that legalized medical marijuana during the period 2010-2013, arguing that the Ogden memo

encouraged state lawmakers in the later-adopting states to impose stricter regulations. In practice,

the pre- and post-2010 distinction roughly corresponds to the collective cultivation distinction used

by Anderson et al. (2013). Every state that Anderson et al. (2013) described as allowing collective

cultivation passed their MML prior to 2010; every MML adopted from 2010 to 2013 prohibited

home cultivation. 13

         There is much less heterogeneity across RMLs than MMLs. All but three recreational

marijuana states (Illinois, New Jersey, and Washington) allow home cultivation. In Washington,

more than a year passed between the passage of the law and when the first recreational dispensaries

opened. By contrast, existing medical marijuana dispensaries in Illinois were allowed to sell to



11Specifically, Anderson et al. (2013) categorized 6 states (Alaska, Hawaii, Maine, New Jersey, New Mexico, and
Vermont) and the District of Columbia as prohibiting collective cultivation or prohibiting home cultivation altogether.
Eight states were put in the collective cultivation category (California, Colorado, Michigan, Montana, Nevada, Oregon,
Rhode Island, and Washington). Williams et al. (2016) described the programs in Alaska, Hawaii, Maine, New Mexico,
and Vermont as "non-medical," but 2014 enrollment rates in these states were lower than in California, Colorado,
Michigan, Oregon, and Washington. Enrollment rates in Montana plunged in 2011 after SB 423 was enacted, which
replaced Montana's Medical Marijuana Act with "new requirements for cultivation, manufacture, and possession of
marijuana for use by people with debilitating medical conditions" (O'Connell 2012, p. 1).

12Sabia et al. (2017) found that the (negative) relationship between MMLs and body weight was strongest in states that
permitted collective cultivation.
13Home growing is allowed in Massachusetts under "specific hardship cases," but as of October of 2014, there were
fewer than 200 certified patients in the entire state (https://www.mass.gov/lists/medical-use-of-marijuana-program-
monthly-dashboards#2014-dashboards-).


                                                           8
recreational customers immediately after the law went into effect on January 1, 2020 (Berg 2020).

Clearly, it is important to distinguish between when the law came into effect and the official start of

sales in recreational marijuana states. However, given that home cultivation is allowed in all but

three of these states, the possibility that supply increased before recreational sales began should not

be dismissed.



                               3. Legalization, Consumption, and Price

3.1. Marijuana Consumption

        In theory, the legalization of marijuana should increase both its supply and demand,

unambiguously leading to an increase in consumption. Estimating the effect of legalization on

consumption is, however, complicated by data availability. At least three national surveys provide

estimates of marijuana use among American teenagers over time (Monitoring the Future, the

National Survey on Drug Use and Health, and the Youth Risk Behavior Survey), but only two, the

National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) and, more recently, the Behavioral Risk Factor

Surveillance System (BRFSS), ask adults about their marijuana use.

        Studies using NSDUH data to estimate of the effect of legalization on the use of marijuana

by adults include Harper et al. (2012), Wen et al. (2015), and Hollingsworth et al. (2020). It should

be noted, however, that the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

(SAMHSA) is not allowing access to the pre-2002 NSDUH microdata due to a change in survey

design, precluding researchers from examining the effects of legalization in early-adopting states

such as California, Colorado, Oregon, and Washington.14 Presumably, the effect of legalizing



14Starting in 2002, NSDUH respondents were compensated $30, leading to a marked increase in participation rates.
Due to this development and a change in sample weighting procedures, SAMHSA claims that data collected from 2002
and beyond cannot be validly compared to pre-2002 data (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Data Archive n.d.).


                                                        9
medical marijuana on adult use was larger in these states than in later-adopting states with stricter,

more medicalized programs and fewer patients.

           Adopting a DD approach and state-level data from the NSDUH's Small Area Estimation

(SAE) files for the period 2002-2009, Harper et al. (2012) found no evidence of a relationship

between MMLs and marijuana consumption among adults. By contrast, using a similar empirical

approach and data from the SAE files for the period 2001-2017, Hollingsworth et al. (2020) found

that MMLs were associated with a 4 to 7 percent increase in past-month adult marijuana use, while

recreational sales were associated with a 30 percent increase in past-month adult marijuana use.

Finally, using data from the restricted-access individual-level NSDUH data for the period 2004-

2012, Wen et al. (2015) found that MMLs were associated with a 14 percent increase in past-month

adult marijuana use.

           In 2016, BRFSS surveys began including a marijuana use question in their "optional

module," which states can elect to use.15 States, however, have been allowed to tack on their own

"state-added" questions to the survey for over a decade (Everson et al. 2019), which are not edited

or evaluated by the CDC (Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion 2020). Using BRFSS

data at the individual-month level, Ambrose et al. (forthcoming) examined the effect of recreational

dispensaries on marijuana use among adults in Washington state. They found that a 33 percent

reduction in driving time to the nearest recreational dispensary (e.g., from 30 to 20 minutes) was

associated with a 5 percent increase in the probability of past-month marijuana use among

individuals ages 18 and over. For young adults (i.e., 18- through 26-year-olds), a 33 percent

reduction in driving time was associated with a 9 percent increase in the probability of past-month

marijuana use.



15   As of 2019, only 13 states asked BRFSS respondents about their marijuana use (Everson et al. 2019).


                                                            10
           As an alternative to self-reports, Chu (2014) used data on arrests for marijuana possession as

an outcome, which are available at the city level from the FBI's Uniform Crime Reports (UCR).

Among male adults for the period 1988-2008, he found that MML-adoption was associated with a 9-

12 percent increase in the ratio of marijuana to total arrests and a 14-16 percent increase in the ratio

of marijuana to drug-possession arrests. 16

           Conyers and Ayres (2020) leveraged a unique natural experiment to assess the effects of

medical marijuana dispensaries on marijuana overuse. In August of 2012, licenses for medical

marijuana dispensaries in Arizona were allocated based on the results of a lottery conducted by the

Department of Health Services. Lottery winners were allowed to open a dispensary, while losers

were forced to wait. Conyers and Ayres (2020) found that emergency department (ED) visits

involving marijuana went up among residents living nearby newly opened dispensaries. After 4

years, ED visits involving marijuana were 45 percent higher among residents of zip codes with newly

opened dispensaries as compared to residents of zip codes without. The authors noted, however,

that residents could have traveled between zip codes to purchase marijuana, which likely biased this

estimate toward zero.



3.2. Price

           The effect of legalization on the price of marijuana depends on whether the supply response

is larger than the demand response (or vice versa). Anderson et al. (2013) examined the effect of

MMLs on state-level prices using data from High Times magazine for the period 1990-2011. Each

issue of High Times contains a section, "Trans High Market Quotations," in which readers from

across the country provide information (e.g., price, amount purchased, and strain) on their marijuana



16   Chu (2015) found similar results when he focused on the period 1992-2011.


                                                           11
purchases. These authors found that MML adoption was associated with a 25-30 percent reduction

in the median per-ounce price of high-quality marijuana (e.g., high-grade Californian sinsemilla) in

the 4th full year after legalization, which suggests the supply response to legalization outweighs the

demand response. Anderson et al. (2013), however, only observed an average of 7.5 purchases per

state-year and could not distinguish between illegal transactions and sales made at medical marijuana

dispensaries. 17

         The reduction in price documented by Anderson et al. (2013) is consistent with complaints

from law enforcement authorities of large-scale diversion from the medicinal to the recreational

market in early-adopting states (Wagner and Dolan 2012; Light et al. 2015; Wong et al. 2016; Flaccus

2018). 18 There is no evidence, at least to our knowledge, of large-scale diversion in late-adopting

states with strict controls on dispensaries, growers, and patients.



                                 4. Legalization and Youth Marijuana Use

         During the 1970s, 12 states decriminalized marijuana, reducing criminal sanctions for

possessing small amounts of marijuana intended for personal consumption (Model 1993). Although

early research produced little evidence that decriminalization affected youth marijuana use, these


17The High Times data do not distinguish between purchases from dispensaries and purchases from dealers on the street,
but it is not clear whether law enforcement treated these types of purchases differently. According to Hunt and Miles
(2015, p. 177):

         While laws in the early years were clear about home cultivation, they were silent or ambiguous about
         the legality of obtaining marijuana from third-party vendors, such as dispensaries or collective
         arrangements. The silence in the laws made the lines between legal medical markets and illegal
         recreational markets blurry, and the ambiguity led to significant confusion and attention by law
         enforcement.

Anderson et al. (2013) compared High Times price data for 2011-2012 with price data posted online by 84 dispensaries
across 7 states. In California, Michigan, Nevada, and Washington, the prices charged by dispensaries were statistically
equivalent to those reported in High Times. In Arizona, Colorado, and Oregon, the prices charged by dispensaries were
significantly lower than those reported in High Times.

18There is also evidence that the potency of marijuana seized by law enforcement officials increased in these states
(Sevigny et al. 2014).

                                                           12
studies were generally based on research designs that cannot be considered credible from a causal

perspective. 19 More recently, using data from Monitoring the Future for the period 1977-2015, Dills

et al. (2017) found no evidence to suggest that decriminalization encourages marijuana use among

teenagers.20

            Today, marijuana use among 8th and 10th graders appears to be on the rise, and organizations

such as the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) are concerned that legalization is contributing to

this phenomenon (Zimlich 2019). Even as support for legalizing marijuana for medicinal and

recreational purposes grows (De Pinto 2019; Dezenski 2020), the AAP remains firm in its

opposition, citing evidence that marijuana use adversely affects adolescent brain development,

particularly areas of the prefrontal cortex, which control judgment and decision-making (AAP 2015,

Zimlich 2019).

            Table 2 summarizes the literature attempting to gauge the relationship between marijuana

legalization and youth marijuana use. With one exception, the studies described in Table 2 employ a

DD empirical strategy, where identification is based on within-state variation in legalization. 21 Half

of the 12 studies listed in Table 2 used data from the Youth Risk Behavior Surveys (YRBS), four

used data from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), two used data from the

National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97), two used data from the Treatment Episode

Data Set (TEDS), and one used data from Monitoring the Future (MTF). Among the survey-based

data sets (YRBS, NSDUH, NLSY97, and MTF), the YRBS is arguably preferred because of its


19   See MacCoun et al. (2009) for a review of these studies.

20Unlike previous researchers, Dills et al. (2017) also leveraged policy variation from a second wave of decriminalization,
which began with Nevada in 2002. Currently, 26 states have decriminalized the possession of marijuana (NORML
2021).
21 Table 2 does not list studies that only report results from single-state analyses (e.g., Lynne-Landsman et al. 2013;
Cerdá et al. 2017; Miller et al. 2017; Dilley et al. 2019) or are based on random-effects regression models (e.g., Hasin et
al. 2015; Cerdá et al. 2020).


                                                                13
relatively large state-year cell sizes and the extended time period for which it is available. Starting in

1991 and still ongoing, the YRBS allows researchers to estimate the effects of MMLs adopted in the

mid- to late 1990s. A disadvantage to using the YRBS is that it does not contain information on

high school dropouts.22

         Consistent with the results of a meta-analysis conducted by Sarvet et al. (2018), there is little

evidence to support the hypothesis that MMLs have increased youth marijuana use on either the

intensive or extensive margins.23 In fact, some researchers have found a negative association

between MMLs and youth marijuana use. For instance, using data from the YRBS for the period

1999-2015, Coley et al. (2019) found that MML adoption was associated with a 9 percent decrease in

the odds of past-month marijuana use among teens. Using NSDUH data for the period 2002-2009,

Harper et al. (2012) found that MMLs were associated with an 8 percent decrease in past-month

marijuana use among teenagers.

         A recent working paper by Smart and Doremus (2021) provides the only credible evidence

of which we are aware that MMLs can lead to increased use among teenagers. Using data from the

NSDUH for the period 2002-2013, these authors leveraged the fact that, after the Ogden

memorandum was issued, dispensaries proliferated and registration rates soared in medical

marijuana states with "loose production limits," defined as those that allowed caregivers to serve

multiple patients. Marijuana use among 12- through 17-year-olds also increased in these states after

the Ogden memorandum was issued. As noted above, the Ogden memorandum, issued in 2009,




22 The TEDS is collected annually by state substance abuse agencies and is based on admissions to publicly funded drug
treatment facilities, providing researchers information on individuals on the margin of excessive consumption (Pacula et
al. 2015). A downside to the TEDS is that admissions could, in part, reflect endogenous changes in enforcement and
referrals from the criminal justice system.

 Sarvet et al. (2018, p. 113) included studies in their meta-analysis that are based on state random-effects regression
23

models but acknowledged that models controlling for state fixed effects are "more rigorous."


                                                            14
deprioritized the prosecution of medical marijuana users and producers. 24 Smart and Doremus

(2021) found no evidence that MML adoption affected youth marijuana use.

         Three papers described in Table 2 explore the relationship between RMLs and youth

marijuana use. Drawing on YRBS data for the period 1993-2017, Anderson et al. (2019) found that

RMLs were associated with an 8 percent decrease in the odds of any marijuana use among high

school students and a 9 percent decrease in the odds of frequent marijuana use among high school

students.25 These results are consistent with the argument that it is more difficult for teenagers to

access marijuana when drug dealers are replaced by licensed dispensaries that require proof of age.

         Using YRBS data for the period 1999-2017, Coley et al (forthcoming) found no evidence of

a relationship between RMLs and past-month marijuana use, although RML adoption was associated

with a small reduction in the frequency of use. By contrast, using NSDUH data for the period 2001-

2017, Hollingsworth et al. (2020) found that legalizing recreational marijuana was associated with a

13-15 percent increase in past-month marijuana use among 12- through 17-year-olds. 26

          It is, however, important to keep in mind that the estimates such as those reported by

Anderson et al. (2019), Hollingsworth et al. (2020), and Coley et al. (forthcoming) are based on

limited geographic and temporal variation in RML adoption. Researchers will have to wait until



24Marijuana use among 12- through 17-year-olds decreased in states with loose production limits after the Cole
memorandum was issued on June 29, 2011. Smart and Doremus (2021, p. 8) observed that "in the months leading up to
and following the [Cole] memo, the Drug Enforcement Administration stepped up raids on medical marijuana
producers."
25Anderson, Rees, and Sabia (2020) produced similar, although less precise, estimates of the association between the
opening of the first recreational dispensary and marijuana use among high school students. Specifically, they found that
the start of recreational sales was associated with a 5 percent decrease in the odds of any marijuana use, and a 14 percent
decrease in the odds of frequent marijuana use.

26See also Ambrose (2020), who found that proximity to a recreational marijuana dispensary was unrelated to youth
marijuana use in Washington state. Hao and Cowan (2020) found no evidence that RML adoption by Colorado and
Washington affected youth marijuana use in bordering states. Using data from the National College Health Assessment
survey for the period 2008-2018, Bae and Kerr (2020) found a positive association between RMLs and marijuana use
among undergraduates ages 18 through 26.


                                                            15
more years of post-legalization data become available before drawing firm conclusions about the

relationship between RMLs and youth marijuana use.



       5. Legalization and the Use of Alcohol, Opioids, Tobacco, and Other Substances

         Opponents of legalization often refer to negative externalities associated with marijuana

consumption (e.g., crime or traffic accidents) when making a case for prohibition. In the presence

of such externalities, utility maximizing individuals will consume more marijuana than is socially

optimal. However, the legalization of marijuana may also affect the consumption of other

substances, some of which impose substantial costs on society (Miron and Zwiebel 1995). The

policy-relevant question is empirical because theory alone cannot determine whether marijuana is a

complement to or a substitute for other substances.



5.1. Alcohol

         Early empirical studies on the relationship between marijuana and alcohol produced mixed

results. Pacula (1998a) and Williams et al. (2004) found a negative association between state beer

taxes and marijuana consumption, suggesting complementarity. By contrast, Chaloupka and

Laixuthai (1997) and Saffer and Chaloupka (1999) found that marijuana decriminalization reduced

the consumption of alcohol, suggesting the two goods are substitutes. All of these studies, however,

relied on cross-sectional policy variation, which could simply reflect unobserved factors at the state

level such as preferences and attitudes. 27




27Early studies in the tobacco literature relied on cross-sectional cigarette tax variation and, consequently, greatly
overstated the effect of taxes on smoking behavior (DeCicca et al. forthcoming). Relying on cross-sectional variation to
estimate the effects of decriminalizing or legalizing marijuana likely produces equally misleading results.


                                                           16
            The legalization of marijuana represents a well-defined natural experiment and, as such, has

afforded researchers an opportunity to further explore the relationship between marijuana and

alcohol. 28 Table 3 summarizes the literature on marijuana legalization and alcohol consumption. Of

the 12 studies described in Table 3, seven used survey data on self-reported alcohol consumption

(Anderson et al. 2013; Wen et al. 2015; Sabia et al. 2017; Johnson et al. 2018; Andreyeva and Ukert

2019; Dragone et al. 2019; Alley et al. 2020), four used alcohol sales data (Anderson et al. 2013;

Baggio et al. 2020; Veligati et al. 2020; Miller and Seo forthcoming), two used data on alcohol-related

hospital admissions (Kelly and Rasul 2014; Conyers and Ayres 2020), and one used data on alcohol-

related traffic fatalities (Anderson et al. 2013). 29

            The survey-based studies provide strong evidence of substitutability between marijuana and

alcohol. 30 For instance, using data from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System and DD

regression models, Anderson et al. (2013) and Sabia et al. (2017) found that MMLs are associated

with sharp reductions in past-month alcohol use and binge drinking. Using a similar empirical

strategy and data from the National College Health Assessment-II for the period 2008-2018, Alley et

al. (2020) found that RML adoption leads to a 6 percent decrease in binge drinking among college

students. Leveraging the distance to the Washington state border in a DD spatial regression

discontinuity design, Dragone et al. (2019) found that the legalization of recreational marijuana

reduced binge drinking among NSDUH respondents by roughly 20 percent.

            Estimates based on alcohol sales data are generally consistent with those based on self-

reported alcohol consumption. Drawing upon Nielsen retail scanner data for the period 2006-2015



28Other studies have used the minimum legal drinking age to test whether marijuana and alcohol are substitutes or
complements (DiNardo and Lemieux 2001; Crost and Guerrero 2012; Crost and Rees 2013).
29   The study by Anderson et al. (2013) is discussed below in Section 7.

 Hollingsworth et al. (2020) also provided evidence of a negative relationship between the legalization of marijuana for
30

medicinal purposes and alcohol consumption.

                                                             17
and focusing on contiguous-border county pairs, Baggio et al. (2020) found that MMLs reduced

retail sales of alcoholic beverages by 12 percent. Miller and Seo (forthcoming) used Nielsen scanner

data from Washington state to estimate a flexible demand system at the county-month level. These

authors found that legalizing recreational marijuana led to a 5 percent decrease in alcohol sales. 31

         Finally, Kelly and Rasul (2014) and Conyers and Ayres (2020) used data on alcohol-related

hospital admissions. Kelly and Rasul (2014) explored what happened when Lambeth, a borough of

London, experimented with marijuana "depenalization." Under the Lambeth experiment, which

took effect in July of 2001 and lasted for one year, possession of small quantities of marijuana was

no longer a prosecutable offense. These authors found large reductions in alcohol-related hospital

admissions among male 15- through 24-year-olds, providing evidence that this group treated alcohol

and marijuana as substitutes. There was no evidence that depenalization had an effect on hospital

admissions among older males. Conyers and Ayres (2020) found no evidence that the opening of

medical marijuana dispensaries in Arizona affected emergency department visits involving alcohol. 32



5.2. Opioids

         The opioid epidemic, a uniquely American phenomenon, can be thought of as being divided

into two stages. In the first stage, which lasted through 2010, prescription anti-pain medications



31Relatedly, using data form the Consumer Expenditure Interview Survey for the period 2005-2018, Lu (2020) found a
positive relationship between RML adoption and household expenditures on alcohol. This result, however, was
sensitive to the inclusion of state-specific linear time trends. In general, there is no consensus in this literature as to
whether state-specific trends belong on the right-hand side of the regression model. For instance, Wen et al. (2015)
included them in all of their estimations, while Powell et al. (2018) and Hollingsworth et al. (2020) did not. We
recognize the possibility, raised by Wolfers (2006) and others, that the state-specific trends are using up exogenous
variation in treatment. Given this possibility, we view estimates based on a standard DD regression model with state-
specific liner trends as lower bounds.

32 Using state-level data on poisoning mortality from the Center for Disease Control's Wide-ranging Online Data for
Epidemiologic Research, Smart and Doremus (2021) found a negative relationship between the share of adults registered
as medical marijuana patients and alcohol-related poisoning deaths among 45- through 64-year-olds. See also Wang et
al. (2019), who found that RMLs reduced internet search volume and advertising effectiveness for alcohol.


                                                             18
such as OxyContin and Vicodin were responsible for the majority of deaths (Dart et al. 2015); in the

second stage, heroin- and fentanyl-related deaths surged (Iwanicki et al. 2018), quickly overtaking

mortality attributable to prescription opioids and prompting lawmakers across the country to

consider the adoption of alternative policies, including the legalization of recreational marijuana

(Sfondeles 2018; Voelker 2018; Wang 2018; Taylor 2019). 33

           In Table 4, we summarize the literature on marijuana legalization and the use of opioids.

Bachhuber et al. (2014) were the first researchers to propose a link between MMLs and the abuse of

prescription opioids. Using a DD regression model and data at the state-year level for the period

1999-2010, they found that MML adoption was associated with a 25 percent reduction in opioid-

related mortality. When state-specific linear trends were included on the right-hand side of the

regression, MML adoption was associated with an 18 percent reduction. These results suggest that

marijuana and opioids are being treated as substitutes, at least by some segment of the population.

           The study by Bachhuber et al. (2014) has been quite influential, and estimates produced by

subsequent scholars seem to reaffirm their basic result. 34 For instance, Bradford and Bradford

(2016, 2017, 2018) and Bradford et al. (2018) explored the association between MMLs and

prescription opioids. We will focus on Bradford and Bradford (2018) because it was published in a

well-regarded economics journal (Journal of Law and Economics) and illustrates the shortcomings of the

other three, which were published in the medical/public health literature. All of the papers used

similar empirical strategies and came to similar conclusions.

           Bradford and Bradford (2018) used data at the physician level for the period 2010-2015 to

examine the association between MMLs and prescribing to Medicare Part D participants. During


33Drug overdose deaths involving opioids have increased more than five-fold since 2000, exceeding 65,000 by 2017
(Ahmad et al. 2019).

34   As of March 2021, Bachhuber et al. (2014) has nearly 700 citations according to Google Scholar.


                                                            19
this period, 10 states and the District of Columbia adopted MMLs. The Arizona MML was the least

strict among these. It was adopted in November, 2010 and tens of thousands of patients were

quickly enrolled. The other 10 MMLs analyzed by Bradford and Bradford (2018) were relatively

strict and the medical marijuana programs they created were small-scale: in 2015, only 38,000

patients were enrolled across these 10 programs. This same year there were, by comparison,

7,814,000 Medicare Part D participants in the 9 treated states and the District of Columbia, or more

than 200 Medicare Part D participants per registered medical marijuana patient.35, 36

         Bradford and Bradford (2018) found that MML adoption was associated with a 4-5 percent

reduction in pain-related prescriptions under Medicare Part D. It is possible that the behavior of

38,000 medical marijuana patients could have been the sole driver of this reduction, but, given its

magnitude, this strikes us as unlikely. Because Bradford and Bradford (2018) did not have access to

enough years of data for an event-study analysis, we do not know whether the parallel trends



35The Bradford and Bradford (2108) estimates were identified from MMLs adopted by Arizona, Connecticut, Delaware,
D.C., Illinois, Maryland, New Hampshire, New York, Massachusetts, Minnesota, and New Jersey. By December of
2015, there were 88,000 medical marijuana patients registered in Arizona (https://azdhs.gov/licensing/medical-
marijuana/index.php), while Arizona Medicaid Part D enrollment was approximately 790,000 (Hoadley et al. 2015). If
we include Arizona in our calculations, there were 68 Medicare Part D participants per registered medical marijuana
patients in 2015.
36Data on Medicare Part D enrollment come from Hoadley et al. (2015). The number of registered medical marijuana
patients in Connecticut comes from the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection
(https://portal.ct.gov/DCP/Medical-Marijuana-Program/Medical-Marijuana-Statistics); the number of registered
medical marijuana patients in Delaware comes from the Delaware Division of Public Health
(https://www.dhss.delaware.gov/dhss/dph/hsp/medmarhome.html); the number of registered medical marijuana
patients in Washington, D.C. comes from D.C. Health (https://dchealth.dc.gov/node/823802); the number of
registered medical marijuana patients in Illinois comes from the Illinois Department of Public Health
(http://dph.illinois.gov/topics-services/prevention-wellness/medical-cannabis/annual-report); the number of registered
medical marijuana patients in Massachusetts comes from the Massachusetts Department of Public Health
(https://www.mass.gov/doc/mmj-dashboard-december-2015/download); the number of registered medical marijuana
patients in Minnesota comes from the Minnesota Department of Health
(https://www.health.state.mn.us/people/cannabis/docs/about/update0416.pdf); and the number of registered medical
marijuana patients in New Jersey comes from the New Jersey Department of Health
(https://www.nj.gov/health/medicalmarijuana/). The New York medical marijuana program did not begin registering
patients until December 23, 2015 (https://health.ny.gov/press/releases/2015/2015-12-23_patient_registration.htm).
The New Hampshire medical marijuana program did not begin registering patients until November 24, 2015
(https://www.nhpr.org/post/why-long-wait-medical-marijuana-nh#stream/0). The Maryland medical marijuana
program did not begin registering patients until April, 2017 (Wood 2017).


                                                         20
assumption held or whether the prescription "effects" became stronger over time as enrollment in

these 11 medical marijuana programs grew.

         Wen and Hockenberry (2018) and McMichael et al. (2020) provide additional evidence that

the legalization of marijuana reduces opioid prescribing. 37 For instance, Wen and Hockenberry

(2018) examined the association between MMLs and opioid prescribing among Medicaid recipients

for the period 2011-2016. During this period, 8 states (Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Maryland,

New Hampshire, New York, Massachusetts, and Minnesota) legalized medical marijuana. These

authors found that MML adoption was associated with a 6 percent reduction in opioid prescribing

among Medicaid recipients, while RML adoption was also associated with a 6 percent reduction in

opioid prescribing. Carrieri et al. (2020) examined the effects of a 2016 Italian law permitting the

cultivation of marijuana with low levels of THC ("light cannabis"). Exploiting temporal and

geographic variation in when this new product became available across Italy, these authors found

evidence of substitution away from prescription opioids.

         Shover et al. (2019) revisited the link between MMLs and opioid-related mortality by

replicating and then extending the Bachhuber et al. (2014) study. Specifically, Shover et al. (2019)

confirmed the negative association between legalization and opioid-related mortality found by

Bachhuber et al. (2014) for the period 1999-2010, but found that this association became positive

when data for the years 2011-2017 were added to the analysis. 38


37See also Ozluk (2017), who found that MML adoption was associated with a reduction in spending on prescription
opioids among young adults.

38 When Shover et al. (2019) included state-specific linear trends on the right-hand side of their regression, the negative
association between MMLs and opioid-related mortality for the period 1999-2010 became statistically insignificant.
Likewise, the positive association between MMLs and opioid-related mortality for the period 1999-2017 became
statistically insignificant when state-specific linear trends were included. Powell et al. (2018) found a negative and
statistically significant association between MMLs and mortality involving prescription opioids for the period 1999-2010.
This association shrank and became statistically insignificant when three extra years of data (2011-2013) were included in
the analysis. Powell et al. (2018) also examined the effect of MMLs on mortality involving prescription opioids and/or
heroin. Again, these authors found evidence to suggest that this effect was strongest during the period 1999-2010. See
also Smart and Doremus (2021), who found a negative relationship between medical marijuana market size and opioid-
analgesic poisoning deaths among 45- through 64-year-olds.

                                                            21
        This reversal in sign has several plausible explanations. It is possible that the negative

association between MML adoption and opioid-related mortality is spurious and fragile. Another

plausible explanation is that the reversal in sign is due to the changing nature of the opioid epidemic.

Perhaps marijuana and prescription pain medications are substitutes, but marijuana and heroin are

not. Finally, as noted above, MMLs adopted after the Ogden memo was released tended to be

stricter and, according to Williams et al. (2016), more "medicalized." Given how few patients were

typically enrolled in post-2010 medical marijuana programs, it would not be surprising if the

association between MMLs and opioid-related mortality was markedly weaker during this period,

although this does not explain why the association would become positive.

        Using data at the county level, Smith (2020) examined the relationship between the opening

of medical marijuana dispensaries and opioid-related mortality during the period 1999-2014.

Importantly, Smith (2020) made an effort to identify the opening dates of quasi-legal medical

marijuana dispensaries operating as clubs, collectives, and compassion centers in states such as

Michigan, Montana, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington. He found that there was, on average, a 7-11

percent reduction in mortality involving prescription opioids when the first dispensary opened, a

result that is consistent with the hypothesis that marijuana and prescription opioids are, on net,

substitutes. The estimated effect of dispensary openings on mortality involving prescription opioids

was largest among white non-Hispanic men. This latter result is particularly notable because Case

and Deaton (2017) have documented a substantial increase in "deaths of despair" (i.e., deaths due to

drugs, alcohol, or suicide) among white non-Hispanics without a college degree since 1998. Case

and Deaton (2017, p. 399) argued that the substantial increase in deaths of despair among less-




                                                  22
educated white non-Hispanics means that polices designed to reduce opioid use are "an obvious

priority."39

         More evidence that legalization can help curb the opioid epidemic comes from Shover et al.

(2019) and Chan et al. (2020). Both of these studies examined the association between RMLs and

opioid-related mortality drawing on state-level data for the years 1999-2017. During these years, 8

states adopted RMLs (Alaska, Colorado, California, Maine, Nevada, Oregon, Massachusetts, and

Washington), but the first recreational sales in California, Maine, and Massachusetts began after

2017, and the first recreational dispensary in Nevada opened on July 1, 2017, only 6 months before

the end of the study period.

         Shover et al. (2019) found that RML adoption was associated with a 14 percent decrease in

opioid-related mortality. Although this estimate was not statistically significant at conventional

levels, the lack of precision is not surprising given how few RMLs were adopted during the period

under study. Chan et al. (2020) found that the legalization of recreational sales was associated with a

16-21 percent decrease in opioid-related mortality. Chan et al. (2020), however, excluded 23 states

and the district of Columbia from their main analysis, making it difficult to compare their results to

those of Shover et al. (2019). 40

         The obvious next step in this literature is to examine the relationship between RMLs and the

use of opioids (as opposed to opioid-related mortality or the prescribing of opioids). The issue here




39 See also Chu (2015), who found evidence that MML adoption reduced admissions to substance abuse treatment
programs for heroin. By contrast, Conyers and Ayres (2020) found that the opening of medical marijuana dispensaries
in Arizona may have increased ED visits involving opioids among nearby residents.

40 Moreover, Chan et al. (2020) reported separate RML implementation and sales estimates. The implementation
estimates were consistently positive but generally not statistically significant. To obtain the effect of legalizing
recreational marijuana on opioid-related mortality, the implementation and sales estimates reported by Chan et al. (2020)
must be added together. With or without state-specific linear trends, the sum of the implementation and sales estimates
is statistically indistinguishable from zero and equal to -0.04. The negative association between recreational sales and
opioid-related mortality was robust to the inclusion of state-specific linear trends.


                                                           23
is lack of data. As far as we know, the only data source that could be used to investigate this

question is the NSDUH and, for now at least, SAMHSA is putting onerous restrictions on

researchers who want access to the individual-level NSDUH data. For instance, because the

wording of the question on the use of prescription pain medications changed between 2014 and

2015 (and because the automated skip pattern leading to this question changed), SAMHSA insists

that researchers conduct separate analyses for the periods 2004-2014 and 2015-2018. 41



5.3. Tobacco

         According to the CDC, smoking tobacco is the leading cause of preventable death in the

world; on average, smokers die 10 years earlier than their non-smoking counterparts (Centers for

Disease Control and Prevention 2020). By contrast, marijuana use has been linked to substantially

lower mortality and morbidity risks, and marijuana is regularly used as a treatment for several serious

health conditions (Hall et al. 2005; Fiz et al. 2011; Ware et al. 2010; Choi et al. 2019).

         Evidence on the relationship between marijuana and tobacco comes from studies of cross-

price effects (Pacula, 1998a, 1998b; Chaloupka et al. 1999; Farrelly et al. 2001; Anderson,

Matsuzawa, and Sabia 2020). Pacula (1998a, 1998b) and Chaloupka et al. (1999) found a negative

association between cigarette prices and youth marijuana use, but relied on cross-state variation,

leaving their estimates potentially biased due to unobserved factors at the state level, such as anti-




41 SAMHSA regularly publishes estimates of marijuana and the abuse of prescription painkillers that are based on the
NSDUH data. These estimates are available from the NSDUH's Small Area Estimation (SAE) files for two-year periods
only (e.g., 2010-2011, 2012-2013), and are therefore of limited value to researchers. Wen et al. (2015), who had access to
individual-level NSDUH data for the period 2004-2012, found no evidence that MMLs were related to the abuse of
prescription painkillers. This result is not consistent with the negative association between MMLs and prescribing found
by Bradford and Bradford (2016, 2017, 2018), Bradford et al. (2018), Wen and Hockenberry (2018), and McMichael et al.
(2020), although it should be noted that there is evidence of NSDUH respondents systematically underreporting
painkiller abuse and the use of illicit drugs such as cocaine, heroin, and marijuana (Gfroerer et al. 2012; Johnson 2014).
Rates of alcohol, marijuana, and heroin use among teenagers in the NSDUH are lower than rates from other nationally
representative data sets such as Monitoring the Future and the Youth Rick Behavior Surveys (Gfroerer et al. 2012).


                                                           24
smoking sentiment.42 Using data from the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse (NHSDA)

for the period 1990-1996 and leveraging within-state variation, Farrelly et al. (2001) found that

raising cigarette taxes reduced the intensity of marijuana use among individuals 12-20 years of age.

Using data from the YRBS for the period 1991-2017, Anderson, Matsuzawa, and Sabia (2020) found

little evidence to suggest that marijuana use among teenagers was sensitive to cigarette taxes.

         In Table 5, we summarize six studies on the relationship between marijuana legalization and

tobacco use. Two of these studies found evidence that legalization for medicinal purposes reduces

tobacco use (Choi et al. 2019; Anderson, Matsuzawa, and Sabia 2020), 43 one found evidence that

recreational legalization reduces tobacco use (Miller and Seo forthcoming),44 and the remaining three

found no evidence of an association between legalization and tobacco use (Andreyeva and Ukert

2019; Alley et al. 2020; Veligati et al. 2020).

         We view Choi et al. (2019), who drew on three separate data sets to estimate the relationship

between MMLs and cigarette consumption among adults, as the highest quality study in this

literature. Using DD regressions and data from the NSDUH, BRFSS, and the Current Population

Survey Tobacco Use Supplements (CPS-TUS), Choi et al. (2019) found that MML adoption was

associated with a reduction in cigarette use of 1 to 1.5 percentage points. These authors also found

that MMLs reduced the number of cigarettes consumed conditional on already being a smoker. A

supplementary synthetic control analysis produced results there were consistent with those obtained

from the DD regressions.


 Pacula (1998a) estimated the effect of state cigarette taxes on youth marijuana use, while Pacula (1998b) and
42

Chaloupka et al. (1999) estimated the effect of cigarette prices inclusive of taxes.

43Anderson, Matsuzawa, and Sabia (2020) found that MML adoption was associated with reductions in both cigarette
and marijuana use among teenagers, suggesting that teenagers treat these two substances as complements.
Hollingsworth et al. (2020) found that the legalization of medical marijuana reduced tobacco consumption among both
adolescents and adults.

44Wang et al. (2019) found that RML adoption increased internet search volume and advertising effectiveness for
tobacco.

                                                          25
5.4. Other Substances

         The gateway hypothesis suggests that legalizing marijuana should, in a causal sense, increase

the use of other, "harder" drugs. In Table 6, we summarize the literature on marijuana legalization

and the use of hard drugs such as cocaine. We also summarize the literature on marijuana

legalization and other drugs such as anti-depressives and sedatives.

         Evidence on the relationship between MML adoption and the use of cocaine comes from

Chu (2015) and Wen et al. (2015). These authors found that legalizing medical marijuana had no

appreciable effects on admissions to substance abuse treatment for cocaine (Chu 2015) or self-

reported cocaine use (Wen et al. 2015). 45 Similarly, Conyers and Ayres (2020) found no evidence

that living near a medical marijuana dispensary affected cocaine-related ED visits.

         Evidence on the relationship between legalizing marijuana for recreational purposes and the

use of cocaine comes from Hollingsworth et al. (2020). Using NSDUH data for the period 2001-

2017, Hollingsworth et al. (2020) found that RML adoption was associated with an increase in the

use of cocaine, but this association was sensitive to specification choice. They concluded that,

"[t]his fact coupled with the event study that shows a decaying effect following year three from

adoption raises concerns about the validity of the cocaine estimates" (p. 18).

         Kelly and Rasul (2014) examined what happened to hospital admissions involving hard drugs

(cocaine, crack, crystal-meth, heroin, LSD, MDMA, and methadone) when Lambeth, a borough of

London, "depenalized" possession of small quantities of marijuana. These authors found that,

among men, hospital admission rates involving hard drugs increased by 40-100 percent when the

Lambeth police temporarily stopped prosecuting marijuana possession cases. By contrast, there

was no evidence that female drug use was sensitive to the depenalization of marijuana.


45Additional evidence on the relationship between legalizing marijuana and the use of cocaine comes from a recent
working paper by Leung (2019). Using data from the Healthy Mind Study Questionnaires for the period 2009-2017,
Leung (2019) found a negative association between MML adoption and cocaine use among college students.

                                                         26
         Intriguingly, there is evidence that sales of over-the-counter sleep aids went down in

Colorado with the opening of recreational dispensaries (Doremus et al. 2019), suggesting that

marijuana is being used to relieve anxiety and treat insomnia. This result is consistent with those of

Bradford and Bradford (2018), who found that MML adoption was associated with a 6-8 percent

reduction in anxiety-related prescriptions and a 7-9 percent reduction in sleep-related prescriptions

under Medicare Part D.46

         Finally, Carrieri et al. (2020) examined the effects of a 2016 Italian law permitting the

cultivation of marijuana with low levels of THC ("light cannabis"). Exploiting temporal and

geographic variation in the availability of this product, these authors found strong evidence of

substitution away from a variety of prescription drugs, including sedatives, anti-depressants, and

anti-psychotics.



                                     6. Legalization and Mental Health

         Randomized control trials provide evidence that cannabinoids, compounds found in

marijuana, can improve sleep quality and help alleviate the symptoms of posttraumatic stress

disorder (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2017, pp. 121-124); animal

studies show that, at low doses, synthetic cannabinoid injections can have a potent antidepressant

effect (Jiang et al. 2005; Bambico et al. 2007). Although epidemiologists have shown that marijuana

use is positively associated with the symptoms of depression, this association likely reflects self-

medication or is due to difficult-to-measure confounders at the individual level such as personality

(National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2017, p. 289 and pp. 307-310). 47


46See also Ozluk (2017), who found that MML adoption was associated with less spending on prescription sedatives
among the elderly.
47 Consuming marijuana as a teenager is also associated with an elevated risk of developing psychosis and schizophrenia
in adulthood (Levine et al. 2017; Ladegard et al. 2020).


                                                          27
         Legalizing marijuana could, in theory, have indirect effects on mental health through the use

of other substances. There is accumulating evidence that restricting where and when alcohol is sold

can reduce suicides (Kõlves et al. 2020). 48 Obversely, gaining access to alcohol through, for

instance, reaching the minimum legal drinking age is associated with an increase in the likelihood of

committing suicide (Carpenter 2004; Carpenter and Dobkin 2009). If, as most studies based on

well-defined natural experiments suggest, alcohol and marijuana are treated as substitutes (DiNardo

and Lemieux 2001; Crost and Guerrero 2012; Anderson et al. 2013; Kelly and Rasul 2014; Baggio et

al. 2020; Miller and Seo forthcoming), then legalizing marijuana could improve mental health and

ultimately reduce suicides.

         Table 7 summarizes the results of three studies on the relationship between legalizing

marijuana and suicide. Anderson et al. (2014) obtained suicide counts at the state-year level from the

National Vital Statistics System (NVSS) for the period 1990­2007. Estimating a DD regression

model, they found that MML adoption was associated with an 11 percent reduction in suicides

among male 20- through 29-year-olds, and a 9 percent reduction in suicides among male 30- through

39-year-olds. Estimated effects on female suicide rates, while of similar magnitude, were less precise

and sensitive to specification changes such as controlling for state-specific linear time trends.

         The Anderson et al. (2014) results were revisited by Grucza et al. (2015). Using NVSS data

for the period 1990-2010 and a DD regression model, these authors found a negative and

statistically significant association between MML adoption and suicides among male 20- through 39-

year-olds. However, when they controlled for spending on mental health, rates of the uninsured,

cigarette taxes, and various anti-tobacco policies, this association, although still negative, became




48The use of opioids is also associated with depression and suicidal behaviors (Scherrer et al. 2015; Davis et al. 2020),
but, to our knowledge, there is no evidence of a causal link.


                                                            28
statistically insignificant at conventional levels. 49 These authors concluded that legalizing marijuana

for medicinal purposes "does not appear to lead to changes in suicide rates" (Grucza et al. 2015, p.

71). Grucza et al. (2015) did not report estimates of the association between MMLs and suicides for

the period 1990-2007. 50

         Bartos et al. (2020) used a synthetic control approach to examine the effect of California's

MML, passed in 1996, on suicides. These authors found that, relative to its synthetic control, the

suicide count in California fell after medical marijuana was legalized. Specifically, they found that

legalization was associated with 399 fewer suicides per year, a reduction of approximately 11

percent.51 In addition, Bartos et al. (2020) found that MML adoption was associated with fewer

firearm-related suicides, but its relationship with non-firearm-related suicides, although negative, was

not statistically significant at conventional levels.

         Two recent working papers, which are not listed in Table 7, have used outcomes other than

suicide to explore the effects of MMLs on mental health (Kalbfuß et al. 2018; Leung 2019).

Drawing on BRFSS data for the period 1993-2015, Kalbfuß et al. (2018) examined MML adoption

and the number of "not good" mental health days in the past month.52 These authors found that

MML adoption was associated with a 5 percent reduction in the number of "not good" mental

health days. MMLs that allowed home cultivation and/or included pain as a qualifying condition




49According to Anderson et al. (2014), legalizing medical marijuana was associated with a 3.5 percent reduction in the
odds of suicide among male 20- through 29-year-olds (p-value = 0.39). Legalizing medical marijuana was associated with
a 5.6 percent reduction in the odds of suicide among male 30- through 39-year-olds (p-value = 0.14).

50In an unpublished working paper, Singer et al. (2020) found that RML adoption was associated with a 5 percent
reduction in the suicide rate among male 40- through 49-year-olds.

51In California, there were a total of 3,694 suicides in 1995 and 3,712 suicides in 1994 (Singh et al. 1996; Anderson et al.
1997).
52BRFSS respondents are asked, "Now thinking about your mental health, which includes stress, depression, and
problems with emotions, for how many days during the past 30 days was your mental health not good?"


                                                            29
were associated with larger reductions in the number of days respondents described their mental

health as "not good."

         Leung (2019) analyzed individual-level data on U.S. college students from the Healthy Mind

Survey (HMS) for the period 2009-2017. HMS respondents are asked nine questions designed to

screen for depression and gauge its severity; they are also asked seven questions designed to screen

for several anxiety disorders, including post-traumatic stress disorder.53 Leung (2019) found little

evidence that MML adoption affected the mental health of HMS respondents. However, as noted

above, MMLs passed in the post-Ogden period were stricter (more "medicalized") than those passed

before; given that Leung's data began in 2009, the year in which the Ogden memo was issued, his

null findings are perhaps not surprising. 54

         With the exception of Singer et al. (2020), none of the studies cited in this section considered

the effects of RMLs. The next step in this literature is to estimate the effect of RML adoption on

measures of mental health aside from suicides. Researchers might also leverage the opening and

closing of recreational dispensaries to better understand how legalization affects mental health.



                                      7. Legalization and Traffic Fatalities

         Opponents of legalizing marijuana argue that it will lead to more traffic accidents and

fatalities (Sabet 2013, pp. 72-76; Evans 2019). This argument is not without merit. Simulator

experiments show that drivers under the influence of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the active



53Specifically, HMS respondents are given the Patient Health Questionnaire and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Screener. In addition, they are asked whether they had suicidal thoughts in the past year and whether they had been
diagnosed by a professional as suffering from a mental illness.

54 See also Rylander et al. (2014), who examined the county-level association between medical marijuana patients and
suicide rates in Colorado during the period 2004-2010. Because Rylander et al. (2014) did not find a positive and
statistically significant association between these variables, they concluded that "[t]he legalization of medical marijuana
may not have an adverse impact on suicide rates" (Rylander et al. 2014, p. 269).


                                                             30
ingredient in marijuana, have trouble "road tracking" (i.e., maintaining the correct road position),

although these same studies provide evidence of compensatory decreases in speed (Hartman and

Huestis 2013; Bondallaz et al. 2016; Vollrath and Fischer 2017); on-road experiments conducted

under normal traffic conditions confirm that THC has a negative, albeit moderate, effect on driving

performance (Robbe 1998; Ramaekers et al. 2000).

         As discussed above (in Section 5.1), there is strong evidence that legalizing marijuana

discourages the use of alcohol, especially binge drinking (Anderson et al. 2013; Kelly and Rasul 2014;

Sabia et al. 2017; Dragone et al. 2019; Baggio et al. 2020; Miller and Seo forthcoming). If driving

under the influence of marijuana is safer than driving under the influence of alcohol, then the

reduced-form effects of legalizing marijuana on traffic accidents and fatalities could, in theory, be

negative. 55 Moreover, because alcohol is often consumed in public (e.g., restaurants and bars) while

public marijuana consumption is generally illegal, legalization could improve road safety even if

driving under the influence of marijuana is just as dangerous as driving under the influence of

alcohol (Anderson et al. 2013). 56

         Table 8 summarizes the literature on marijuana legalization and road safety. Using state-level

data from the Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS) for the period 1990­2010, Anderson et al.

(2013) were the first researchers to estimate the effects of MML adoption on traffic fatality rates.

These authors found that legalizing marijuana for medicinal purposes was associated with a 9-10




55See the review by Sewell et al. (2009). These authors compared the effects of driving under the influence of marijuana
with the effects of driving under the influence of alcohol. Legalization could also impact traffic safety through the use
of other substances, including opioids.

56 Specifically, Anderson et al. (2013, p. 359) argued that, because marijuana consumption typically takes place at home,
"designating a driver for the trip back from a restaurant or bar becomes unnecessary, and legalization could reduce
traffic fatalities even if driving under the influence of marijuana is every bit as dangerous as driving under the influence
of alcohol." In Alaska, Colorado, and Oregon, marijuana can be consumed in licensed private clubs and "social
lounges" (Mickelson 2019). As these clubs become more popular (or their legal status changes outside of Alaska,
Colorado, and Oregon), the relationship between marijuana consumption and traffic fatalities could change.


                                                             31
percent reduction in traffic fatalities. MMLs were associated with larger negative effects on traffic

fatalities involving alcohol, 57 traffic fatalities on the weekends, and traffic fatalities at night. Fatal

crashes on weekends and at nights are more likely to involve alcohol than those that occur on

weekdays and during daylight hours (National Center for Statistics and Analysis 2019).

         The negative association between MMLs and traffic fatalities has been confirmed by Cook et

al. (2020), who used an identification strategy similar to that used by Anderson et al. (2013).

Specifically, Cook et al. (2020) used city-level data from the FARS for the period 2010-2017 to

examine the effects of state MMLs and ordinances decriminalizing marijuana. These authors found

that MML adoption was associated with a 9 percent decrease in fatal crashes, while decriminalization

was associated with a temporary increase in traffic fatalities involving young male drivers. 58

         Aydelotte et al. (2017), who used data from Colorado and Washington for period 2009-2015

and a DD approach, found no evidence of a relationship between the legalization of recreational

marijuana and traffic fatalities. These authors, however, defined the post-treatment period as

beginning in 2013, before recreational sales in Colorado and Washington actually began.

Recreational sales in Colorado began on January 1, 2014, while recreational sales in Washington

began on July 8, 2014 (Bishop-Henchman and Scarboro 2016).

         Two recent studies have used a synthetic control approach to examine the effects of RMLs

in Colorado and Washington (Hansen et al. 2020a; Santaella-Tenorio et al. 2020). Since the first



 Anderson et al. (2013) considered two separate measures of alcohol-related traffic fatalities: the traffic fatality rate
57

where at least one driver involved had a BAC > 0 and the traffic fatality rate where at least one driver involved had a
BAC  0.10. Their results were similar regardless of how the alcohol-related traffic fatality rate was defined.

58Using data from the FARS and a regression model with state random effects, Santaella-Tenorio et al. (2017) found
that MMLs were associated with an 11 percent reduction in traffic fatalities. Ellis et al. (2020) found that the legalization
of medical marijuana reduced auto accident premiums; this effect was larger in areas with higher levels of pre-legalization
driving under the influence. Among high school students, Dills et al. (2017) found no association between MMLs and
self-reported involvement in past-year traffic accidents. By contrast, Smart and Doremus (2021) found a positive
association between the share of adults registered as medical marijuana patients in a state and traffic fatalities among 15-
through 20-year-old drivers.


                                                             32
recreational dispensaries opened in these states, marijuana sales have soared (Boesen 2020). Using

data from the FARS for the period 2000-2016, Hansen et al. (2020a) found no evidence that RMLs

impacted total or alcohol-related traffic fatalities. These authors speculated that the growth in

recreational marijuana sales could have come at the expense of black-market and medicinal sales,

leading to their null result (Hansen et al. 2020a, p. 664). Santaella-Tenorio et al. (2020), who

analyzed an additional year of post-treatment data, concluded that the Colorado RML increased

traffic fatalities. Traffic fatalities in Washington also increased after recreational sales began but this

increase was comparable to the increase in its synthetic control, leading Santaella-Tenorio et al.

(2020, p. 1066) to conclude that the "adverse unintended effects of RCLs [recreational cannabis

laws] can be heterogeneous." It should be noted, however, that Hansen et al. (2020a) and Santaella-

Tenorio et al. (2020) did not use the same set of matching variables to create their synthetic controls,

and synthetic control estimates can be quite sensitive to the choice of matching variables (Minard

and Waddell 2019).



                                    8. Legalization and Workplace Health

         Increasingly, concerns are being raised over the potential impact of legalizing marijuana on

workplace safety (Goldsmith et al. 2015; Parnes et al. 2018; Freedman 2020). The American College

of Occupational and Environmental Medicine recently stated that legalizing marijuana comes with

"huge public and workplace health implications" and that "marijuana can cause impairment which

will interfere with safe and acceptable performance in the workplace" (Industrial Safety and Hygiene

News 2019, para. 3 and 4).59



59 Legalization also raises new challenges for employers who maintain drug testing policies. Unlike alcohol, it is difficult

to determine whether employees or applicants are using marijuana on the job or at home, making outright bans on using
marijuana attractive from an employer's perspective. However, in some states, medical marijuana patients are legally
protected in the workplace and disciplinary actions against them are considered discriminatory (Freedman 2020).

                                                            33
         It is difficult to sign the relationship between legalization and workplace safety a priori.

Marijuana use impairs short-term memory function, information processing, hand-eye coordination,

and reaction times, all of which could reduce workplace safety (Ramaekers et al. 2004; Hall and

Degenhardt 2009; Hartman and Huestis 2013; National Institute on Drug Abuse 2019). If,

however, legalization discourages the consumption of alcohol, opioids, and other substances, then it

could improve workplace safety and reduce on-the-job injuries and fatalities (Anderson et al. 2013;

Bachhuber et al. 2014; Chu 2015; McMichael et al. 2020). Alcohol consumption at work is

associated with substantial increases in the risk of injury (Ohsfeldt and Morrisey 1997; Ramirez et al.

2013), while non-habitual opioid use slows reflexes and impairs cognitive functioning (Zacny 1995).

         In Table 9, we review five papers on marijuana legalization and outcomes related to

workplace safety and the health of employees. The first of these is by Ullman (2017), who drew

upon data from the March Current Population Survey (CPS) for the period 1992-2012. Using a DD

regression at the individual-year level, Ullman (2017) found that MML adoption was associated with

an 8 percent reduction in the likelihood of missing work due to a health issue; estimated effects were

larger in medical marijuana states with lax supply-side restrictions, among full-time workers, and

among middle-aged males (the group most likely to hold a medical marijuana card). Using state-

level data from the Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries for the period 1992-2015, Anderson et al.

(2018) found a negative association between MMLs and workplace fatalities among individuals ages

25-44. Consistent with Ullman's (2017) results, Anderson et al. (2018) found larger estimated effects

for 25- through 44-year-olds in MML states that listed pain as a qualifying condition or allowed

collective cultivation.60


60Ullman (2017) coded Arizona, California, Colorado, Michigan, Montana, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington as states
with lax MMLs. These correspond to 8 out of the 9 states listed by Anderson et al. (2018) as allowing pain as a
qualifying condition and collective cultivation. According to Anderson et al. (2018), Rhode Island listed pain as a
qualifying condition and allowed collective cultivation, but Ullman (2018) coded Rhode Island as a "strict" MML state.


                                                          34
         Nicholas and Maclean (2019) explored the effect of MMLs on the self-reported health and

labor supply of adults 51 years of age and older. Using data from the Health and Retirement Study

for the period 1992-2012, these authors found that MML adoption was associated with less pain and

better overall health. They also found that MML adoption increased the hours of work supplied by

older adults who were already in the labor force, and that these effects were strongest for those with

a preexisting health condition that would qualify for legal medical marijuana use. 61

         As an alternative to using data on workplace fatalities or self-reported health, Ghimire and

Maclean (2020) used information on workers' compensation (WC) claims from the Annual Social

and Economic supplement to the CPS, arguing that MMLs could affect WC claims through

improving symptom management. With access to legal medical marijuana, an injured or sick worker

"may be better able to treat symptoms and hence return to work more quickly or possibly not

require a work separation to recuperate" (Ghimire and Maclean 2020, p. 420). Alternatively, if

marijuana is an inferior treatment option or compromises the effectiveness of other, ongoing

treatments, then WC claiming could increase with MML adoption. Consistent with the argument

that marijuana can help with symptom management, these authors found that MMLs were

associated with fewer WC claims and less income from WCs.62

         To our knowledge, the only published research on RMLs in this area comes from Maclean et

al. (2021), who estimated the effects of RML adoption on new applications and allowances for Social

Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) and Supplemental Security Income (SSI).63 Using data for the


61Nicholas and Maclean (2019) found no evidence of an association on the extensive margin. Using data from the
Current Population Survey Outgoing Rotation Groups, Sabia and Nguyen (2018) found no evidence that MML adoption
was related to the employment, hours of work, or wages of working-age adults.

62In an unpublished working paper, Abouk et al. (2021) found that RML adoption was negatively associated with WC
benefit receipt.
63SSDI gives benefits to disabled persons who worked in a covered job for at least 5 of the 10 years prior to application.
SSI is a means-tested benefit that is available to low-income disabled or blind persons who do not meet the
qualifications for SSDI or whose SSDI benefits are sufficiently low (Maclean et al. 2021).

                                                           35
period 2001-2019, these authors found that RML adoption increased applications for both SSDI and

SSI, but had no appreciable effect on allowances. One possible explanation for this pattern of

results is that post-RML SSDI and SSI applications are more likely to be identified as illegitimate by

Social Security Administration case reviewers.



                                          9. Legalization and Crime

         Based on urine samples at the time of booking, marijuana is the most commonly used drug

among arrestees in the United States (Pacula and Kilmer 2003; Baran 2011; Burke 2019). 64 More

generally, there exists a strong positive association between marijuana consumption and criminal

behavior (Bennett et al. 2008). This positive correlation has been interpreted as evidence of causality

but could be due to unobserved factors at the individual level such as personality, risk tolerance, or

time preferences. In an effort to isolate the effect of using marijuana on crime, researchers have

generally relied on two approaches: (i) leveraging the legalization or decriminalization of marijuana

as a well-defined natural experiment, or (ii) exploiting the spatial and temporal variation from

openings and closings of marijuana dispensaries.

         In theory, legalizing marijuana could shrink the black market and reduce its attendant

violence or free up police resources, allowing law enforcement officials to reallocate their efforts

toward reducing non-drug crime (Miron and Zwiebel 1995; Adda et al. 2014). Also, if legalization

lowers the price of marijuana--and demand is sufficiently inelastic--then crimes committed to

finance marijuana consumption could fall. 65 On the other hand, increased marijuana use could lead


64Self-reported data on past-month drug use from the NSDUH and the Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring (ADAM)
Program confirm that marijuana is the most popular illicit substance among arrestees (Lattimore et al. 2014).

65Anderson et al. (2013) found that MML adoption was associated with a 25-30 percent reduction in the median per-
ounce price of high-quality marijuana in the 4th full year after legalization, suggesting that the supply response to
legalization outweighs the demand response. Using data on over 23,000 marijuana transactions from priceofweed.com,
Davis et al. (2016) estimated the price elasticity of demand to be between -0.67 and -0.79.


                                                         36
to more violent behavior directly through a psychopharmacological effect or indirectly through a

"gateway" effect (Pacula and Kilmer 2003; Morris et al. 2014). 66

         Table 10 reviews the literature on marijuana legalization and crime.67 Of the nine studies

listed, three use data from the Uniform Crime Reports and estimate standard DD models in which

state-level variation in MMLs is exploited (Morris et al. 2014; Huber III et al. 2016; Chu and

Townsend 2019). None of these studies found evidence to suggest that MMLs have increased

crime. Morris et al. (2014) found that MML adoption was associated with fewer robberies, larcenies,

and burglaries, while Huber III et al. (2016) found that MML adoption was associated with fewer

homicides and assaults. Chu and Townsend (2019) found little evidence to suggest that MMLs

affected either property or violent crimes. 68

         Using a difference-in-difference-in-differences regression model and data at the county-year

level from the UCR and Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR) for the period 1994-2012,

Gavrilova et al. (2019) compared the effect of legalizing medical marijuana in U.S. states on the

Mexican border with its effect in non-border states. 69 By allowing production in the United States,

MMLs could create competition for incumbent Mexican drug trafficking organizations (DTOs),

reducing their revenues and disincentivizing them from investing in rent-protecting violent activity

(Miron and Zwiebel 1995; Gavrilova et al. 2019). Consistent with this argument, Gavrilova et al.



66Whether marijuana use heightens or inhibits aggression is up for debate, and likely depends on the characteristics of
the user (Bushman 1990; Pacula and Kilmer 2003; Ostrowsky 2011).
67In related work, Klassen and Anthony (2019) found that the legalization of marijuana for recreational purposes
reduced the amount of illicit cultivation in Oregon national forests.

68Within California, Chu and Townsend (2019) found that MMLs reduced both property and violent crimes by
approximately 20 percent. Among Monitoring the Future respondents, Dills et al. (2017) found no evidence that MMLs
affected self-reports of arson, property damage, or weapon carrying on school property. However, these authors found
a positive relationship between MML adoption and self-reported petty crime.
69Gavrilova et al. (2019) also estimated models in which MML adoption was interacted with the distance of the county
centroid to the U.S.-Mexico border.


                                                           37
(2019) found that MML adoption by states on the Mexican border was associated with a 13 percent

reduction in violent crime. Using a DD and spatial regression discontinuity design and UCR data

for the period 2010-2014, Dragone et al. (2019) estimated the effect of legalizing recreational

marijuana in Washington on crime near the Washington-Oregon border. Their results suggest that

Washington's RML led to a 15-30 percent reduction in rapes and a 10-20 percent reduction in thefts

on the Washington side of the border relative to the Oregon side. 70

         With large amounts of high-grade marijuana and cash on hand, marijuana dispensaries

provide criminals with a potentially lucrative target. Three studies listed in Table 10 rely on variation

in dispensary openings or closings to estimate the relationship between having legal access to

marijuana and crime (Brinkman and Mok-Lamme 2019; Burkhardt and Goemans 2019; Chang and

Jacobson 2017). Using data from administrative records, Brinkman and Mok-Lamme (2019) and

Burkhardt and Goemans (2019) estimated the effect of recreational marijuana dispensary openings

on neighborhood-level crime in Denver, Colorado. Brinkman and Mok-Lamme (2019) found that

the opening of a dispensary was associated with large reductions in nonviolent crime, while

Burkhardt and Goemans (2019) found that dispensaries reduced hard drug- and alcohol-related

crimes. Burkhardt and Goemans (2019) also found that dispensary openings were associated with

an increase in vehicle break-ins within a mile of the dispensary's location.

         Chang and Jacobson (2017) estimated the effect of a short-term mass closing of hundreds of

medical marijuana dispensaries in Los Angeles, California. Contrary to the results reported in

Burkhardt and Goemans (2019), Chang and Jacobson (2017) found that dispensary closures led to

increased theft from vehicles in the area immediately around the dispensary. In a separate analysis,

these authors found nearly identical effects related to restaurant closures, suggesting that a more


70Hansen et al. (2020b) found evidence that Oregon residents crossed the border to buy marijuana after recreational
dispensaries opened in Washington, suggesting that Oregon counties on the Washington border may not be the
appropriate control group.

                                                          38
general mechanism could be driving their observed dispensary estimates. Specifically, they

hypothesized that retail establishments provide informal security through their customers and that

"eyes upon the street" deter "dark alley" crimes (Chang and Jacobson 2017, p. 134).

        Finally, Adda et al. (2014) explored what happened to crime when Lambeth, a borough of

London, temporarily "depenalized" marijuana possession. These authors found that depenalization

led to large increases in marijuana-related offenses (e.g., trafficking and intent to supply), but also

that depenalization shifted police resources toward hard drug-related and nondrug crime, causing

these offenses to fall by 9 percent.



                                             10. Conclusion

        In 2012, Colorado and Washington became the first states to legalize the use of marijuana

for recreational purposes. At the time, there were several unknowns fueling the debate over

legalization. Would it lead to more teenagers experimenting with marijuana? Would it encourage

the use of alcohol? Would the opening of recreational dispensaries lead to more violent and

property crimes? In the years since, researchers have worked diligently to answer these questions

and considerable headway has been made. Meanwhile, new questions have come to the fore.

        Youth marijuana use is the outcome that has perhaps received the most attention from

researchers. Many of the studies appearing in public health and medical journals have employed

identification strategies that economists would not deem credible from a causal perspective (e.g.,

Lynne-Landsman et al. 2013 and Dilley et al. 2019). Although their results have generally been

consistent with the those produced using more sophisticated empirical strategies (Sarvet et al. 2018),

we have chosen not to describe them. Their results could have just as easily gone the other way.

        Table 2 lists a dozen studies that have employed a difference-in-differences (DD) design to

examine the effects of medical marijuana laws on youth marijuana use. Almost without exception,

                                                    39
and regardless of whether their focus was on early MMLs (Anderson et al. 2014) or MMLs passed

after 2000 (Hollingsworth et al. 2020), there is little evidence that teenagers responded to the

legalization of medical marijuana by increasing their consumption.

        The evidence with regard to recreational marijuana and youth use is more equivocal. One

study described in Table 2 provides evidence that RMLs reduced marijuana use among teenagers,

although this estimated effect is modest in terms of magnitude (Anderson et al. 2019); two found no

evidence of an effect (Hao and Cowan 2020; Coley et al. forthcoming); and one study found that

legalizing marijuana for recreational purposes was associated with a substantial increase in past-

month marijuana use among 12- through 17-year-olds (Hollingsworth et al. 2020). As more states

legalize marijuana for recreational purposes and more years of post-treatment data become available

in the Youth Risk Behavior Surveys, Monitoring the Future, and National Survey on Drug Use and

Health, a clearer picture will presumably emerge.

        One of the key unknowns in the debate leading up to Colorado and Washington passing

their RMLs concerned the relationship between alcohol and marijuana (Escobedo and Spellman

2012; Johnson 2012; Livingston 2013). Although there was general agreement that, from a public

health perspective, alcohol was the more harmful of the two substances, prominent experts argued

that there was not enough evidence to determine whether they were substitutes or complements

(Kilmer et al. 2010; Pacula and Sevigny 2014; Caulkins and Kilmer 2016).

        Efforts to legalize medical and recreational marijuana have provided researchers with new

opportunities to explore the relationship between alcohol and marijuana. The studies summarized in

Table 3 generally support the hypothesis that young adults treat these two goods as substitutes. For

instance, Anderson et al. (2013) and Sabia et al. (2017) found that legalizing medical marijuana

reduced past-month alcohol use and binge drinking; Miller and Seo (forthcoming) found that

legalizing recreational marijuana led to a 5 percent decrease in alcohol sales; and Kelly and Rasul

                                                    40
(2014) found large reductions in alcohol-related hospital admissions among male 15- through 24-

year-olds after Lambeth, a borough of London, "depenalized" the possession of marijuana. These

studies, which are described in Section 5.1, have, in our opinion, gone a long way towards settling

the debate over whether alcohol and marijuana are complements or substitutes, at least among

young adults.

        The relationship between marijuana and opioids did not receive much attention from

researchers and policymakers until the publication of Bachhuber et al. (2014). Bachhuber et al.

(2014) found that that MML adoption was associated with a 25 percent reduction in opioid-related

mortality, a result that made headlines (Healy 2014; Millman 2014). This result--coming when so

many Americans were abusing, and being killed by, prescription opioids--also helped persuade key

policymakers to support the legalization of marijuana (Sfondeles 2018; Wang 2018; Taylor 2019).

Since the publication of Bachhuber et al. (2014), dozens of studies have examined the relationship

between legalizing medical marijuana and various opioid-related outcomes, including mortality and

prescribing. In general, they have found evidence of substitution (Powell et al. 2018; Carrieri et al.

2020; McMichael et al. 2020), but it is clear that more recent, "medicalized" MMLs have not had the

same effect as those passed during the pre-Ogden period (Powell et al. 2018; Shover et al. 2019).

        We reviewed only two studies examining the effect of legalizing recreational (as opposed to

medical) marijuana on opioid-related outcomes (Table 4). Drawing on data for the years 1999-2017,

during which time 5 states (Alaska, Colorado, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington), allowed the sale of

recreational marijuana, both Shover et al. (2019) and Chan et al. (2020) found a negative association

between RML adoption and opioid-related mortality. It is possible that RMLs will eventually help

curb the opioid epidemic, but more time will have to pass (and more data will have to be collected)

before any firm conclusions can be drawn.




                                                   41
       In addition to reviewing the literature on the effects of marijuana legalization on alcohol

consumption and opioid use, we summarized studies on tobacco use (Table 5) and the use of other

substances (Table 6). In general, there is little evidence that legalization has encouraged the smoking

of tobacco; if anything, it has discouraged its use. Similarly, an accumulating body of research

suggests that MML adoption is associated with reductions in prescription medications for disorders

such as depression, anxiety, and epilepsy.

       Drivers under the influence of marijuana have trouble maintaining the correct road position

(Bondallaz et al. 2016; Vollrath and Fischer 2017), but legalization could discourage drunk driving,

which is unequivocally dangerous (Irwin et al. 2017). The legalization of marijuana could also affect

road safety through other substances, including prescription opioids. Evidence from the reduced-

form relationship between MMLs and traffic fatalities suggests that, on net, road safety improves

when medical marijuana is legalized (Table 8). The best evidence on relationship between RMLs

and road safety come from studies using a synthetic control approach (Hansen et al. 2020a;

Santaella-Tenorio et al. 2020). However, this approach is sensitive to which matching variables are

used (Minard and Waddell 2019), which could explain why these studies come to different

conclusions: Hansen et al. (2020a) found no evidence that RMLs affected traffic fatalities in

Colorado and Washington, while Santaella-Tenorio et al. (2020) concluded that Colorado's RML

(but not Washington's RML) increased traffic fatalities. As more years of Fatality Analysis

Reporting System data are made available from other recreational marijuana states, we will

undoubtedly learn more about RMLs and road safety.

       To date, only a small number of studies have examined the effects of legalizing marijuana on

mental health and workplace safety. Their results are generally consistent with the argument that the

public health consequences of legalizing marijuana are, on net, positive (Tables 7 and 9), but more

work clearly needs to be done. In particular, we know little about the effects of legalizing marijuana

                                                  42
on mental health outcomes other than suicide. Although the legalization of medical marijuana

appears to reduce sickness-related absences and workplace injuries (Ullman 2017; Anderson et al.

2018; Nicholas and Maclean 2019), the precise mechanisms are unknown. Until these mechanisms

are pinned down, it is premature to conclude that the legalization of recreational marijuana will have

similar effects on workplace safety.

        Finally, we reviewed nine studies on the relationship between legalization and crime (Table

10). Studies that examine the effect of MML or RML adoption provide strong evidence that

legalization reduces non-drug crimes. For instance, Huber III et al. (2016) found that MML

adoption led to fewer homicides and assaults, while Dragone et al. (2019) found that Washington's

RML was associated with reductions in rapes and thefts. By contrast, studies of the effects of

dispensary openings and closings have produced mixed results that require a more careful, nuanced

interpretation. As the number of dispensaries grows, economists will want to gauge their localized

effects on not only crime but also on the other outcomes reviewed. In general, there is a dearth of

studies examining the effects of dispensaries, co-ops, and growers on neighborhood-level outcomes.

We believe this is an area ripe for future researchers to explore.




                                                   43
                                            References

Abouk, Rahi, Keshar Ghimire, Johanna Catherine Maclean, and David Powell. 2021. "Does
Marijuana Legalization Affect Work Capacity? Evidence from Workers' Compensation Benefits."
NBER Working Paper No. 28471.

Adda, Jerome, Brendon McConnell, and Imran Rasul. 2014. "Crime and the Depenalization of
Cannabis Possession: Evidence from a Policing Experiment." Journal of Political Economy, 122(5):
1130-1202.

Ahmad, F.B., L.A. Escobedo, L.M Rossen, M.R. Spencer, M. Warner, and P. Sutton. 2019.
"Provisional Drug Overdose Death Counts." National Center for Health Statistics. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/vsrr/drug-overdose-data.htm.

Alley, Zoe, David Kerr, and Harold Bae. 2020. "Trends in College Students' Alcohol, Nicotine,
Prescription Opioid and Other Drug Use After Recreational Marijuana Legalization: 2008-2018."
Addictive Behaviors, 102: 106212.

Ambrose, Christopher. 2020. "Local Access to Recreational Marijuana and Youth Substance Use."
Working Paper, Washington State University.

Ambrose, Christopher, Benjamin Cowan, and Robert Roseman. Forthcoming. "Geographical
Access to Recreational Marijuana." Contemporary Economic Policy.

American Academy of Pediatrics. 2015. "The Impact of Marijuana Policies on Youth: Clinical,
Research, and Legal Update." Pediatrics, 135(3): 584-587.

Anderson, D. Mark, Benjamin Hansen, and Daniel I Rees. 2013. "Medical Marijuana Laws, Traffic
Fatalities, and Alcohol Consumption." Journal of Law and Economics, 56(2): 333-369.

Anderson, D. Mark, Benjamin Hansen, and Daniel I. Rees. 2015. "Medical Marijuana Laws and
Teen Marijuana Use." American Law and Economics Review, 17(2): 495-528.

Anderson, D. Mark, Benjamin Hansen, Daniel I. Rees, and Joseph J. Sabia. 2019. "Marijuana Laws
and Teen Marijuana Use: New Estimates from the Youth Risk Behavior Surveys." JAMA Pediatrics,
173(9): 879-881.

Anderson, D. Mark, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, and Joseph J. Sabia. 2020. "Cigarette Taxes and Teen
Marijuana Use." National Tax Journal, 73(2): 475-510.

Anderson, D. Mark, Daniel I. Rees, and Joseph J. Sabia. 2014. "Medical Marijuana Laws and
Suicides by Gender and Age." American Journal of Public Health, 104(12): 2369­2376.

Anderson, D. Mark, Daniel I. Rees, and Erdal Tekin. 2018. "Medical Marijuana Laws and Workplace
Fatalities in the United States." International Journal of Drug Policy, 60: 33-39.

Anderson, Robert N., Kenneth D. Kochanek, and Sherry L. Murphy. 1997. "Report of Final
Mortality Statistics, 1995." Monthly Vital Statistics Report, 45(11): 65.
                                                 44
Andreyeva, Elena and Benjamin Ukert. 2019. "The Impact of Medical Marijuana Laws and
Dispensaries on Self-Reported Health." Forum for Health Economics and Policy, 22(2): 1-20.

Aydelotte, Jayson D., Lawrence H. Brown, Kevin M. Luftman, Alexandra L. Mardock, Pedro G.R.
Teixeira, Ben Coopwood, and Carlos V.R. Brown. 2017. "Crash Fatality Rates After Recreational
Marijuana Legalization in Washington and Colorado." American Journal of Public Health, 107(8): 1329-
1331.

Bachhuber, Marcus A., Brendan Saloner, Chinazo O. Cunningham, and Colleen L. Barry. 2014.
"Medical Cannabis Laws and Opioid Analgesic Overdose Mortality in the United States, 1999-
2010." JAMA Internal Medicine, 174(10): 1668­1673.

Bae, Harold and David Kerr. 2020. "Marijuana Use Trends Among College Students in States With
and Without Legalization of Recreational Use: Initial and Longer-Term Changes from 2008 to
2018." Addiction, 115(6): 1115-1124.

Baggio, Michele, Alberto Chong, and Sungoh Kwon. 2020. "Marijuana and Alcohol: Evidence using
Border Analysis and Retail Sales Data." Canadian Journal of Economics, 53(2): 563-591.

Bambico, Francis Rodriguez, Noam Katz, Guy Debonnel and Gabriella Gobbi. 2007.
"Cannabinoids Elicit Antidepressant-Like Behavior and Activate Serotonergic Neurons through the
Medial Prefrontal Cortex." Journal of Neuroscience, 27(43): 11700-11711.

Baran, Madeleine. 2011. "68 Percent of Adult Male Arrestees Test Positive for Drug Use." MPR
News, November 30. Available at: https://www.mprnews.org/story/2011/11/29/arrestees-
positive-drug-use.

Bartos, Bradley J. Charis E. Kubrin, Carol Newark, and Richard McCleary 2020. "Medical Marijuana
Laws and Suicide." Archives of Suicide Research, 24 (2): 204-217.

Bennett, Trevor, Kay Holloway, and David Farrington. 2008. "The Statistical Association between
Drug Misuse and Crime: A Meta-Analysis." Aggression and Violent Behavior, 13: 107-118.

Berg, Austin. 2020. "What You Need to Know about Marijuana Legalization in Illinois." Available
at: https://www.illinoispolicy.org/what-you-need-to-know-about-marijuana-legalization-in-illinois/.

Bishop-Henchman, Joseph and Morgan Scarboro. 2016. "Marijuana Legalization and Taxes: Lessons
for Other States from Colorado and Washington." Tax Foundation, Special Report No. 321.
Available at: https://taxfoundation.org/marijuana-taxes-lessons-colorado-washington.

Boesen, Ulrik. 2020. "A Road Map to Recreational Marijuana Taxation." Tax Foundation, Fiscal
Fact No. 713. Available at: https://taxfoundation.org/recreational-marijuana-tax/.

Bondallaz, Percy, Bernard Favrat, Haïthem Chtioui, Eleonora Fornari, Philippe Maeder, and
Christian Giroud. 2016. "Cannabis and its Effects on Driving Skills." Forensic Science International, 268:
92-102.

                                                   45
Bradford Ashley and David Bradford. 2016. "Medical Marijuana Laws Reduce Prescription
Medication Use in Medicare Part D." Health Affairs, 35(7): 1230-1236.

Bradford Ashley and David Bradford. 2017. "Medical Marijuana Laws May be Associated with a
Decline in the Number of Prescriptions for Medicaid Enrollees." Health Affairs, 36(5): 945-951.

Bradford Ashley and David Bradford. 2018. "The Impact of Medical Cannabis Legalization on
Prescription Medication Use and Costs under Medicare Part D." Journal of Law and Economics, 61(3):
461-487.

Bradford, Ashley, David Bradford, Amanda Abraham, and Grace Bagwell Adams. 2018.
"Association between US State Medical Cannabis Laws and Opioid Prescribing in the Medicare Part
D Population." JAMA Internal Medicine, 178(5): 667­672.

Brinkman, Jeffrey and David Mok-Lamme. 2019. "Not in My Backyard? Not So Fast. The Effect of
Marijuana Legalization on Neighborhood Crime." Regional Science and Urban Economics,
78(September): 103460.

Burke, Cynthia. 2019. "2018 Adult Arrestee Drug Use in the San Diego Region." SANDAG CJ
Bulletin. Available at:
https://www.sandag.org/uploads/publicationid/publicationid_4622_26593.pdf.

Burkhardt, Jesse and Chris Goemans. 2019. "The Short-run Effects of Marijuana Dispensary
Openings on Local Crime." Annals of Regional Science, 63(1): 163-198.

Bush, Evan. 2014. "Seattle's First Pot Shop Poised to Open Tuesday in Sodo." Seattle Times, July 1.
Available at: https://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/marijuana/seattles-first-pot-shop-poised-
to-open-tuesday-in-sodo/.

Bushman, Brad. 1990. "Human Aggression While Under the Influence of Alcohol and Other Drugs:
An Integrative Research Review." Psychological Science, 2(5): 148-152.

Carrieri, Vincenzo, Leonardo Madio, and Francesco Principe. 2020. "Do-It-Yourself Medicine? The
Impact of Light Cannabis Liberalization on Prescription Drugs." Journal of Health Economics,
74(December): 102371.

Carpenter, Christopher. 2004. "Heavy Alcohol Use and Youth Suicide: Evidence from Tougher
Drunk Driving Laws." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 23(4): 831-842.

Carpenter, Christopher and Carlos Dobkin. 2009 "The Effect of Alcohol Consumption on
Mortality: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from the Minimum Drinking Age." American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 1 (1): 164-182.

Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton. 2017. "Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century." Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, Spring.



                                                 46
Caulkins, Jonathan and Beau Kilmer. 2016. "Considering Marijuana Legalization Carefully: Insights
for Other Jurisdictions from Analysis for Vermont." Addiction, 111(12): 2082-2089.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2020. "Smoking and Tobacco Use." Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/fast_facts/index.htm.

Cerdá, Magdalena, Christine Mauro, Ava Hamilton, Natalie Levy, Julian Santaella-Tenorio, Deborah
Hasin, Melanie Wall, Katherine Keyes, and Silvia Martins. 2020. "Association Between Recreational
Marijuana Legalization in the United States and Changes in Marijuana Use and Cannabis Use
Disorder From 2008 to 2016." JAMA Psychiatry, 77(2): 165-171.

Cerdá, Magdalena, Melanie Wall, Tianshu Feng, Katherine M. Keyes, Aaron L. Sarvet, John
Schulenberg, Patrick M. O'Malley, Rosalie L. Pacula, Sandro Galea, and Deborah S. Hasin. 2017.
"Association of State Recreational Marijuana Laws with Adolescent Marijuana Use." JAMA
Pediatrics, 171(2): 142-149.

Chaloupka, Frank J., and Adit Laixuthai. 1997 "Do Youths Substitute Alcohol and Marijuana? Some
Econometric Evidence." Eastern Economic Journal, 23(3): 253­276.

Chaloupka, Frank, Rosalie L. Pacula, Matthew Farrelly, Lloyd Johnston, Patrick O'Malley, and
Jeremy Bray. 1999. "Do Higher Cigarette Prices Encourage Youth to Use Marijuana?" NBER
Working Paper No. 6939.

Chan, Nathan W., Jesse Burkhardt, and Matthew Flyr. 2020. "The Effects of Recreational Marijuana
Legalization and Dispensing on Opioid Mortality." Economic Inquiry, 58(2): 589-606.

Chang, Tom and Mireille Jacobson. 2017. "Going to Pot? The Impact of Dispensary Closures on
Crime." Journal of Urban Economics, 100(July): 120-136.

Choi, Anna, Dhaval Dave, and Joseph J. Sabia. 2019. "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes: Medication
Marijuana Laws and Tobacco Cigarette Use." American Journal of Health Economics, 5(3): 303-333.

Choo, Esther K., Madeline Benz, Nikolas Zaller, Otis Warren, Kristin L. Rising, and K. John
McConnell. 2014. "The Impact of State Medical Marijuana Legislation on Adolescent Marijuana
Use." Journal of Adolescent Health 55: 160-166.

Chu, Yu-Wei Luke. 2014. "The Effects of Medical Marijuana Laws on Illegal Marijuana Use." Journal
of Health Economics, 38: 43-61.

Chu, Yu-Wei Luke. 2015 "Do Medical Marijuana Laws Increase Hard-Drug Use?" Journal of Law and
Economics, 58(2): 481­517.

Chu, Yu-Wei Luke and Wilbur Townsend. 2019. "Joint Culpability: The Effects of Medical
Marijuana Laws on Crime." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 159(March): 502-525.

Clarkson, Michael and Andrew Soukhome. 2021. "South Dakota Judge Nips Recreational Marijuana
in the Bud." Society for Human Resource Management. Available at: https://www.shrm.org/about-
shrm/Pages/default.aspx.
                                                 47
Coley, Rebekah Levine, Summer Sherburne Hawkins, Marco Ghiani, Claudi Kruzik, and
Christopher Baum. 2019. "A Quasi-Experimental Evaluation of Marijuana Policies and Youth
Marijuana Use." American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 45(3): 292-303.

Coley, Rebekah Levine, Claudia Kruzik, Marco Ghiani, Naoka Carey, Summer Sherburne Hawkins,
and Christopher Baum. Forthcoming. "Recreational Marijuana Legalization and Adolescent Use of
Marijuana, Tobacco, and Alcohol." Journal of Adolescent Health.

Combes, Pierre-Philippe and Laurent Linnemer. 2010. "Inferring Missing Citations: A Quantitative
Multi-Criteria Ranking of all Journals in Economics." GREQAM Document de Travail. Nr. 2010-
28, 2010, S. 49.

Conyers, Gregory and Ian Ayres. 2020. "A Lottery Test of the Effect of Dispensaries on Emergency
Room Visits in Arizona." Health Economics, 29(8): 854-864.

Cook, Amanda C., Gregory Leung, and Rhet A. Smith. 2020. "Marijuana Decriminalization, Medical
Marijuana Laws, and Fatal Traffic Crashes in US Cities, 2010-2017." American Journal of Public Health,
110(3): 363-369.

Corasaniti, Nick. 2018. "Murphy Starts to Expand Access to Medical Marijuana in New Jersey." The
New York Times, January 23. Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/23/nyregion/new-
jersey-medical-marijuana.html

Crombie, Noelle. 2012. "Cracks in Oregon's Medical Marijuana Law are Filled with Weed." The
Oregonian, April 21. Available at:
http://www.oregonlive.com/health/index.ssf/2012/04/cracks_in_oregons_medical_mari.html#rpc
token=1293866519&forcesecure=1.

Crost, Benjamin and Santiago Guerrero. 2012. "The Effect Alcohol Availability on Marijuana Use:
Evidence from the Minimum Legal Drinking Age." Journal of Health Economics, 31(1): 112- 121.

Crost, Benjamin and Daniel Rees. 2013. "The Minimum Legal Drinking Age and Marijuana Use:
New Evidence from the NLSY97." Journal of Health Economics, 32(2): 474-476.

Dart, Richard C., Hilary L. Surratt, Theodore J. Cicero, Mark W. Parrino, S. Geoff Severtson, Becki
Bucher-Bartelson, and Jody L. Green. 2015. "Trends in Opioid Analgesic Abuse and Mortality in the
United States." New England Journal of Medicine, 372(3): 241-248.

Davis, Robert E., Nicole A. Doyle, and Vinayak K. Nahar. 2020. "Association between Prescription
Opioid Misuse and Dimensions of Suicidality among College Students." Psychiatry Research, 287:
Article 112469.

Davis, Adam, Kark Geisler, and Mark Nichols. 2016. "The Price Elasticity of Marijuana Demand:
Evidence from Crowd-Sourced Transaction Data." Empirical Economics, 50: 1171-1192.

DeCicca, Philip, Donald S. Kenkel, and Michael F. Lovenheim. Forthcoming. "The Economics of
Tobacco Regulation: A Comprehensive Review." Journal of Economic Literature.


                                                  48
De Pinto, Jennifer. 2019. "Support for Marijuana Legalization Hits New High, CBS News Poll
Finds." CBS News, April 19. Available at: https://www.cbsnews.com/news/support-for-marijuana-
legalization-hits-new-high-cbs-news-poll-finds/.

Dezenski, Lauren. 2020. "Montana, Arizona, New Jersey, South Dakota and Mississippi Approve
Marijuana Ballot Measures, CNN Projects." CNN.com, December 7. Available at:
https://www.cnn.com/2020/11/04/politics/marijuana-legalization-2020-states/index.html.

Dilley, Julia, Susan Richardson, Beau Kilmer, Rosalie Pacula, Mary Segawa, and Magdalena Cerdá.
2019. "Prevalence of Cannabis Use in Youths After Legalization in Washington State." JAMA
Pediatrics, 173(2): 192-193.

Dills, Angela, Sietse Goffard, and Jeffrey Miron. 2017. "The Effects of Marijuana Liberalizations:
Evidence from Monitoring the Future." NBER Working Paper No. 23779.

DiNardo, John and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. "Alcohol, Marijuana, and American Youth: The
Unintended Consequences of Government Regulation." Journal of Health Economics, 20: 991-1010.

Doremus, Jacqueline M., Sarah S. Stith, and Jacob M. Vigil. 2019. "Using Recreational Cannabis to
Treat Insomnia: Evidence from Over-the-Counter Sleep Aid Sales in Colorado." Complementary
Therapies in Medicine, 47: Article 102207.

Dragone, Davide, Giovanni Prarolo Paolo, and Vanin Giulio Zanella. 2019. "Crime and the
Legalization of Recreational Marijuana." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 159: 488-501.

Ellis, Cameron, Martin Grace, Rhet Smith, and Juan Zhang. 2020. "Medical Marijuana and
Automobile Accidents: Evidence from Auto Insurance." Working paper, University of Arkansas at
Little Rock. Available at:
https://www.dropbox.com/s/mlqpf8f4kjzm38d/Medical_Marijuana_and_Auto_Insurance%20%2
82%29.pdf?dl=0.

Escobedo, Tricia and Jim Spellman. 2012. "Group Argues Weed is Safer than Booze." CNN, May
17. Available at: https://www.cnn.com/2012/05/17/health/colorado-marijuana-
initiative/index.html

Evans, David G. 2019. "Marijuana Legalization Will Cause Many Problems for Missouri Law
Enforcement and Schools." Missouri Medicine, 116(3): 164-167.

Everson, Erik, Julia Dilley, Julie Maher, and Curtis Mack. 2019. "Post-Legalization Opening of
Retail Cannabis Stores and Adult Cannabis Use in Washington State, 2009-2016." American Journal of
Public Health, 109(9): 1294-1301.

Farrelly, Matthew, Jeremy Bray, Gary Zarkin, and Brett Wendling. 2001. "The Joint Demand for
Cigarettes and Marijuana: Evidence from the National Household Surveys on Drug Abuse." Journal
of Health Economics, 20(1): 51-68.



                                                   49
Fiz, Jimena, Marta Durán, Dolors Capellà, Jordi Carbonell, and Magí Farré. 2011. "Cannbis Use in
Patients with Fibromyalgia: Effect on Symptoms Relief and Health-Related Quality of Life." PLoS
One, 6(4): e18440.

Flaccus, Gillian. 2018. "US Prosecutor: Oregon has Big Pot Overproduction Problem." AP News,
February 2. Available at: https://www.apnews.com/833bc51a456d4819b1e9882cb17b46ef.

Freedman, Max. 2020. "Cannabis at Work: How Employers Are Reacting to the Legalization of
Marijuana." Business News Daily, June 10. Available at: https://www.businessnewsdaily.com/9386-
legal-marijuana-employment-practices.html.

Gavrilova, Evelina, Takuma Kamada, and Floris Zoutman. 2017. "Is Legal Pot Crippling Mexican
Drug Trafficking Organisations? The Effect of Medical Marijuana Laws on US Crime." Economic
Journal, 129(January): 375-407.

Gfroerer, Joe, Jonaki Bose, Larry Kroutil, Marsha Lopez, and Laura Kann. 2012. "Methodological
Considerations in Estimating Adolescent Substance Use." Proceedings of the Joint Statistical Meetings,
Section on Survey Research Methods, pp. 4127­4140.

Ghimire, Keshar and Johanna Catherine Maclean. 2020. "Medical Marijuana and Workers'
Compensation Claiming." Health Economics, 29(4): 419-434.

Goldsmith, Roberty, Marcelo Targino, Gilbert Fanciullo, Douglas Martin, Natalie Hartenbaum,
Jeremy White, and Phillip Franklin. 2015. "Medical Marijuana in the Workplace: Challenges and
Management Options for Occupational Physicians." Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine,
57(5): 518-525.

Grucza, Richard A., Michael Hur, Arpana Agrawal, Melissa J. Krauss, Andrew D. Plunk, Patricia A.
Cavazos-Rehg, Frank J. Chaloupka, and Laura J. Bierut. 2015. "A Reexamination of Medical
Marijuana Policies in Relation to Suicide Risk." Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 152(1): 68-72

Gurley, Gabrielle. 2019. "Cannabis, the Bipartisan Wonder Drug." The American Prospect, September
27. Available at: https://prospect.org/health/cannabis-the-bipartisan-wonder-drug/.

Hall, Wayne and Louisa Degenhardt. 2009. "Adverse Health Effects of Non-Medical Cannabis
Use." Lancet, 374(9698): 1383-1391.

Hall, Wayne, MacDonald Christie, and David Currow. 2005. "Cannabinoids and Cancer: Causation,
Remediation, and Palliation." Lancet Oncology, 6(1): 35-42.

Hansen, Benjamin, Keaton Miller, and Caroline Weber. 2020a. "Early Evidence on Recreational
Marijuana Legalization and Traffic Fatalities." Economic Inquiry, 58(2): 547-568.

Hansen, Benjamin, Keaton Miller, and Caroline Weber. 2020b. "Federalism, Partial Prohibition, and
Cross-Border Sales: Evidence from Recreational Marijuana." Journal of Public Economics, 187: Article
104159.



                                                   50
Hao, Zhuang and Benjamin W. Cowan. 2020. "The Cross-Border Spillover Effects of Recreational
Marijuana Legalization." Economic Inquiry, 58(2): 642-666.

Harper, Sam, Erin Strumpf, and Jay Kaufman. 2012. "Do Medical Marijuana Laws Increase
Marijuana Use? Replication Study and Extension." Annals of Epidemiology, 22(3): 207-212.

Hartman, Rebecca L. and Marilyn A. Huestis. 2013. "Cannabis Effects on Driving Skills." Clinical
Chemistry, 59(3): 478­492.

Hasin, Deborah S., Melanie Wall, Katherine M. Keyes, Magdalena Cerdá, John Schulenberg, Patrick
M. O'Malley, Sandro Galea, Rosalie L. Pacula, and Tianshu Feng. 2015. "Medical Marijuana Laws
and Adolescent Marijuana Use in the USA from 1991 to 2014: Results from Annual, Repeated
Cross-Sectional Surveys. Lancet Psychiatry, 2: 601­608.

Haskell, Meg. 2010. "Medical Marijuana: Maine Learns Lessons from Montana." The Bangor Daily News,
Dec. 17. Available at: https://bangordailynews.com/2010/12/17/health/maine-proceeds-carefully-
with-its-pot-program-after-other-states-face-legislative-complications/.

Healy, Melissa. 2014. "Medical Marijuana could Reduce Painkiller Abuse, Study Suggests." Los
Angeles Times, August 25. Available at: https://www.latimes.com/nation/la-sci-medical-marijuana-
20140826-story.html

Hoadley, Jack, Juliette Cubanski and Tricia Neuman. 2015. "Medicare Part D at Ten Years: The
2015 Marketplace and Key Trends, 2006­2015." Available at:
http://files.kff.org/attachment/report-medicare-part-d-at-ten-years-the-2015-marketplace-and-key-
trends-2006-2015.

Hollingsworth, Alex, Coady Wing, and Ashley Bradford. 2020. "Comparative Effects of
Recreational and Medical Marijuana Laws on Drug Use Among Adults and Adolescents." Available
at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3400519.

Huber III, Arthur, Rebecca Newman, and Daniel LaFave. 2016. "Cannabis Control and Crime:
Medicinal Use, Depenalization and the War on Drugs." B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy,
16(4): 1-35.

Hunt, Priscillia E. and Jeremy Miles. 2015. "The Impact of Legalizing and Regulating Weed: Issues
with Study Design and Emerging Findings in the USA" In: Nielsen S., Bruno R., Schenk S. (eds)
Non-Medical and Illicit Use of Psychoactive Drugs. Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences, 34: 173-198.

Industrial Safety and Hygiene News. 2019. "Safety Experts: Congress Should Consider Workplace
Safety Implications of Marijuana Legalization." ISHN.com, October 14. Available at:
https://www.ishn.com/articles/111682-safety-experts-congress-should-consider-workplace-safety-
implications-of-marijuana-legalization.

Ingold, John. 2014. "World's First Legal Recreational Marijuana Sales begin in Colorado." The Denver
Post, January 1. Available at:
https://www.denverpost.com/2014/01/01/worlds-first-legal-recreational-marijuana-sales-begin-in-
colorado/.
                                                     51
Irwin, Christopher, Elizaveta Iudakhina, Ben Desbrow, and Danielle McCartney. 2017. "Effects of
Acute Alcohol Consumption on Measures of Simulated Driving: A Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis." Accident Analysis and Prevention, 102: 248-266.

Iwanicki, Janetta L., S. Geoff Severtson, Zachary Margolin, Nabarun Dasgupta, Jody L. Green, and
Richard C. Dart. 2018. "Consistency between Opioid-Related Mortality Trends Derived from
Poison Center and National Vital Statistics System, United States, 2006­2016." American Journal of
Public Health, 108(12): 1639-1645.

Jiang, Wen, Yun Zhang, Lan Xiao, Jamie Van Cleemput, Shao-Ping Ji, Guang Bai, and Xia Zhang
2005. "Cannabinoids Promote Embryonic and Adult Hippocampus Neurogenesis and Produce
Anxiolytic- and Antidepressant-Like Effects." The Journal of Clinical Investigation, 115(11): 3104-3116.

Johnson, Kirk. 2012. "Marijuana Push in Colorado Likens It to Alcohol." New York Times, January
26. Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/27/us/a-ballot-push-to-legalize-marijuana-
with-alcohol-as-the-role-model.html.

Johnson, Timothy P. 2014. "Sources of Error in Substance Use Prevalence Surveys." International
Scholarly Research Notices, A2014, Article 923290.

Johnson, Julie, Dominic Hodgkin, and Sion Kim Harris. 2017. "The Design of Medical Marijuana
Laws and Adolescent Use and Heavy Use of Marijuana: Analysis of 45 States from 1991 to 2011."
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 170: 1-8.

Johnson, Julie, Renee Johnson, Dominic Hodgkin, Abenaa Jones, Ann Marie Matteucci, and Sion
Harris. 2018. "Heterogeneity of State Medical Marijuana Laws and Adolescent Recent Use of
Alcohol and Marijuana: Analysis of 45 States, 1991-2011." Substance Abuse, 39(2): 247-254.

Johnson, Ed and Peter Korn. 2010. "A Growth Industry? The Portland Tribune, April 14. Available at:
http://portlandtribune.com/component/content/article?id=28347.

Jones, Jeffrey M. 2019. "U.S. Support for Legal Marijuana Steady in Past Year." Gallup, October 23.
Available at: https://news.gallup.com/poll/267698/support-legal-marijuana-steady-past-year.aspx.

Kalbfuß, Jörg, Reto Odermatt, and Alois Stutzer. 2018. "Medical Marijuana Laws and Mental Health
in the United States." CEP Discussion Papers (CEPDP1546). Centre for Economic Performance,
London School of Economics and Political Science, London, UK.

Keeping, Juliana. 2010. "Fired Up: Legality of Medical Marijuana Dispensaries an Issue of Debate in
Michigan." AnnArbor.com, December 9. Available at:
http://www.annarbor.com/news/hazy-medical-marijuana-law-leaves-washtenaw-county-
communities-dealing-with-fallout/.

Kelly, Elaine and Imran Rasul 2014. "Policing Cannabis and Drug Related Hospital Admissions:
Evidence from Administrative Records." Journal of Public Economics, 112: 89-114.



                                                   52
Kilmer, Beau, Jonathan P. Caulkins, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Robert J. MacCoun, and Peter H.
Reuter. 2010. "Altered State? Assessing How Marijuana Legalization in California could Influence
Marijuana Consumption and Public Budgets." RAND Corporation; Santa Monica, CA: 2010. No.
OP-315-RC.

Klassen, Mark and Brandon P. Anthony. 2019. "The Effects of Recreational Cannabis Legalization
on Forest Management and Conservation Efforts in U.S. National Forests in the Pacific
Northwest." Ecological Economics 162(August): 39-48.

Kõlves, Kairi, Kate M. Chitty, Rachmania Wardhani, Airi Värnik, Diego de Leo, and Katrina Wit.
2020. "Impact of Alcohol Policies on Suicidal Behavior: A Systematic Literature Review."
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17: Article 7030.

Ladegard, Kristie, Christian Thurstone, and Melanie Rylander. 2020. "Marijuana Legalization and
Youth." Pediatrics, 145 (Supplement 2): S165-S174.

Lattimore, Pamela, Danielle Steffey, Joseph Gfroerer, Jonaki Bose, Michael Pemberton, and Michael
Penne. 2014. Arrestee Substance Use: Comparison of Estimates from the National Survey on Drug Use and
Health and the Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring Program. CBHSQ Data Review. Center for Behavioral
Health Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration,
Rockville, MD.

Leung, Gregory. 2019. "The Impact of Medical Marijuana Laws on College Students' Mental Health,
Drugs Substitutability, and Academic Outcomes." Working Paper, University of Kansas.

Levine, Amir, Kelly Clemenza, and Jeffrey Lieberman. 2017. "Evidence for the Risks and
Consequences of Adolescent Cannabis Exposure." Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 56(3): 214-225.

Light, Miles K., Adam Orens, Brian Lewandowski, and Todd Pickton. 2015. "Market Size and
Demand for Marijuana in Colorado." The Marijuana Policy Group Authors. Available at:
https://www.cannabisconsumer.org/uploads/9/7/9/6/97962014/market_size_and_demand_study
_july_9_2014[1].pdf.

Livingston, Ben. 2013. "Don't Call Him the "Pot Czar". The Stranger, April 10. Available at:
www.thestranger.com/seattle/dont-call-him-the-pot-czar/Content?oid=16460452.

Lopez, German. 2019. "Marijuana Legalization is Very Popular." Vox, April 15. Available at:
https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2019/4/15/18311320/marijuana-legalization-polls-
surveys-trump.

Lu, Thanh. 2020. "Marijuana Legalization and Household Spending on Food and Alcohol."
Working Paper, Weill Cornell Medical College.

Lynne-Landsman, S. D., Livingston, M. D., and A.C. Wagenaar. 2013. "Effects of State Medical
Marijuana Laws on Adolescent Marijuana Use." American Journal of Public Health, 103(8): 1500-1506.



                                                 53
MacCoun, Robert, Rosalie L. Pacula, Jamie Chriqui, Katerine Harris, and Peter Reuter. 2009. "Do
Citizens Know Whether Their State Has Decriminalized Marijuana? Assessing the Perceptual
Component of Deterrence Theory." Review of Law and Economics, 5(1): 347-371.

Maclean, Johanna Catherine, Keshar Ghimire, and Lauren Hersch Nicholas. 2021. "Legalization of
Marijuana and Disability Claiming." Health Economics, 30(2): 453-469.

Martin, Jonathan. 2011. "Pot Dispensaries Sprouting Statewide." The Seattle Times, January 29.
Available at: https://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/pot-dispensaries-sprouting-statewide/.

Maziarz, Marcela Ospina. 2019. "NJ's Medical Marijuana Program Triples Patient Count Since Start
of Murphy Administration." Department of Health, State of New Jersey. Available at:
https://www.nj.gov/health/news/2019/approved/20190724b.shtml.

McMichael, Benjamin, Lawrence Van Horn, and W. Kip Viscusi. 2020. "The Impact of Cannabis
Access Laws on Opioid Prescribing." Journal of Health Economics, 69(January): 102273.

McNamara, Audrey. 2020. "These States Now Have Legal Weed, and Which States Could Follow
Suit in 2020." CBS News, January 1. Available at: https://www.cbsnews.com/news/where-is-
marijuana-legal-in-2020-illinois-joins-10-other-states-legalizing-recreational-pot-2020-01-01/.

Mickelson, Taryn. 2019. "No Lounging Allowed: WA Ban on Cannabis Clubs Continues." The
Spokesman-Review, May 9. Available at: https://www.spokesman.com/stories/2019/may/09/no-
cannabis-lounging-allowed/.

Miller, Austin, Robert Rosenman, and Benjamin Cowan. 2017. "Recreational Marijuana Legalization
and College Student Use: Early Evidence." SSM ­ Population Health, 3: 649-657.

Miller, Keaton and Boyoung Seo. Forthcoming. "The Effect of Cannabis Legalization on Substance
Demand and Tax Revenues." National Tax Journal.

Millman, Jason. 2014. "Is Medical Marijuana the Answer to America's Prescription Painkiller
Epidemic?" Washington Post, August 26. Available at:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2014/08/25/is-medical-marijuana-the-answer-
to-americas-prescription-painkiller-epidemic/.

Minard, Simeon and Glen R. Waddell. 2019. "Dispersion-Weighted Synthetic Controls." Working
paper, University of Oregon. Available at:
https://pages.uoregon.edu/waddell/papers/MinardWaddell_DWSC.pdf.

Miron, Jeffrey and Jeffrey Zwiebel. 1995. "The Economic Case Against Drug Prohibition." Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 9(4): 175-192.

Mitchell, Thomas. 2018. "Colorado Cannabis Dispensary Counter: Growth from 2014 to 2018."
Westword, January 18. Available at: https://www.westword.com/marijuana/colorado-dispensaries-
how-many-are-there-9885310.



                                                54
Model, Karyn. 1993. "The Effect of Marijuana Decriminalization on Hospital Emergency Room
Drug Episodes: 1975-1978." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 88(423): 737-747.

Morris, Robert G., Michael TenEyck, J. C. Barnes, and Tomislav V. Kovandzic. 2014. "The Effect
of Medical Marijuana Laws on Crime: Evidence from State Panel Data, 1990-2006." PloS One, 9(3):
e92816.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2017. The Health Effects of Cannabis and
Cannabinoids: The Current State of Evidence and Recommendations for Research. Washington, D.C.: National
Academies Press.

National Center for Statistics and Analysis. 2019. "Alcohol-Impaired Driving: 2018 Data." Traffic
Safety Facts (Report No. DOT HS 812 864). Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration.

National Institute on Drug Abuse. 2019. "What is Marijuana?" National Institutes of Health.
Available at: https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/marijuana.

Nicholas, Lauren Hersch and Johanna Catherine Maclean. 2019. "The Effects of Medical Marijuana
Laws on the Health and Labor Supply of Older Adults: Evidence from the Health and Retirement
Study." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 38(2): 455-480.

NORML. 2021. "Decriminalization." Available at: https://norml.org/laws/decriminalization/.

Nunley, Christian. 2021. "Democratic Senators Will Push to Pass Pot Reform Bill this Year."
CNBC, February 1. Available at: https://www.cnbc.com/2021/02/01/cannabis-reform-senators-
say-they-will-push-pot-bill-in-2021.html.

O'Connell, Sue. 2012. "SB 423 Monitoring: Montana Marijuana Act: Developments Through
August 2012." Montana Legislature. Available at:
https://leg.mt.gov/content/Committees/Interim/2011-2012/Children-Family/Meeting-
Documents/August-2012/aug2012-sb423-developments-to-date.pdf.

Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 2020. "Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance
System." U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Available at:
https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/data-source/behavioral-risk-factor-surveillance-system.

Ohsfeldt, Robert and Michael Morrisey. 1997. "Beer Taxes, Workers' Compensation, and Industrial
Injury." Review of Economics and Statistics, 79(1): 155-160.

Ostrowsky, Michael. 2011. "Does Marijuana Use Lead to Aggression and Violent Behavior?" Journal
of Drug Education, 41(4): 369-389.

Ozluk, Pelin. 2017. "The Effects of Medical Marijuana Laws on Utilization of Prescribed Opioids
and Other Prescription Drugs." Working paper. Available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3056791.

Pacula, Rosalie L. 1998a. "Does Increasing the Beer Tas Reduce Marijuana Consumption?" Journal of
Health Economics, 17(5): 557-585.
                                                   55
Pacula, Rosalie L. 1998b. "Adolescent Alcohol and Marijuana Consumption: Is There Really a
Gateway Effect?" NBER Working Paper No. 6348.

Pacula, Rosalie L. and Beau Kilmer. 2003. "Marijuana and Crime: Is There a Connection Beyond
Prohibition?" NBER Working Paper No. 10046.

Pacula, Rosalie L., David Powell, Paul Heaton, and Eric L. Sevigny. 2013. "Assessing the Effects of
Medical Marijuana Laws on Marijuana and Alcohol Use: The Devil is in the Details." NBER
Working Paper No. 19302.

Pacula, Rosalie L., David Powell, Paul Heaton, and Eric L. Sevigny. 2015. "Assessing the Effects of
Medical Marijuana Laws on Marijuana Use: The Devil is in the Details." Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, 34(1): 7-31.

Pacula, Rosalie L. and Eric L. Sevigny. 2014. "Marijuana Liberalization Policies: Why we Can't Learn
Much from Policy Still in Motion." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33(1): 212­221.

Parnes, Jamie, Adrian Bravo, Bradley Conner, and Matthew Pearson. 2018. "A Burning Problem:
Cannabis Lessons Learned from Colorado." Addiction Research and Theory, 26(1): 3-10.

Powell, David, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula and Mireille Jacobson. 2018. "Do Medical Marijuana Laws
Reduce Addictions and Deaths Related to Pain Killers?" Journal of Health Economics, 58(March): 29-
42.

Ramaekers, J.G., G. Berghaus, M. van Laar, and O.H. Drummer. 2004. "Dose Related Risk of
Motor Vehicle Crashes After Cannabis Use." Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 73(2): 109-119.

Ramaekers, J.G., H. W. J. Robbe, and J. F. O'Hanlon. 2000. "Marijuana, Alcohol and Actual Driving
Performance." Human Psychopharmacology, 15(7): 551-558.

Ramiriez, Marizen, Ronald Bedford, Ryan Sullivan, T. Renee Anthony, John Kraemer, Brett Faine,
and Corinne Peek-Asa. 2013. "Toxicology Testing in Fatally Injured Workers: A Review of Five
Years of Iowa FACE Cases." International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 10(11):
6154-6168.

Robbe, H. 1998. "Marijuana's Impairing Effects on Driving are Moderate When Taken Alone but
Severe When Combined with Alcohol." Human Psychopharmacology, 13 (S2): S70-S78.

Rosevear, John M. 2010. "The Wild West: Medical Marijuana Comes to Ann Arbor. The Ann Arbor
Observer, November 28. Available at:
https://annarborobserver.com/articles/the_wild_west.html#.XihekXdFw2w.

Rylander, Melanie, Carolyn Valdez, and Abraham M. Nussbaum. 2014. "Does the Legalization of
Medical Marijuana Increase Completed Suicide?" American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 40(4):
269-273.



                                                  56
Sabet, Kevin A. 2013. Refer Sanity. Seven Great Myths About Marijuana. New York, NY: Beaufort
Books.

Sabia, Joseph J. and Thanh Tam Nguyen. 2018. "The Effect of Medical Marijuana Laws on Labor
Market Outcomes." Journal of Law and Economics, 61(3): 361-396.

Sabia, Joseph J., Jeffery Swigert, and Timothy Young. 2017. "Medical Marijuana Laws and Body
Weight." Health Economics, 26(1): 6-34.

Saffer, Henry and Frank Chaloupka. 1999. "The Demand for Illicit Drugs." Economic Inquiry, 37(3):
401-411.

Santaella-Tenorio, Julian, Christine M. Mauro, Melanie M. Wall, June H. Kim, Magdalena Cerdá,
Katherine M. Keyes, Deborah S. Hasin, Sandro Galea, and Silvia S. Martins. 2017. "US Traffic
Fatalities, 1985­2014, and Their Relationship to Medical Marijuana Laws." American Journal of Public
Health, 107(2): 336­342.

Santaella-Tenorio, Julian, Katherine Wheeler-Martin, Charles J. DiMaggio, Alvaro Castillo-Carniglia,
Katherine M. Keyes, Deborah Hasin, and Magdalena Cerdá. 2020. "Association of Recreational
Cannabis Laws in Colorado and Washington State with Changes in Traffic Fatalities, 2005-2017."
JAMA Internal Medicine, 180(8): 1061-1068.

Sarvet, Aaron L., Melanie M. Wall, David S. Fink, Emily Greene, Aline Le, Anne E. Boustead,
Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Katherine M. Keyes, Magdalena Cerdá, Sandro Galea, and Deborah S.
Hasin. 2018. "Medical Marijuana Laws and Adolescent Marijuana Use in the United States: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis." Addiction, 113(6): 1003-1016.

Scherrer, Jeffrey F., Joanne Salas, Patrick J. Lustman, Sandra Burge, and F. David Schneider. 2015.
"Change in Opioid Dose and Change in Depression in a Longitudinal Primary Care Patient
Cohort." Pain, 156(2): 348­355.

Schuermeyer, Joseph, Stacy Salomonsen-Sautel, Rumi Kato Price, Sundari Balan, Christian
Thurstone, Sung-JoonMin, and Joseph T.Sakai. 2014. "Temporal Trends in Marijuana Attitudes,
Availability and use in Colorado Compared to Non-Medical Marijuana States: 2003­11."
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 140(1): 145-155.

Sevigny, Eric, Rosalie L. Pacula, and Paul Heaton. 2014. "The Effects of Medical Marijuana Laws on
Potency." International Journal of Drug Policy, 25(2): 308-219.

Sewell, R. Andrew, James Poling, and Mehmet Sofuoglu. 2009. "The Effect of Cannabis
Compared with Alcohol on Driving." American Journal on Addictions, 18: 185­93.

Sfondeles, Tina. 2018. "Rauner Oks Medical Marijuana to Replace Opioids, Passes on Recreational
Pot." Chicago Sun Times, August 28. Available at: https://chicago.suntimes.com/news/illinois-
medical-marijuana-alternative-opioids-bruce-rauner/.




                                                 57
Shover, Chelsea L., Corey S. Davis, Sanford C. Gordon, and Keith Humphreys. 2019. "Association
between Medical Cannabis Laws and Opioid Overdose Mortality Has Reversed Over Time."
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(26): 12624-12626.

Singer, Jeffrey, Jacob James Rich, Michael Schemenaur, and Robert Capodilupo. 2020. "The
Relationship Between Cannabis Legalization, Suicide and Mental Health Remains Unchanged After
Recreational Access." Working Paper. Available at:
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.09.25.20201848v1.

Singh, Gopal, Kenneth Kochanek, and Marian MacDorman. 1996. "Advance Report of Final
Mortality Statistics, 1994." Mortality Vital Statistics Report, 45(3): 63.

Smart, Rosanna. 2015. "The Kids Aren't Alright but Older Adults Are Just Fine: Effects of Medical
Marijuana Market Growth on Substance Use and Abuse." Available at:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2574915.

Smart, Rosanna and Jacqueline Doremus. 2021. "The Kids Aren't Alright: The Effects of Medical
Marijuana Market Size on Adolescents." Working Paper, California Polytechnic State University.

Smith, Rhet A. 2020. "The Effects of Medical Marijuana Dispensaries on Adverse Opioid
Outcomes." Economic Inquiry, 58 (2): 569-588.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Data Archive (SAMHDA). n.d. "National Survey on Drug Use
and Health (NSDUH-2002-2014)." Available at: https://www.datafiles.samhsa.gov/study/national-
survey-drug-use-and-health-nsduh-2002-2014-nid16959.

Taylor, Kate. 2019. "Legalize Pot? Amid Opioid Crisis, Some New Hampshire Leaders Say No
Way." New York Times, Feb. 20. Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/20/us/weed-
opioids-new-hampshire.html.

Ullman, Darin. 2017. "The Effect of Medical Marijuana on Sickness Absence." Health Economics,
26(10): 1322-1327.

United States Department of Justice Archives. 2017. "Memorandum for Selected United States
Attorneys on Investigations and Prosecutions in States Authorizing the Medical Use of Marijuana."
Office of Public Affairs, United States Department of Justice. Available at:
https://www.justice.gov/archives/opa/blog/memorandum-selected-united-state-attorneys-
investigations-and-prosecutions-states.

Veligati, Sirish, Seth Howdeshell, Sara Beeler-Stinn, Deepak Lingam, Phylicia Allen, Li-Shiun Chen,
and Richard Grucza. 2020. "Changes in Alcohol and Cigarette Consumption in Response to Medical
and Recreational Cannabis Legalization: Evidence from U.S. State Tax Receipt Data." International
Journal of Drug Policy, 75: 102585.

Voelker, Rebecca. 2018. "States Move to Substitute Opioids with Medical Marijuana to Quell
Epidemic." JAMA, 320(23): 2408-2410.



                                                58
Vollrath, Mark and Josefine Fischer. 2017. "When Does Alcohol Hurt? A Driving Simulator Study."
Accident Analysis and Prevention, 109: 89-98.

Volz, Matt. 2010. "Drug Overdose: Medical Marijuana Facing a Backlash." The Flathead Beacon, May
23. Available at: https://flatheadbeacon.com/2010/05/23/drug-overdose-medical-marijuana-
facing-a-backlash/.

Wagner, Benjamin B. and Jared C. Dolan. 2012. "Medical Marijuana and Federal Narcotics
Enforcement in the Eastern District of California." McGeorge Law Review, 43(1): 109-126.

Wang, Vivian. 2018. "Cuomo Moves to Legalize Recreational Marijuana in New York within
Months." New York Times, December 17. Available at:
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/17/nyregion/marijuana-legalization-
cuomo.html?action=click&module=RelatedCoverage&pgtype=Article&region=Footer&login=emai
l&auth=login-email.

Wang, Pengyuan, Guiyang Xiong, and Jian Yang. 2019. "Frontiers: Asymmetric Effects of
Recreational Cannabis Legalization." Marketing Science, 38(6): 927-936.

Ware, Mark, Tongtong Wang, Stan Shapiro, Ann Robinson, Thierry Ducruet, Thao Huynh, Ann
Gamsa, Gary Bennett, and Jean-Paul Collet. 2010. "Smoked Cannabis for Chronic Neuropathic
Pain: A Randomized Controlled Trial." Canadian Medical Association Journal, 182(14): E694-E701.

Warner, Joel. 2009. "Ganjapreneurs are Cashing in on Colorado's Booming Medical Pot Business."
The Denver Westword, September 10. Available at: https://www.westword.com/news/ganjapreneurs-
are-cashing-in-on-colorados-booming-medical-pot-business-5105200.

Wen, Hefei and Jason M. Hockenberry JM. 2018. "Association of Medical and Adult-Use Marijuana
Laws with Opioid Prescribing for Medicaid Enrollees." JAMA Internal Medicine, 178(5): 673­679.

Wen, Hefei, Jason M. Hockenberry, and Janet R. Cummings. 2015. "The Effect of Medical
Marijuana Laws on Adolescent and Adult Use of Marijuana, Alcohol, and Other Substances." Journal
of Health Economics, 42: 64-80.

Williams, Jenny, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Frank Chaloupka, and Henry Wechsler. 2004. "Alcohol
and Marijuana use Among College Students: Economic Complements or Substitutes?" Health
Economics, 13(9): 825-843.

Williams, Robin, Mark Olfson, June H. Kim, Silvia S. Martins, and Herbert D. Kleber. 2016. "Older,
Less Regulated Medical Marijuana Programs Have Much Greater Enrollment Rates than Newer
`Medicalized' Programs." Health Affairs, 35(3): 480-488.

Wolfers, Justin. 2006. "Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A Reconciliation and
New Results." American Economic Review, 96(5): 1802-1820.

Wong, Kevin, Chelsey Clarke, and T. Grady Harlow. 2016. "The Legalization of Marijuana in
Colorado: The Impact," Vol. 4/September. Available at:


                                                59
https://www.sheriffs.org/sites/default/files/2016%20FINAL%20Legalization%20of%20Marijuana
%20in%20Colorado%20The%20Impact.pdf.

Wood, Pamela. 2017. "As Questions Linger, Patients Register for Maryland's Medical Cannabis
Program." Baltimore Sun, April 14. Available at: https://www.baltimoresun.com/politics/bs-md-
cannabis-patients-20170414-story.html.

Zacny, James. 1995. "A Review of the Effects of Opioids on Psychomotor and Cognitive
Functioning in Humans." Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 3(4): 432-466.

Zimlich, Rachael. 2019. "How Legalization Impacts Teen Marijuana Use." Contemporary Pediatrics,
August 20. Available at: https://www.contemporarypediatrics.com/view/how-legalization-impacts-
teen-marijuana-use




                                               60
            Figure 1. Publications Related to Marijuana Legalization and Public Health by Year
40
30
20
10
0




     2013            2014              2015              2016              2017              2018              2019              2020
      Notes: Yearly counts of publications related to marijuana legalization and public health are shown. In addition to articles in the
      journals listed by Combes and Linnemer (2010), articles published in the American Journal of Health Economics, American Journal of
      Public Health, Health Affairs, JAMA, JAMA Internal Medicine, JAMA Pediatrics, JAMA Psychiatry, and Pediatrics are included.




                                                                  61
                     Table 1. Medical and Recreational Marijuana Laws, 1996-2021

                                                                                                 Recreational sales
                                MML effective dates                 RML effective dates              allowed
Alaska                              3/4/1999                           2/24/2015                   10/29/2016
Arkansas                           11/9/2016
Arizona                            4/14/2011                           11/30/2020
California                         11/6/1996                            11/9/2016                     1/1/2018
Colorado                            6/1/2001                           12/10/2012                     1/1/2014
Connecticut                        8/20/2014a
Delaware                           6/26/2015a
D. C.                              7/30/2013a                           2/26/2015                    2/26/2015
Florida                            7/26/2016a
Hawaii                            12/28/2000
Illinois                           11/9/2015a                           1/1/2020                      1/1/2020
Louisiana                           8/6/2019a
Maine                             12/22/1999                            1/31/2017
Maryland                           12/2/2017a
Massachusetts                       1/1/2013                           12/15/2016                   11/20/2018
Michigan                           12/4/2008                            12/6/2018                    12/1/2019
Minnesota                           7/1/2015a
Mississippi                     Not yet operational
Missouri                          10/17/2020a
Montana                            11/2/2004                            1/1/2021
Nevada                             10/1/2001                            1/1/2017                      7/1/2017
New Hampshire                       5/1/2016a
New Jersey                         12/6/2012a                           2/22/2021
New Mexico                          7/1/2007
New York                            1/8/2016
North Dakota                        3/1/2019a
Ohio                               1/16/2019a
Oklahoma                           7/26/2018
Oregon                             12/3/1998                            7/1/2015                     10/1/2015
Pennsylvania                       1/17/2018a
Rhode Island                        1/3/2006
South Dakotab                   Not yet operational
Utah                                3/2/2020a
Vermont                             7/1/2004                            7/1/2018
Virginia                          10/17/2020a
Washington                         11/3/1998                            12/6/2012                     7/8/2014
West Virginia                      8/22/2017a
a Date
     on which first medical marijuana dispensary opened.
b SouthDakota voters simultaneously approved the legalization of marijuana for medicinal and recreational purposes in
November, 2020. However, on February 8, 2021, South Dakota's RML was determined by the state court as
unconstitutional and therefore void and without effect (Clarkson and Soukhome 2021).



                                                               62
                                                   Table 2. Marijuana Legalization and Youth Marijuana Use

            Study                           Data Sources             Empirical strategy and identification                                  Results
Anderson et al. (2015),               Youth Risk Behavior      YRBS analysis: Difference-in-differences (DD)        YRBS analysis: With or without state-specific time
American Law and Economics            Surveys (YRBS), 1993-    regression at the individual-year level. Models      trends, there is no evidence that MMLs increased
Review                                2011                     include individual- and state-level covariates,      the likelihood of marijuana use or frequent use
Examines the effect of legalizing                              state and year fixed effects, and state-specific     among teenagers.
medical marijuana on teenage          National Longitudinal    linear time trends.
marijuana use.                        Survey of Youth 1997                                                          NLSY97 analysis: With or without state-specific
                                      (NLSY97)                 NLSY97 analysis: DD regression at the                time trends, there is no evidence that MMLs
                                                               individual-year level. Models include                increased the likelihood of marijuana use or
                                      Treatment Episode Data   individual- and state-level covariates, individual   frequent use among teenagers.
                                      Set (TEDS), 1992-2009    and year fixed effects, and state-specific linear
                                                               time trends.                                     TEDS analysis: With or without state-specific time
                                                                                                                trends, there is no evidence that MMLs increased
                                                               TEDS analysis: DD regression at the state-year admission rates involving marijuana among teens at
                                                               level. Models include state-level covariates,    publicly funded drug treatment facilities.
                                                               state and year fixed effects, and state-specific
                                                               linear time trends.

Anderson et al. (2019), JAMA          YRBS, 1993-2017          DD regression at the individual-year level.          There is no evidence that MMLs increased the
Pediatrics                                                     Models include individual- and state-level           likelihood of marijuana use or frequent use among
Estimates the effects of legalizing                            covariates, state and year fixed effects.            teenagers. RMLs are associated with an 8%
medical and recreational                                                                                            decrease in the odds of any marijuana use and a 9%
marijuana on teenage marijuana                                                                                      decrease in the odds of frequent teen marijuana
use.                                                                                                                use.

Choo et al. (2014), Journal of        YRBS, 1991-2011          DD regression at the individual-year level.          There is no evidence that MMLs increased the
Adolescent Health                                              Models include individual-level covariates,          probability of marijuana use among teens.
Examines the association between                               state and year fixed effects.
legalizing medical marijuana and
teenage marijuana use.


                                                                                 63
Coley et al. (2019), American         YRBS, 1999-2015          DD regression at the individual-year level.     MMLs are associated with a 9% decrease in the
Journal of Drug and Alcohol                                    Models include individual- and state-level      odds of marijuana use among teens. There is no
Abuse                                                          covariates, state and year fixed effects.       evidence that MMLs affected frequent teen
Examines the association between                                                                               marijuana use. There is no evidence that marijuana
legalizing medical marijuana and                                                                               decriminalization affects the likelihood of
the use of marijuana by teenagers.                                                                             marijuana use or frequent use among teenagers.
In addition, examines the
association between
decriminalization and teenage
marijuana use.

Coley et al. (Forthcoming),           YRBS, 1999-2017          DD regression at the individual-year level.     There is no evidence that marijuana
Journal of Adolescent Health                                   Models include individual- and state-level      decriminalization, MMLs, or RMLs affected the
Estimates the effects of marijuana                             covariates, state and year fixed effects.       likelihood of marijuana use among teens. RMLs
decriminalization, medical                                                                                     are associated with a small decrease in the
marijuana legalization, and                                                                                    frequency of marijuana use among current
recreational marijuana legalization                                                                            marijuana users.
on teenage marijuana use.

Dills et al. (2017), NBER             Monitoring the Future,   DD regression at the individual-year level.     There is little evidence that legalization or
Working Paper                         1977-2015                Models include individual- and state-level      decriminalization affects teenage marijuana use.
Estimates the effects of medical                               covariates, state and year fixed effects, and
marijuana legalization and                                     state-specific linear time trends.
decriminalization on marijuana
use by teenagers.

Harper et al. (2012), Annals of  National Survey on Drug       DD regression at the state-year level. Models   MMLs are associated with an 8% decrease in any
Epidemiology                     Use and Health                include state and year fixed effects.           marijuana use among teens. There is no evidence
Examines the association between (NSDUH), 2002-2009                                                            that MMLs affect perceived riskiness of monthly
legalizing medical marijuana and                                                                               marijuana use.
marijuana use by teenagers.




                                                                                64
Hollingsworth et al. (2020),          NSDUH, 2001-2017   DD regression at the state-year level. Models       MML adoption is associated with a 4-5% increase
Working Paper                                            include state-level covariates, state fixed         in past-month youth marijuana use, while RML
Estimates the effects of legalizing                      effects, and region-by-year fixed effects.          adoption is associated with a 13-15% increase in
medical and recreational                                                                                     past-month use. Recreational sales are associated
marijuana on marijuana use                                                                                   with a 10% increase in past-year use.
among 12- through 17-year-olds.

Johnson et al. (2017), Drug and       YRBS, 1991-2011    DD regression at the individual-year level.         MMLs are associated with a 7% reduction in the
Alcohol Dependence                                       Models include individual-level covariates,         odds of marijuana use among teens. There is no
Examines the association between                         state and year fixed effects.                       evidence that MMLs affected frequent teen
legalizing medical marijuana and                                                                             marijuana use. MMLs with more liberal provisions
teenage marijuana use.                                                                                       are associated with lower odds of teen marijuana
                                                                                                             use, while MMLs with higher possession limits and
                                                                                                             voluntary registration are associated with higher
                                                                                                             odds of use.

Pacula et al. (2015), Journal of      NLSY97             NLSY97 analysis: DD regression at the          NLSY97 analysis: There is no evidence that MMLs
Policy Analysis and                                      individual-year level. Models include          affected the likelihood of marijuana use or frequent
Management                            TEDS, 1992-2011    individual- and state-level covariates, state and
                                                                                                        marijuana use among individuals under the age of
Estimates the effect of legalizing                       year fixed effects.                            21. MMLs that require a patient registry system are
medical marijuana on marijuana                                                                          associated with increased use, while MMLs that
use among individuals under the                          TEDS analysis: DD regression at the state-year allow home cultivation are associated with
age of 21.                                               level. Models include state-level covariates,  decreased use.
                                                         state and year fixed effects.
                                                                                                        TEDS analysis: MMLs are associated with a 12%
                                                                                                        decrease in the admission rates involving marijuana
                                                                                                        among individuals under the age of 21 at publicly
                                                                                                        funded drug treatment facilities. MMLs that legally
                                                                                                        permit dispensaries are associated with more
                                                                                                        treatment admissions, while MMLs that allow
                                                                                                        home cultivation are associated with fewer
                                                                                                        treatment admissions.



                                                                           65
Smart and Doremus (2021),             NSDUH, 2002-2013   Linear trend-break models at the state-year         The linear trend-break analysis produces evidence
Working Paper                                            level, focused on the periods following the         that marijuana use among 12- through 17-year-olds
Estimates the effects of legalizing                      Ogden and Cole memorandums. Models                  increased after the Ogden memorandum was
medical marijuana and the size of                        include state-level covariates, state and year      issued, but fell after the Cole memorandum was
the medical marijuana market on                          fixed effects.                                      issued.
youth marijuana use.
                                                         The authors also estimate DD regressions at         The DD analysis produces evidence of a positive
                                                         the state-year level, where the share of adults     association between medical marijuana market size
                                                         registered as medical marijuana patients in         and past-month marijuana use among 12- through
                                                         state s during year t proxies for the size of the   17-year-olds. There is no evidence, however, that
                                                         medical marijuana market. Models include            MML adoption affects youth marijuana use.
                                                         state-level covariates, state and year fixed
                                                         effects, and state-specific linear time trends.

Wen et al. (2015), Journal of         NSDUH, 2004-2012   DD regression at the individual-year level.         There is no evidence that MMLs affected past-
Health Economics                                         Models include individual- and state-level          month marijuana use among 12- through 20-year-
Examines whether legalizing                              covariates, state and year fixed effects, and       olds. MMLs are associated with a 5% increase in
medical marijuana affects the use                        state-specific linear time trends.                  the probability of past-year marijuana initiation
of marijuana by 12- through 20-                                                                              among 12- through 20-year-olds.
year-olds.




                                                                           66
                                                      Table 3. Marijuana Legalization and the Use of Alcohol

                Study                        Data Sources              Empirical strategy and identification                                  Results
Alley et al. (2020), Addictive        National College Health    Difference-in-differences (DD) regression at         RMLs are associated with a 6% decrease in binge
Behaviors                             Assessment-II (NCHA-       the individual-year level. Models include            drinking among college students. Estimates are
Examines the association between      II), 2008-2018             individual- and institution-level covariates,        larger for college students ages 21 and older.
legalizing recreational marijuana                                state and year fixed effects, and state-specific
and alcohol consumption among                                    linear trends.
college students.

Anderson et al. (2013), Journal       Fatality Analysis          FARS analysis: DD regression at the state-year       FARS analysis: MMLs are associated with a 13-15%
of Law and Economics                  Reporting System           level. Models include state-level covariates,        decrease in traffic fatalities involving alcohol.
Estimates the effects of legalizing   (FARS), 1990-2010          state and year fixed effects, and state-specific
medical marijuana on alcohol-                                    linear time trends.                                  BRFSS analysis: MMLs are associated with a
related traffic fatalities, alcohol   Behavioral Risk Factor                                                          decrease in self-reported past-month alcohol use.
consumption, and alcohol sales.       Surveillance System        BRFSS analysis: DD regression at the                 Estimates are more pronounced for young adults
                                      (BRFSS), 1993-2010         individual-year level. Models include                and for binge drinking (defined as having 5 or more
                                                                 individual- and state-level covariates, state and    alcoholic beverages on one occasion).
                                      Beer Institute's Brewers   year fixed effects, and state-specific linear time
                                      Almanac, 1990-2010         trends.                                              Brewers Almanac analysis: MMLs are associated with
                                                                                                                      a 5% decrease in beer sales. There is no evidence
                                                                 Brewers Almanac analysis: DD regression at the       that MML adoption reduces wine or spirits sales.
                                                                 state-year level. Models include state-level
                                                                 covariates, state and year fixed effects, and
                                                                 state-specific linear time trends.




                                                                                  67
Andreyeva and Ukert (2019),            BRFSS, 1993-2013          DD regression at the individual-year level.      MMLs are associated with decreases in heavy and
Forum for Health Economics &                                     Models include individual- and state-level       risky drinking, while dispensary sales are associated
Policy                                                           covariates, state and year fixed effects, and    with an increase in heavy drinking. Heavy drinking
Examines the relationship between                                state-specific linear time trends.               is defined as having consumed 2 or more (1 or
legalizing medical marijuana and                                                                                  more) drinks per day on average for the past month
alcohol consumption.                                                                                              for men (women). Risky drinking is defined as
                                                                                                                  having consumed 60 or more (32 or more) drinks
                                                                                                                  in the past month for men (women). Combined,
                                                                                                                  legalization and dispensary sales have no effect on
                                                                                                                  alcohol consumption.

Baggio et al. (2020), Canadian         Nielsen Retail Scanner    DD regression at the county-month level.         Focusing on contiguous-border county pairs,
Journal of Economics                   Data Set, 2006-2015       Models include county- and state-level           MMLs are associated with a 12% decrease in retail
Estimates the effect of legalizing                               covariates, county and month fixed effects,      alcohol sales.
medical marijuana on retail sales of                             and state-specific linear trends.
alcohol.

Conyers and Ayres (2020),              Hospital discharge data   Licenses for medical marijuana dispensaries in   There is no evidence that living in the same zip
Health Economics                       from the Arizona          Arizona were allocated based on the results of   code as a newly opened medical marijuana
Estimates the effect of living near    Department of Health      a lottery conducted by the Department of         dispensary is associated with alcohol-related ED
a medical marijuana dispensary on      Services, 2010-2016.      Health Services. DD regression comparing         visits.
alcohol-related emergency                                        alcohol-related ED visits among residents of
department (ED) visits.                                          zip codes with newly opened dispensaries to
                                                                 alcohol-related ED visits among residents of
                                                                 zip codes without dispensaries.

Dragone et al. (2019), Journal of      National Survey on Drug   DD and spatial regression discontinuity design   Legalization of recreational marijuana is associated
Economic Behavior and                  Use and Health            at the county-year level near the WA-OR          with a 20% decrease in self-reported binge drinking
Organization                           (NSDUH), 2010-2014        border. Models include county and time fixed     on the WA side of the border relative to the OR
Estimates the effect of legalizing                               effects, and second-order polynomials in the     side.
recreational marijuana in                                        minimum distance of the county centroid
Washington state on alcohol                                      from the border.
consumption near the
Washington-Oregon border.

                                                                                  68
Johnson et al. (2018), Substance      Youth Risk Behavior         DD regression at the individual-year level.      MMLs are associated with an 8% decrease in the
Abuse                                 Surveys (YRBS), 1991-       Models include individual-level covariates,      odds of past-month alcohol use among high school
Examines the association between      2011                        state and year fixed effects.                    students.
legalizing medical marijuana and
youth alcohol use.

Kelly and Rasul (2014), Journal       Inpatient Hospital          DD regression at the borough-quarter-year        There was a substantial reduction in admissions
of Public Economics                   Episode Statistics (HES),   level. Models include borough-level              involving alcohol among males ages 15 through 24
Asks how an experiment                1997-2009                   covariates, borough and quarter fixed effects.   after Lambeth depenalized marijuana.
depenalizing marijuana in                                                                                          Depenalization was not associated with alcohol-
Lambeth, a borough of London,                                                                                      related admissions among older male cohorts.
affected hospital admissions
involving alcohol.

Miller and Seo (forthcoming),         Nielsen Retail Scanner      Estimate a flexible demand system at the         Legalization of recreational marijuana is associated
National Tax Journal                  Data Set, 2013-2016         county-month level. Models include county        with a 5% decrease in the demand for alcohol.
Estimates the effect of legalizing                                and month fixed effects. Hausman, tax, and
recreational marijuana in                                         wholesale instruments are used to instrument
Washington state on retail sales of                               for prices. The percentage of population in
alcohol.                                                          counties where marijuana retail is banned is
                                                                  used to instrument marijuana availability.

Sabia et al. (2017), Health           BRFSS, 1990-2012            DD regression at the individual-year level.      MMLs are associated with a 3% decrease in the
Economics                                                         Models include individual- and state-level       probability of past-month alcohol consumption and
Examines whether legalizing                                       covariates, state and year fixed effects, and    a 5% decrease in the probability of past-month
medical marijuana affects alcohol                                 state-specific linear time trends.               binge drinking among respondents 18 through 24
consumption.                                                                                                       years of age.




                                                                                   69
Veligati et al. (2020),              National Institute on   DD regression at the state-year level. Models    There is no evidence that MMLs or RMLs increase
International Journal of Drug        Alcohol Abuse and       include state-level covariates, state and year   per capita alcohol sales.
Policy                               Alcoholism's Alcohol    fixed effects.
Examines the association between     Epidemiologic Data
legalizing medical marijuana and     System (AEDS), 1990-
per capita alcohol consumption.      2016
In addition, examines the
association between legalizing
recreational marijuana and alcohol
consumption.

Wen et al. (2015), Journal of        NSDUH, 2004-2012        DD regression at the individual-year level.      MMLs are associated with a 10% increase in binge
Health Economics                                             Models include individual- and state-level       drinking among respondents ages 21 and older.
Estimates the effect of legalizing                           covariates, state and year fixed effects, and    There is no evidence that MMLs affect alcohol
medical marijuana on alcohol                                 state-specific linear time trends.               consumption among 12- through 20-year-olds.
consumption.




                                                                              70
                                                    Table 4. Marijuana Legalization and the Use of Opioids

            Study                            Data Sources              Empirical strategy and identification                             Results
Bachhuber et al. (2014),             National Vital Statistics   DD regression at the state-year level. Models    Without state-specific time trends, MMLs are
JAMA Internal Medicine               System (NVSS) multiple      include state-level covariates, state and year   associated with a 25% reduction in opioid-related
Examines the association between     cause-of-death mortality    fixed effects, and state-specific linear time    mortality. With state-specific linear trends, MMLs
legalizing medical marijuana and     files, 1999-2010            trends.                                          are associated with an 18% reduction in opioid-
opioid-related mortality.                                                                                         related mortality.

Bradford and Bradford (2016),        Medicare Part D             DD regression at the physician-year level.       MMLs are associated with a reduction in the
Health Affairs                       Prescription Drug Event     Models include physician- and state-level        prescribing of pain medications under Medicare
Examines the association between     Standard Analytic File,     covariates, state and year fixed effects.        Part D.
legalizing medical marijuana and     2010-2013
prescribing under Medicare Part D.

Bradford and Bradford (2017),        State Drug Utilization DD regression at the state-quarter level.             MMLs are associated with a reduction in the
Health Affairs                       Data (SDUD), 2007-2014 Models include state-level covariates, state and      prescribing of pain medications to Medicaid
Examines the association between                            year fixed effects.                                   enrollees.
legalizing medical marijuana and
prescribing to Medicaid enrollees.

Bradford and Bradford (2018),        Medical Expenditure         DD regression at the physician-year level.       MMLs are associated with a reduction in the
Journal of Law and Economics         Panel Survey (MEPS),        Models include physician and year fixed          prescribing of pain medications under Medicare
Examines the association between     2007-2011                   effects.                                         Part D.
legalizing medical marijuana and
prescribing under Medicare Part D.

Bradford et al. (2018), JAMA         Medicare Part D             DD regression at the state-year level. Models       MMLs are associated with an 8.5% reduction in the
Internal Medicine                    Prescription Drug Event     include state-level covariates, state fixed effects prescribing of opioids under Medicare Part D.
Examines the association between     Standard Analytic File,     and a linear time trend.
legalizing medical marijuana and     2010-2015.
the prescribing of opioids under
Medicare Part D.

                                                                                 71
Carrieri et al. (2020), Journal of    Data on prescription        DD regression at the province-month level.         Without province-specific linear trends, the
Health Economics                      opioid sales for the        Models include province-level covariates,          legalization of "light cannabis" is associated with a
Asks whether a 2016 Italian law       period 2016-2018 are        province, month and year fixed effects, and        1% reduction in prescription opioid sales. With
permitting the cultivation of         from Federfarma, the        province-specific linear time trends.              province-specific linear trends, the legalization of
marijuana with low levels of THC      Italian association of                                                         "light cannabis" is associated with a 2% reduction
affected prescription opioid sales.   pharmacy owners.                                                               in prescription opioid sales.

Chan et al. (2020), Economic          NVSS multiple cause-of-     DD regression at the state-year level. Models      Legalization of recreational marijuana is associated
Inquiry                               death mortality files,      include state-level covariates, state and year     with a (statistically insignificant) 4% reduction in
Estimates the effects of legalizing   1999-2017.                  fixed effects, and state-specific linear trends.   opioid-related mortality. Recreational sales are
medical and recreational marijuana                                                                                   associated with a 16-21% reduction in opioid-
on opioid-related mortality.                                                                                         related mortality.

Chu (2015), Journal of Law and        Treatment Episode Data      DD regression at the state-year level. Models      MMLs are associated with a 20% reduction in
Economics                             Set (TEDS), 1992-2011.      include state-level covariates, state and year     admissions to substance abuse treatment for
Estimates the effects of legalizing                               fixed effects, and state-specific linear trends.   heroin.
medical marijuana on admissions
for heroin treatment.

Conyers and Ayres (2020),             Hospital discharge data     Licenses for medical marijuana dispensaries in     Living in the same zip code as a newly opened
Health Economics                      from the Arizona            Arizona were allocated based on the results of     medical marijuana dispensary is associated with an
Estimates the effect of living near   Department of Health        a lottery conducted by the Department of           increase in opioid-related ED visits of 0.8% per
a medical marijuana dispensary on     Services, 2010-2016.        Health Services. DD regression comparing           quarter.
opioid-related emergency                                          opioid-related ED visits among residents of
department (ED) visits.                                           zip codes with newly opened dispensaries to
                                                                  opioid-related ED visits among residents of
                                                                  zip codes without dispensaries.

McMichael et al. (2020), Journal      Symphony Health's           DD regression at the provider-state-year level.    Legalizing medical marijuana is associated with a
of Health Economics                   IDV® (Integrated            Models include state-level covariates, state and   4% reduction in opioid prescribing. Legalizing
Estimates the effects of legalizing   Dataverse) dataset, 2011-   year fixed effects, and healthcare provider        recreational marijuana is associated with a 12%
medical and recreational marijuana    2018.                       fixed effects.                                     reduction in opioid prescribing.
on the prescribing of opioids by
healthcare providers.

                                                                                   72
Powell et al. (2018), Journal of      NVSS multiple cause-of-   DD regression at the state-year level. Models    1999­2010: MMLs are associated with a 20%
Health Economics                      death mortality files,    include state-level covariates, state and year   reduction in opioid-related mortality.
Estimates the effects of legalizing   1999-2013                 fixed effects.
medical marijuana on opioid-
related mortality using data after                                                                               1999­2013: MMLs are associated with a
the release of the Ogden memo in                                                                                 (statistically insignificant) 10% reduction in opioid-
October of 2009.                                                                                                 related mortality.

Shover et al. (2019), Proceedings     NVSS multiple cause-of-   DD regression at the state-year level. Models    1999-2010: Without state-specific time trends,
of the National Academy of            death mortality files,    include state-level covariates, state and year   MMLs are associated with a 21.1% reduction in
Sciences                              1999-2017                 fixed effects, and state-specific linear time    opioid-related mortality. With state-specific linear
Replicates and extends Bachhuber                                trends.                                          trends, the association between MMLs and opioid-
et al. (2014) by examining the                                                                                   related mortality is not statistically significant at the
effects of legalizing medical and                                                                                5% level.
recreational marijuana on opioid-
related mortality using data from                                                                                1999-2017: Without state-specific time trends,
1999-2017.                                                                                                       MMLs are associated with a 22.7% increase in
                                                                                                                 opioid-related mortality; RMLs are associated with
                                                                                                                 a (statistically insignificant) 14.7 percent reduction
                                                                                                                 in opioid-related mortality. With state-specific
                                                                                                                 linear trends, the association between MMLs and
                                                                                                                 opioid-related mortality is not statistically
                                                                                                                 significant at the 5% level.




                                                                                73
Smith (2020), Economic Inquiry        NVSS multiple cause-of-   DD regression at the county-year level.            NVSS analysis: Without state-specific linear trends,
Examines the effects of medical       death mortality files,    Models include county- and state-level             the opening of a medical marijuana dispensary is
marijuana dispensaries on mortality   1999-2014                 covariates, county and year fixed effects, and     associated with an 11% reduction in mortality
involving a prescription opioid and                             state-specific linear time trends.                 involving a prescription opioid. With state-specific
admissions to substance abuse         TEDS, 1992-2014                                                              linear trends, the opening of a medical marijuana
treatment for opioids.                                                                                             dispensary is associated with a 7% reduction in
                                                                                                                   mortality involving a prescription opioid.

                                                                                                                   TEDS analysis: Without state-specific linear trends,
                                                                                                                   the opening of a medical marijuana dispensary is
                                                                                                                   associated with a (statistically insignificant) 5%
                                                                                                                   reduction in admissions to substance abuse
                                                                                                                   treatment for opioids. With state-specific linear
                                                                                                                   trends, the opening of a medical marijuana
                                                                                                                   dispensary is associated with a (statistically
                                                                                                                   insignificant) 8% reduction admissions to substance
                                                                                                                   abuse treatment for opioids.

Wen et al. (2015), Journal of         NSDUH, 2004-2012          DD regression on repeated cross sections of        There is no evidence that MMLs affect the use of
Health Economics                                                individuals. Models include individual- and        prescription painkillers or heroin.
Estimates the effects of legalizing                             state-level covariates, state and year fixed
medical marijuana on the use of                                 effects, and state-specific linear time trends.
prescription painkillers and heroin
by adolescents and adults.

Wen and Hockenberry (2018),           SDUD, 2011-2016           DD regression using at the state-quarter level.    MMLs are associated with a 6% reduction in opioid
JAMA Internal Medicine                                          Models include state-level covariates, state and   prescribing to Medicaid enrollees.
Examines the association between                                quarter fixed effects.
legalizing medical marijuana and
the prescribing of opioids to
Medicaid enrollees.




                                                                                 74
                                                  Table 5. Marijuana Legalization and the Use of Tobacco

                Study                    Data Sources              Empirical strategy and identification                            Results
Alley et al. (2020), Addictive        NCHA-II, 2008-2018     DD regression at the individual-year level.      There is no evidence of an association between
Behaviors                                                    Models include individual- and institution-level RMLs and tobacco use among college students.
Examines the association between                             covariates, state and year fixed effects, and
legalizing recreational marijuana                            state-specific linear trends.
and tobacco use among college
students. The mode of tobacco
use includes cigarettes, pipes,
cigars, e-cigarettes, and smokeless
tobacco.

Anderson et al. (2020), National      YRBS, 1991-2017        DD regression at the individual-year level.     MMLs are associated with a 6% reduction in any
Tax Journal                                                  Models include individual- and state-level      teen cigarette use in the past month and a 12%
Estimates the effects of medical                             covariates, and state and year fixed effects.   reduction in frequent teen cigarette, defined as
and recreational marijuana                                                                                   having smoked cigarettes during at least 20 of the
legalization on teen cigarette use.                                                                          past 30 days. There is little evidence to suggest that
                                                                                                             RMLs are associated with teen cigarette use.

Andreyeva and Ukert (2019),           BRFSS, 1993-2013       DD regression at the individual-year level.     There is no evidence of an association between
Forum for Health Economics &                                 Models include individual- and state-level      MMLs and cigarette smoking.
Policy                                                       covariates, state and year fixed effects, and
Examines the relationship between                            state-specific linear time trends.
medical marijuana legalization and
cigarette use.




                                                                              75
Choi et al. (2019), American          NSDUH, 2002-2015         NSDUH analysis: DD regression at the state-         Across all three data sets, the authors find evidence
Journal of Health Economics                                    year level. Models include state-level              that MMLs are associated with a 1 to 1.5
Estimates the effect of legalizing    BRFSS, 1990-2015         covariates, and state and year fixed effects.       percentage-point reduction in any cigarette
medical marijuana on cigarette use.                                                                                smoking. There is also evidence that MMLs are
                                      Current Population       BRFSS analysis: DD regression at the                associated with a reduction in the number of
                                      Survey Tobacco Use       individual-year level. Models include               cigarettes consumed per day among current
                                      Supplements (CPS-TUS),   individual- and state-level covariates, state and   smokers, suggesting effects at the intensive margin.
                                      1992-2015                year fixed effects, and state-specific linear and
                                                               higher order trends.

                                                               CPS-TUS analysis: DD regression at the
                                                               individual-year level. Models include
                                                               individual- and state-level covariates, state and
                                                               year fixed effects, and state-specific linear and
                                                               higher order trends.

Miller and Seo (forthcoming),         Nielsen Retail Scanner   Estimate a flexible demand system at the            Legalization of recreational marijuana is associated
National Tax Journal                  Data Set, 2013-2016      county-month level. Models include county           with a 12% decrease in tobacco demand.
Examines the effect of legalizing                              and month fixed effects. Hausman, tax, and
recreational marijuana in                                      wholesale instruments are used to instrument
Washington state on retail sales of                            for prices. The percentage of population in
tobacco.                                                       counties where marijuana retail is banned is
                                                               used to instrument marijuana availability.

Veligati et al. (2020),               National Institute on    DD regression at the state-year level. Models       There is no evidence that MMLs or RMLs
International Journal of Drug         Alcohol Abuse and        include state-level covariates, state and year      increased per capita cigarette sales.
Policy                                Alcoholism's AEDS,       fixed effects.
Estimates the effects of legalizing   1990-2016
medical and recreational marijuana
on per capita cigarette sales.




                                                                                76
                                               Table 6. Marijuana Legalization and the Use of Other Substances

             Study                         Data Sources                Empirical strategy and identification                               Results
Bradford and Bradford (2016),        Medicare Part D              DD regression at the physician-year level.         MMLs are associated with reductions in the
Health Affairs                       Prescription Drug Event      Models include physician- and state-level          prescribing of medications for anxiety, depression,
Examines the association between     Standard Analytic File,      covariates, state and year fixed effects.          nausea, pain, psychosis, seizures, and sleep
legalizing medical marijuana and     2010-2013                                                                       disorders under Medicare Part D. There is no
prescribing under Medicare Part D.                                                                                   evidence that MMLs reduce the prescribing of
                                                                                                                     medications for glaucoma and spasticity.

Bradford and Bradford (2017),        SDUD, 2007-2014              DD regression at the state-quarter level.          MMLs are associated with reductions in the
Health Affairs                                                    Models include state-level covariates, state and   prescribing of medications for depression, nausea,
Examines the association between                                  year fixed effects.                                pain, psychosis, and seizures under Medicaid.
legalizing medical marijuana and                                                                                     There is no evidence that MMLs reduce the
prescribing to Medicaid enrollees.                                                                                   prescribing of medications for glaucoma and
                                                                                                                     spasticity.


Bradford and Bradford (2018),        MEPS, 2007-2011              DD regression at the physician-year level.         MMLs are associated with reductions in the
Journal of Law and Economics                                      Models include physician and year fixed            prescribing of medications for anxiety, depression,
Examines the association between                                  effects.                                           nausea, pain, psychosis, seizures and sleep disorders
legalizing medical marijuana and                                                                                     under Medicare Part D. There is no evidence that
prescribing under Medicare Part D.                                                                                   MMLs reduce the prescribing of medications for
                                                                                                                     glaucoma and spasticity.

Carrieri et al. (2020), Journal of   Data on prescription         DD regression at the province-month level.         Without province-specific linear trends, the
Health Economics                     sales for the period 2016-   Models include province-level covariates,          legalization of "light cannabis" is associated with a
Asks whether a 2016 Italian law      2018 are from Federfarma,    province, month and year fixed effects, and        1.6% reduction in prescription sales (including sales
permitting the cultivation of        the Italian association of   province-specific linear trends.                   of sedatives, anti-epileptics, anti-psychotics, and
marijuana with low levels of THC     pharmacy owners.                                                                anti-depressives). With province-specific linear
affected prescription sales.                                                                                         trends, legalization is associated with a 1.7%
                                                                                                                     reduction in prescription sales.


                                                                                   77
Chu (2015), Journal of Law and        TEDS, 1992-2011.          DD regression at the state-year level. Models      No evidence that MMLs are related to admissions
Economics                                                       include state-level covariates, state and year     to substance abuse treatment for cocaine.
Estimates the effect of legalizing                              fixed effects, and state-specific linear trends.
medical marijuana on admissions
to substance abuse treatment for
cocaine.

Conyers and Ayres (2020),             Hospital discharge data   Licenses for medical marijuana dispensaries in     There is no evidence that living in the same zip
Health Economics                      from the Arizona          Arizona were allocated based on the results of     code as a newly opened medical marijuana
Estimates the effect of living near   Department of Health      a lottery conducted by the Department of           dispensary is associated with cocaine-related ED
a medical marijuana dispensary on     Services, 2010-2016.      Health Services. DD regression comparing           visits.
cocaine-related emergency                                       cocaine-related ED visits among residents of
department (ED) visits.                                         zip codes with newly opened dispensaries to
                                                                cocaine-related ED visits among residents of
                                                                zip codes without dispensaries.

Doremus et al. (2020),                Nielsen Retail Scanner    Panel regression at the store-month level.         Recreational dispensary openings are associated
Complementary Therapies in            Data Set, 2012-2014       Growth in market share of over-the-counter         with a 0.33 percentage point decrease in the market
Medicine                                                        sleep aids regressed on store- and county-level    share growth of over-the-counter sleep aids.
Asks whether the opening of                                     controls, store indicators, and indicator for
recreational marijuana dispensaries                             recreational dispensary in county.
affected the growth in sales of
over-the-counter sleep aids.

Hollingsworth et al. (2020),          NSDUH, 2001-2017          DD regression at the state-year level. Models      There is no evidence that MML adoption is
Working Paper                                                   include state-level covariates, state fixed        associated with cocaine use. There is also evidence
Estimates the effects of legalizing                             effects, and region-by-year fixed effects.         that RMLs increase cocaine use, but these estimates
medical and recreational marijuana                                                                                 are sensitive to model specification.
on cocaine use.




                                                                                 78
Kelly and Rasul (2014), Journal     Inpatient HES, 1997-   DD regression at the borough-quarter level.       Admission rates involving hard drugs increased by
of Public Economics                 2009                   Models include borough-level covariates,          40-100 percent after Lambeth depenalized
Asks how an experiment                                     quarter and borough fixed effects.                marijuana.
depenalizing marijuana in
Lambeth, a borough of London,
affected hospital admissions
involving hard drugs (including
cocaine, crack, crystal-meth,
heroin, LSD, MDMA and
methadone).

Wen et al. (2015), Journal of       NSDUH, 2004-2012       DD regression on repeated cross sections of       There is no evidence that MMLs affect the use of
Health Economics                                           individuals. Models include individual- and       cocaine.
Examines whether legalizing                                state-level covariates, state and year fixed
medical marijuana affects                                  effects, and state-specific linear time trends.
adolescent and adult cocaine use.




                                                                            79
                                                           Table 7. Marijuana Legalization and Suicides

           Study                         Data Sources                  Empirical strategy and identification                                 Results
Anderson et al. (2014),           NVSS multiple cause-of-        Difference-in-difference (DD) regression at          Controlling for state-specific linear trends, MML
American Journal of Public        death mortality files, 1990-   the state-year level. Models include state-level     adoption is associated with a 5-6% reduction in the
Health                            2007                           covariates, state and year fixed effects, and        male suicide rate. The association between MML
Estimates the effect of                                          state-specific linear time trends.                   adoption and the female suicide rate is of
legalizing medical marijuana on                                                                                       comparable magnitude but not statistically
suicide rates.                                                                                                        significant. MML adoption is associated with an
                                                                                                                      11% reduction in suicides among male 20- through
                                                                                                                      29-year-olds, and a 9% reduction in suicides among
                                                                                                                      male 30- through 39-year-olds.

Bartos et al. (2020), Archives    NVSS multiple cause-of-        Uses a synthetic control approach to compare         After medical marijuana was legalized in 1996,
of Suicide Research               death mortality files, 1970-   suicides in California with those in its synthetic   suicides fell by 398.9 per year (or approximately
Asks whether the legalization     2004                           control. Matching on pre-treatment suicide           11%) in California as compared to its synthetic
of medical marijuana in                                          counts.                                              control. This estimated effect is largely driven by
California affected total,                                                                                            firearm-related suicides.
firearm-related, and non-
firearm-related suicides.

Grucza et al. (2015), Drug        NVSS multiple cause-of-        DD regression using individual-level data.           Controlling for state-specific linear trends, there is
and Alcohol Dependence.           death mortality files, 1990-   Models include individual- and state-level           no evidence that MML adoption is related to
Estimates the association         2010                           covariates, state and year fixed effects, and        suicides. MML adoption is associated with a
between legalizing medical                                       state-specific linear time trends.                   (statistically insignificant) 4% reduction in the odds
marijuana and the odds of                                                                                             of suicide among male 20- through 29-year-olds (p-
suicide.                                                                                                              value = 0.39), and a (statistically insignificant) 6%
                                                                                                                      reduction in the odds of suicide among male 30-
                                                                                                                      through 39-year-olds (p-value = 0.14).




                                                                                   80
                                                      Table 8. Marijuana Legalization and Traffic Fatalities

           Study                            Data Sources               Empirical strategy and identification                                  Results
Anderson et al. (2013),            Fatality Analysis Reporting   Difference-in-differences (DD) regression at       Without state-specific time trends, MMLs are
Journal of Law and                 System (FARS), 1990-2010      the state-year level. Models include state-level   associated with a 10% reduction in traffic fatalities.
Economics                                                        covariates, state and year fixed effects, and      With state-specific linear trends, MMLs are
Estimates the effect of                                          state-specific linear time trends.                 associated with a (statistically insignificant) 9%
legalizing medical marijuana on                                                                                     reduction in traffic fatalities. Estimated effects are
traffic fatalities.                                                                                                 larger in magnitude for traffic fatalities involving
                                                                                                                    alcohol, traffic fatalities on weekends, and traffic
                                                                                                                    fatalities at night.

Aydelotte et al. (2017),           FARS, 2009-2015.              DD regression at the state-year level. Models      RML adoption is not associated with changes in
American Journal of Public                                       include state-level covariates, pre- and post-     traffic fatalities. The authors define the post-
Health                                                           treatment dummies.                                 treatment period as beginning in 2013, before
Examines the association                                                                                            recreational sales in Colorado and Washington
between legalizing recreational                                                                                     began.
marijuana and traffic fatalities
in Colorado and Washington.

Cook et al. (2020), American       FARS, 2010-2017               DD regression at the city-half year (i.e., 6        MMLs are associated with a 9% reduction in fatal
Journal of Public Health                                         month) level. Models include city- and state-       crashes. Decriminalization of marijuana is
Examines the association                                         level covariates, city and half-year fixed effects. associated with a 13% increase in fatal crashes
between legalizing medical                                                                                           involving 15- through 24-year-old male drivers.
marijuana and fatal crashes. In
addition, examines the
association between
decriminalizing marijuana and
fatal crashes.




                                                                                  81
Hansen et al. (2020),             FARS, 2000-2016   Used a synthetic control approach to produce        Little evidence that RMLs impacted total traffic
Economic Inquiry                                    separate estimates for Colorado and                 fatalities or traffic fatalities involving alcohol.
Asks whether the start of                           Washington. Matching variables include the
recreational marijuana sales in                     marijuana testing rate, the alcohol testing rate,
Colorado and Washington                             the fraction of vehicle miles traveled (VMT)
affected traffic fatalities.                        on urban roads, average VMT, and the
                                                    unemployment rate.

Santaella-Tenorio et al.          FARS, 2005-2017   Used a synthetic control approach to produce        In Colorado, legalization of recreational sales
(2020), JAMA Internal                               separate estimates for Colorado and                 increased traffic fatalities. Traffic fatalities in
Medicine                                            Washington. Matching variables not listed.          Washington also increased after recreational sales
Asks whether the start of                                                                               began but this increase is comparable to the
recreational marijuana sales in                                                                         increase in the synthetic control group.
Colorado and Washington
affected traffic fatalities.




                                                                      82
                                                    Table 9. Marijuana Legalization and Workplace Health

           Study                           Data Sources              Empirical strategy and identification                                 Results
Anderson et al. (2018),           Census of Fatal              Difference-in-difference (DD) regression at        MML adoption is associated with a 19.5%
International Journal of          Occupational Injuries from   the state-year level. Models include state-level   reduction in the expected number of workplace
Drug Policy                       the Bureau of Labor          covariates, state and year fixed effects.          fatalities among workers aged 25-44. MMLs that
Estimates the effect of           Statistics, 1992-2015                                                           list pain as a qualifying condition or allow collective
legalizing medical marijuana on                                                                                   cultivation are associated with larger reductions in
workplace fatalities.                                                                                             fatalities among workers aged 25-44 than those that
                                                                                                                  do not.

Ghimire and Maclean               Annual Social and            DD regression at the individual-year level.        MMLs are associated with a 6-7% decrease in the
(2020), Health Economics          Economic Supplement to       Models include individual- and state-level         likelihood of claiming WC and a 0.8% decrease in
Examines the association          the Current Population       covariates, state and year fixed effects.          the level of WC income.
between MMLs and workers'         Survey (CPS), 1990-2013.
compensation (WC) claims.

Maclean et al. (2021), Health     Social Security              DD regression at the state-quarter level.          RMLs adoption associated with a 3.6% increase in
Economics                         Administration State         Models include state-level covariates, state and   SSDI applications and a 6.5% increase in SSI
Estimates the effect of RMLs      Agency Monthly Workload      quarter fixed effects.                             applications. The authors find no evidence of an
on new applications and           Data, 2001-2019.                                                                association between RMLs and allowances.
allowances for Social Security
Disability Insurance (SSDI)
and Supplemental Security
Income (SSI)

Nicholas and Maclean              Health and Retirement        DD regression at the individual-year level.        MMLs are associated with a reduction in self-
(2019), Journal of Policy         Study, 1992-2012.            Models include individual- and state-level         reported pain and an improvement in self-assessed
Analysis and Management                                        covariates, state and year fixed effects, and      health among older adults. MMLs are also
Estimates the effect of                                        state-specific linear time trends.                 associated with increases in work hours among
legalizing medical marijuana on                                                                                   older adults already working. Estimated effects are
self-reported pain, overall                                                                                       largest among those with a health condition that
                                                                                                                  would qualify for legal medical marijuana use.

                                                                                83
health and labor supply of
adults ages 51 and older.

Ullman (2017), Health           March CPS, 1992-2012   DD regression at the individual-year level.        The legalization of medical marijuana is associated
Economics                                              Models include individual-level covariates,        with an 8% reduction in the likelihood of missing
Asks whether the legalization                          state and year fixed effects, and state-specific   work due to health issues. Estimated effects are
of medical marijuana affected                          linear time trends.                                larger for individuals in MML states with lax
workplace absences due to                                                                                 supply-side restrictions, full-time workers, and
sickness.                                                                                                 middle-aged males.




                                                                         84
                                                       Table 10. Marijuana Legalization and Crime

             Study                     Data Sources                Empirical strategy and identification                            Results
Adda et al. (2014),            Administrative records from   Difference-in-differences (DD) regression at    Depenalization is associated with a 29% increase in
Journal of Political           the London Metropolitan       the borough-month-year level. Models include    marijuana-related offenses (e.g., trafficking and
Economy                        Police Service, April 1998-   borough-level covariates, borough and month     intent to supply). There is also evidence that
Asks how an experiment         January 2006.                 fixed effects.                                  depenalization shifted police effort towards crime
depenalizing marijuana in                                                                                    related to hard drugs (e.g., heroin and crack) and
Lambeth, a borough of                                                                                        non-drug crime. Reallocation of effort led to a 9%
London, affected crime.                                                                                      decrease in non-drug offenses (e.g., robbery and
                                                                                                             burglary).

Brinkman and Mok-Lamme         Administrative records from Instrumental variables regression at the census The opening of a dispensary is associated with a
(2019), Regional Science and   the City and County of      tract-month level. The distance of census tract 19% reduction in total crime. This estimated effect
Urban Economics.               Denver, 2013-2016.          centroid to nearest municipal border and        is driven primarily by nonviolent offenses.
Estimates the effect of                                    distance to a major roadway are used to
recreational marijuana                                     instrument for the change in the number of
dispensary openings on                                     dispensaries. Models include census tract-level
neighborhood crime rates in                                covariates and month fixed effects.
Denver, Colorado.

Burkhardt and Goemans          Administrative records from DD regression at the half-mile-radius-month       The opening of dispensaries is associated with a
(2019), Annals of Regional     the Denver police           level, where the half-mile radius is drawn        decrease in violent crime offenses within a half-mile
Science                        department, 2010-2016.      around a specific dispensary location. Models     radius in neighborhoods with above median
Estimates the effect of                                    include radius-level covariates, dispensary and   income. Dispensary openings are also associated
recreational marijuana                                     police-district-by-month fixed effects.           with 13% fewer hard drug- and alcohol-related
dispensary openings on                                                                                       crimes, suggesting that legal marijuana sales are
neighborhood crime rates in                                                                                  substitutes for hard drug and alcohol sales. Finally,
Denver, Colorado.                                                                                            dispensary openings are associated with a 15%
                                                                                                             increase in vehicle break-ins within a one-mile
                                                                                                             radius.



                                                                             85
Chang and Jacobson (2017),        Incident-level crime data     DD regression at the dispensary-day level,           Dispensary closures lead to increases in property
Journal of Urban Economics provided by the Los                  where the number of crimes near a dispensary         crimes (particularly theft from vehicles) near the
Analyzes the short-run effect     Angeles Police Department     is regressed on an indicator for whether the         dispensary. There are similar increases in property
of closing hundreds of medical    and the Los Angeles           dispensary closed after a temporary shutdown         crimes after restaurant closures, suggesting a
marijuana dispensaries in Los     Sheriff's Department to the   of medical marijuana dispensaries in Los             general retail effect could be driving the marijuana
Angeles, California on local      Los Angeles Times             Angeles on June 7, 2010. Models include              dispensary estimates.
crime rates.                      "Mapping L.A." project.       dispensary and day fixed effects.

Chu and Townsend (2019),          Uniform Crime Reports         DD regression at the city-year level. Models         There is little evidence that MMLs affected
Journal of Economic               (UCR), 1988-2013.             include city-level covariates, city and year fixed   property or violent crimes in the full sample.
Behavior and Organization                                       effects, and city-specific time trends. The          Within California, legalization of medical marijuana
Estimates the effect legalizing                                 authors also estimate synthetic control models.      is associated with a 20% reduction in both violent
medical marijuana on crime.                                                                                          and property crime.

Dragone et al. (2019),            UCR, 2010-2014                DD and spatial regression discontinuity design       Legalization of recreational marijuana is associated
Journal of Economic                                             at the county-year level near the WA-OR              with a 15-30% reduction in rapes and a 10-20%
Behavior and Organization                                       border. Models include county and time fixed         reduction in thefts in counties on the WA side of
Estimates the effect of                                         effects, and second-order polynomials in the         the border relative to the OR side.
legalizing recreational                                         minimum distance of the county centroid
marijuana in Washington state                                   from the border.
on crime near the Washington-
Oregon border.

Gavrilova et al. (2019),          UCR, 1994-2012                Difference-in-difference-in-differences (DDD)        UCR analysis: MML adoption by states on the
Economic Journal                                                regression at the county-year level comparing        Mexican border is associated with a 12.5%
Asks whether legalizing           Supplementary Homicide        the effect of legalizing medical marijuana in        reduction in the violent crime rate, and this result is
medical marijuana affected        Reports (SHR), 1994-2012      U.S. states on the Mexican border with its           driven primarily by robberies, homicides, and
violent crime in U.S. states on                                 effect in non-border states. Models include          aggravated assaults.
the Mexican border.                                             county-level covariates, county and year fixed
                                                                effects, border-by-year fixed effects, and state-    SHR analysis: MMLs are associated with a 41%
                                                                specific linear time trends. The authors also        decrease in drug-law-related homicides, consistent
                                                                estimate models that interact MML adoption           with the hypothesis that MMLs reduce violent
                                                                with the distance of the county centroid to the      crimes committed by drug trafficking organizations.
                                                                U.S.-Mexico border.

                                                                                  86
Huber III et al. (2016), B.E.   UCR, 1970-2012   DD regression at the state-year level. Models    MML adoption is associated with a 4-12%
Journal of Economic                              include state-level covariates, and state and    reduction in robberies, larcenies, and burglaries.
Analysis and Policy                              year fixed effects. The authors also             There is tentative evidence that decriminalization
Estimates the effect of                          experiment with controlling for region-by-year   may lead to increases in burglaries and robberies.
legalizing medical marijuana                     fixed effects and higher-order state-specific
and marijuana                                    time trends.
decriminalization on nondrug
crime.

Morris et al. (2014), PLOS      UCR, 1990-2006   DD regression at the state-year level. Models    MMLs are associated with a 2-3% reduction in
ONE                                              include state-level covariates, and state and    homicides and a 2-3% reduction in assaults.
Estimates the association                        year fixed effects.
between medical marijuana
laws and crime.




                                                                 87
