                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     LABOR RATIONING

                                         Emily Breza
                                         Supreet Kaur
                                       Yogita Shamdasani

                                      Working Paper 28643
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28643


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




We thank Abhijit Banerjee, David Card, Andrew Foster, Jessica Goldberg, Pat Kline, Jeremy
Magruder, Ben Olken, Duncan Thomas, and many seminar participants for helpful comments and
conversations. We thank Arnesh Chowdhury, Piyush Tank, Silvia Wang, Mohar Dey, Anshuman
Bhargava, Vibhuti Bhatt, Asis Thakur, and Anustubh Agnihotri for excellent research assistance.
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Emily Breza, Supreet Kaur, and Yogita Shamdasani. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Labor Rationing
Emily Breza, Supreet Kaur, and Yogita Shamdasani
NBER Working Paper No. 28643
April 2021
JEL No. E24,J2,J6,O10,O17

                                       ABSTRACT

This paper measures excess labor supply in equilibrium. We examine hiring shocks--which
employ 24% of the labor force in external month-long jobs--in Indian local labor markets. In
peak months, wages increase instantaneously and local aggregate employment declines. In lean
months, consistent with severe labor rationing, wages and aggregate employment are unchanged,
with positive employment spillovers on remaining workers--indicating that over a quarter of
labor supply is rationed. At least 24% of lean self-employment among casual workers occurs
because they cannot find jobs. Consequently, traditional survey approaches mismeasure labor
market slack. Rationing has broad implications for labor market analysis.


Emily Breza                                   Yogita Shamdasani
Harvard University                            National University of Singapore
Littauer Center, M28                          yogita@nus.edu.sg
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ebreza@fas.harvard.edu

Supreet Kaur
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
supreet@berkeley.edu
                                     LABOR RATIONING                                         1

                                     1. Introduction

       [D]istinguishing elements of voluntariness from elements of involuntariness in
       the unemployment problem is a hopeless endeavour. (Fellner, 1976)

In developing countries, wage employment rates among rural workers often hover around
50%. For example, Indian landless prime age males--whose primary source of earnings is
wage labor--work 45.7% of the time (NSS 2009). In Bangladesh, wage employment rates for
landless males are about 55% in lean months (Akram et al., 2018). In Sub Saharan Africa,
these rates are typically even lower (Beegle and Christiaensen, 2019).

The interpretation of this empirical regularity is unclear, and has long been a source of de-
bate. Research going back to Lewis (1954) argues that low employment reflects extremely
high involuntary unemployment, indicating large distortions. However, other work has shown
that these labor markets adjust rapidly to changing market conditions (e.g., Rosenzweig,
1988). Thus, low wage work might instead be the outcome of reasonably well-functioning
labor markets, where workers are simply choosing other activities such as self-employment.
These two possibilities have drastically different implications for the labor market equilib-
rium. Moreover, while the development labor literature has documented frictions--giving
rise to separation failures, labor misallocation, and downward wage rigidity (e.g., LaFave and
Thomas, 2016; Bryan et al., 2014; Kaur, 2019)--knowing that these exist does not tell us
about the extent of aggregate distortions in equilibrium. In other words, existing work can-
not explain how one should interpret observed employment patterns. Specifically, whether
there is a large amount of labor rationing in this setting still remains unknown.

This paper empirically assesses the extent to which labor supply exceeds labor demand in
equilibrium. For concreteness, we define a worker as rationed if: a) she would prefer wage
employment at the current market wage over what she is doing (i.e. the worker is not on her
labor supply curve), and b) the worker is employable at that wage (i.e. from the employer's
perspective, her marginal product is weakly above the current wage). A rationed worker may
be involuntarily unemployed, or engaged in another activity such as self-employment.

Determining the amount of rationing presents challenges under current approaches. To mea-
sure involuntary unemployment, economists use survey self-reports--whether an individual
was looking for a job but could not find one. However, the validity of this approach has
been questioned, and remains unknown (e.g. Bound et al., 2001; Taylor, 2008). These chal-
lenges are exacerbated in developing countries, where self-employment is prevalent and can
absorb workers who cannot find jobs. While previous work discusses the presence of such
"disguised" or "hidden" unemployment, we currently have no estimates of whether a sizable
fraction of self-employment is due to rationing in the wage labor market.
                                              LABOR RATIONING                                   2

We tackle these fundamental measurement problems by developing a simple revealed pref-
erence approach to test for excess labor supply (i.e. labor rationing). We induce transitory
hiring shocks in Indian local labor markets--giving jobs to on average 24% of the labor force
of casual male workers in external jobsites for 2-4 weeks. This shock substantively reduces
how many workers remain in the local economy, without changing local labor demand.1
We then use the local labor market response to learn about the equilibrium that existed
in the absence of our shock. We take seriously the idea that seasonality in labor demand
may be consequential for labor market functioning (Leibenstein, 1957), with relevance for
understanding seasonal fluctuations in employment levels (Bryan et al., 2014; Fink et al.,
2018). Consequently, we undertake this exercise across the year--enabling us to test for
excess supply separately across lean and peak months.

This approach uncovers labor market functioning without direct intervention on the partici-
pants of interest. While we exogenously generate shocks, the outcomes are driven completely
by the response of existing employers and workers who never interface with the external job-
sites. We use the phrase "local labor market" to denote all jobs, wages, and employment
excluding the external worksite jobs we create. If the level of rationing is higher than the size
of our shock--e.g., if we remove 25% of the labor force and more than 25% of worker-days
are rationed--then we would expect the following local labor market impacts: i) no change
in wage levels; ii) no effect on aggregate employment; and iii) positive employment spillovers
on individual workers whose employment goes up due to less competition for jobs. This
constitutes a revealed preference test of rationing driven by a failure of wage adjustment.
Specifically, workers reveal they prefer jobs at the market wage over their previous activity
(e.g. unemployment or self-employment), and employers reveal the worker is qualified for
a job at the market wage. If these predictions hold, the size of our hiring shock is a lower
bound on the level of excess labor supply in the economy.

This design diagnoses rationing without assumptions about the equilibrium in the absence
of rationing--for example, whether it is fully competitive or subject to monopsony or some
other friction. We view this as a strength of our approach, and do not make direct claims
regarding potential other frictions.

The setting for our test is rural labor markets in Odisha, India, which exhibit many features of
developing country village economies--including low wage employment and high seasonality.
We conduct the experiment using a matched-pair, stratified design in 60 labor markets (i.e.
villages) across varying times of the year. We invite workers to sign up for employment at
1
    We discuss the possibility of multiplier effects from demand below.
                                            LABOR RATIONING                                                 3

external worksites, drawing signups by a large proportion of the labor force.2 We randomize
the intensity of hiring across villages: in treated villages, we provide jobs to on average 24%
of the labor force of male workers; in control villages, we hire 1-5 workers only. In each case,
we randomly choose which workers are "removed" from among the signups.

What is the impact of removing about a quarter of workers on the local labor market? The
answer depends crucially on seasonality.

During "peak" months--when employment is above median--the equilibrium wage rises by
5.0 percent. In addition, local aggregate employment declines by 4.3 percentage points or
21%. In the peak season, each day of work created in external jobsites generates 0.737
days of new work for laborers in the economy overall (i.e. crowds out 0.263 days in the
local labor market). It is worth noting that this wage and employment response is almost
instantaneous--occurring within just a week of the start of the transitory hiring shock. This
indicates a remarkably high level of labor market responsiveness, and accords with the view
that spot labor markets in these settings can quickly reflect changes in market conditions
(Rosenzweig, 1988).

In sharp contrast, effects during "lean" months--when employment is below median--match
predictions under severe labor rationing. Removing a quarter of the labor force has no effect
on wages or aggregate employment (predictions (i) and (ii) above). In other words, creating
external jobs for a quarter of workers generates no crowd-out in the private labor market
in the lean season. Consistent with prediction (iii), there are large positive employment
spillovers on the workers remaining in the local labor market; the employment rate for these
workers goes up by 5.4 percentage points (38%). This follows from the fact that there is no
change in aggregate employment: workers who would otherwise have been rationed fill in
job slots that are available because many others have become employed outside the village.
External employment therefore helps not only those who received our worksite jobs, but also
those who did not. Overall, our results indicate that on average, at least a quarter of male
labor supply is rationed out of the wage labor market in lean months.

These lean season spillover effects are transitory--lasting only as long as the hiring shocks
do. This is what one would expect if the response to our hiring shock was due to excess labor
supply. It also helps rule out, for example, a wealth effect explanation for our results.3

A large portion of excess labor supply is disguised as self-employment. In lean months,
we see a 3.4 percentage point, or 24%, decline in self-employment among those who sign
2
  We offer relatively high wages for desirable manufacturing jobs. This is beneficial for our design, enabling
us to draw (random) workers from across the skill distribution in the village.
3
  Also consistent with rationing, the wage increase in peak months persists after the shock ends, leading to
lower employment--in line with a ratcheting effect from downward wage rigidity (Kaur, 2019).
                                      LABOR RATIONING                                         4

up for worksite jobs. By revealed preference, these business owners prefer wage labor at
the prevailing wage to working in their businesses. This implies that in our sample, in the
lean season, at least 24% of self-employment stems from workers being rationed out of wage
labor. Among farm households, these effects are entirely concentrated among those with
below median per-capita landholdings--the group we would expect to be most affected by
a ration in the labor market. Workers in these households reduce self-employment by 7.2
percentage points (50%)--indicating that on small farms, half of self-employment in lean
months is driven by rationing. Like the employment spillovers, these effects are also tran-
sitory. Once the shock ends, self-employment levels between treatment and control villages
are indistinguishable--ruling out the concern that business owners simply intertemporally
substitute by increasing self-employment in the future.

Finally, we examine traditional survey-based unemployment measures. Despite the sizable
impacts on wage employment, overall work status does not move in lean months--precisely
due to disguised unemployment. In addition, if we mimic the approach for measuring involun-
tary unemployment used in government surveys (including India's National Sample Survey),
we would conclude that our shocks had no impact on unemployment in lean months. We
evaluate an alternate survey measure, and find its movement matches the revealed preference
magnitudes. However, our findings suggest that, in our setting, traditional survey questions
will mismeasure the extent to which individuals are unable to find wage work.

We argue that other potential mechanisms through which the shocks could affect wages or
employment--such as a local demand expansion from increased wealth, or a change in worker
composition--cannot explain our pattern of results. We also offer direct tests for such poten-
tial confounds, and rule out perfectly elastic labor supply. In addition, we evaluate potential
micro-foundations for excess labor supply--such as efficiency wages, dynamic contracting,
implicit insurance, and worker collective action--in light of our findings.

Overall, the patterns we document are consistent with the hypothesis of "under-utilized
labor" proposed by Leibenstein (1957). If the labor market, and particularly the wage, does
not adjust fully to seasonal reductions in labor demand, this can generate rationing in lean
periods. While our estimates are of course specific to our particular context, the pattern
of differences in labor market functioning across peak and lean times is likely more general.
Similar dynamics plausibly prevail in many rural, developing country settings.

Our results have implications for labor market policies, such as workfare--implying that
crowd-out will depend crucially on the level of slack. In a suggestive exercise, we examine
the phased-in roll-out of India's workfare program, NREGA (Imbert and Papp, 2015). When
slack is higher (i.e. baseline district-month employment is lower), NREGA has no detectable
                                              LABOR RATIONING                                                     5

impact on wages or private employment. However, when the labor market is tighter, wages
rise and agricultural employment falls by almost 20%, indicating substantial crowd out.
These patterns match our experimental findings. Note that we don't rule out the possibility
of lean season wage increases more generally: if a shock is larger than the number of rationed
workers or changes reservation wages, wages could rise even in lean times.

This paper provides novel evidence on the functioning of labor markets in poor countries.
It offers the first direct evidence that labor supply substantively exceeds labor demand in
equilibrium. The earliest work in development, such as the surplus labor hypothesis, was
premised on the view that rural economies have large slack (Lewis, 1954). The empirical
relevance of this view has been unclear, especially in modern times. We document consider-
able slack, indicating that at least a quarter of labor supply is rationed during lean months.
These findings suggest that moving rural workers to other sectors--where their labor may
be more readily absorbed--could increase aggregate output not simply due to TFP differ-
ences between sectors (Gollin et al., 2014; McMillan and Rodrik, 2011), but also by enabling
rationed workers to be employed.4

We also provide the first estimates of how much of self-employment is actually "disguised
unemployment" (i.e., "forced entrepreneurship"). A striking share of self-employment in our
sample--23% on average and 75% among smallholder farms--would not occur if business
owners could find work at the prevailing wage in lean months. This helps further our un-
derstanding of a prominent empirical fact: why self-employment is so high in poor countries
(e.g. Banerjee and Duflo, 2007; De Mel et al., 2010).5

Relatedly, we advance the literature on labor market frictions in poor countries. A large body
of work has examined separation failures (Singh et al., 1986; Benjamin, 1992; Fafchamps,
1993; Udry, 1996; LaFave and Thomas, 2016; Dillon et al., 2019; Jones et al., 2020; LaFave
et al., 2020). These studies do not take a stance on the exact distortion that generates
the failure--rationing or some other friction.6 They also do not quantify how many firms
are affected.7 Our findings complement this work by tracing the first direct link from labor
rationing to separation failures, and showing that rationing increases self-employment on
4
  Our design relates to tests of surplus labor (Schultz, 1964; Sen, 1967; Donaldson and Keniston, 2016). While
other work has documented low employment levels during lean months, our study is the first to link this
to rationing, rather than simply market clearing with low employment demand. Note that the presence of
rationing complicates the interpretation of analyses that rely on wage differences across sectors to infer TFP
differences.
5
  Adhvaryu et al. (2019) document that coffee farmers increase non-agricultural self-employment when farming
becomes less profitable, though this does not require any market frictions such as rationing.
6
  See Behrman (1999) for a review. Pitt and Rosenzweig (1986) test a different microfoundation: productivity
of own vs. hired labor. Foster and Rosenzweig (2017) examine the implications of transaction costs in hiring.
7
  E.g., the comparative static of whether household size affects farm labor use tests for a failure of separability,
but does not shed light on whether the associated labor supply distortion affects 1% or 50% of workers.
                                           LABOR RATIONING                                               6

the majority of smallholder farms. More broadly, while previous studies have documented
frictions--including separation failures, wage rigidity (Kaur, 2019), and worker collusion
(Breza et al., 2019)--they are not designed to tell us whether the magnitudes are ultimately
consequential for labor market functioning. Our design is built solely to address this question,
offering the first evidence that the labor market is, at times, severely distorted.

At the same time, our finding of instantaneous adjustment in peak months supports the view
that spot labor markets can be quite flexible--consistent with studies showing robust labor
market adjustment to shocks (e.g. Rosenzweig, 1988; Jayachandran, 2006; Imbert and Papp,
2015; Donaldson and Keniston, 2016; Akram et al., 2018; Breza and Kinnan, 2018; Muralid-
haran et al., 2020; Egger et al., 2019). Our results therefore reconcile these studies with
those above, providing a more complete characterization of labor market functioning.

Our methodological approach also contributes to the literature on measuring unemployment
and labor market slack. To date, economists have measured involuntary unemployment using
survey self-reports, whose reliability is difficult to ascertain (e.g. Bound et al., 2001; Taylor,
2008; Card, 2011; Faberman and Rajan, 2020). We stack survey responses against our re-
vealed preference findings, documenting the unreliability of such measures. We highlight this
can be particularly problematic when rationed workers are likely to switch to other activities,
such as self-employment or gig economy jobs. In addition, we build on previous work, which
has documented heterogeneity in employment crowd-out from shocks (e.g. Cr´            epon et al.,
2013; Gautier et al., 2018). Through precise information on the shock size and by sampling
outcomes for the entire labor force, we provide the first revealed preference estimates for the
extent of rationing in the economy in any setting.

Finally, our research design provides a cleaner test of excess labor supply relative to other
potential approaches, such as offering jobs to the unemployed. In practice, the implementa-
tion of this approach has not provided a straightforward test. For example, in Breza et al.
(2019), employers are compensated to offer jobs, search costs are eliminated, and the match
to workers is randomly assigned. Consequently, it is unclear whether either of the two cri-
teria for rationing is satisfied, making it impossible to quantify rationing.8 In addition, our
design enables a fuller picture of excess supply and its implications, including the essential
role of seasonality, effects on self-employment, and private-sector crowd-out--which requires
examining the interaction of labor supply and demand in equilibrium.

Our findings have broad implications for labor market analysis and policy. First, the absence
of lean-season market clearing implies that the wage does not always play an allocative role.
Thus, analyses that use wages to infer the marginal product of labor, for example, may
8
 Specifically, workers who accepted jobs may not be considered qualified by employers in the absence of the
wage subsidy, and may not have preferred the job under natural search and matching conditions.
                                              LABOR RATIONING                                               7

be misleading. Second, our findings are relevant for predicting the effects of labor market
programs, such as workfare (Imbert and Papp, 2015; Beegle et al., 2017; Bertrand et al.,
2017; Zimmermann, 2020; Muralidharan et al., 2020). Specifically, heterogeneity in slack
may help explain why some programs have substantive labor market impacts while others
have virtually none.9 Finally, our finding of large quantities of "forced entrepreneurship" can
help explain why policies that direct resources to small firms have only had limited success
for the average firm (e.g., McKenzie and Woodruff, 2014; Banerjee et al., 2015).

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the context. Section
3 outlines our hypotheses and predictions. Section 4 details the implementation and Section
5 describes the data. We present the results in Sections 6 and 7. Section 8 discusses
microfoundations and potential threats to validity. Section 9 offers suggestive extensions,
such as heterogeneity in the impact of India's workfare program. Section 10 concludes.

                                                2. Context

Our field experiment takes place in villages across five districts in rural Odisha, India. Mar-
kets for casual daily labor are extremely active in our setting specifically, and constitute an
employment channel for hundreds of millions of workers in India more generally (National
Sample Survey, 2010). The village constitutes a prominent boundary for the casual labor
market -- daily-wage workers typically find jobs in both agriculture and non-agriculture
within or close to their own village. This local nature of hiring is a necessary condition for
our experimental hiring shocks to have a meaningful impact on the aggregate labor supply
facing firms and on the labor market equilibrium.

The casual labor markets in the study areas are characterized by the same decentralization
and informality as much of India (e.g. Rosenzweig, 1988; Dreze et al., 1986). Contracting is
usually bilaterally arranged between employers and workers a few days before the start of
work. Moreover, the typical job lasts 1-3 days. This short duration of employment contracts
creates the potential for transitory labor supply shocks to quickly impact wages. Labor
demand is typically infrequent and variable. As in much of India, agricultural labor demand
is seasonal, and both agricultural and non-agricultural jobs tend to be task-based (Foster
and Rosenzweig, 2017). For example, an employer might hire a different group of 5 workers
to weed his paddy fields once or twice in a season, or a skilled roof-thatcher may hire a
different assistant each time he is hired to rethatch a roof in the village.

Hiring is also employer-directed. 98% of agricultural employers report typically approaching
workers, by physically going to the neighborhoods where workers live, to fill hiring needs.
9
    E.g., Beegle et al. (2017) find no workfare crowd-out in Malawi, and hypothesize this may be due to slack.
                                           LABOR RATIONING                                                 8

Given the intermittent nature of an individual employer's labor demand, a typical agricul-
tural employer in our sample only hires workers for six days per month. Thus, workers
work for many different employers, and each employer works with many different workers.
Because rural villages tend to be relatively small and engage in labor relationships every
year, employers and workers within a village tend to know one another. For example, when
asked to rate the quality of workers in the village, surveyed employers reported not knowing
a randomly-chosen worker only 27.9% of the time. In addition, non-agricultural employers
also recruit by driving into the village and picking up workers who are available at the time
in trucks.10

In our context, labor markets are not fully integrated spatially. For example, employers
must pay higher wages to workers who are hired from outside their village, in part due
to transportation costs and commuting time. In our data, this amounts to a 12% wage
premium. In addition, workers believe their village-level collective labor supply decisions
affect village wages (Breza et al., 2019). This would not be possible under fully integrated
markets.

Consistent with the seasonal, project-based nature of labor demand, employment rates in the
casual labor market are highly variable, higher in "peak" months and lower in "lean" months.
Wage employment rates fall by more than 40% from peak to lean months. The villages in
our study match a general feature of village economies: large periods of low employment
(Muralidharan et al., 2020; Dreze et al., 1986).

Self-employment is extremely common in our setting. Among the workers who sign up for
the external jobs that form the basis of our hiring shock, 67% own land, while 88% have some
kind of household business. Common household businesses reported in our context include
grocery store owners, street vendors, vegetable sellers and firewood collectors. However,
businesses tend to have low levels of capital and small land-holdings, especially for those
cultivators who are also engaged in casual labor.

We also note that while India has a well-known workfare program, the National Rural Em-
ployment Guarantee Act (NREGA), it is not very well implemented in Odisha. In principle,
NREGA offers 100 days of employment in public works annually, but the average employment
rate in public works in our sample is 0.5%.11
10
   Workers also obtain non-agricultural work by commuting to district towns, though this is less common in
our specific context.
11
   In their analysis of NREGA, Imbert and Papp (2015) discuss the vast heterogeneity in program implemen-
tation across India; Odisha is notably absent from their list of high-performing states. Moreover, in the NSS
data used by Imbert and Papp (2015), respondents in our 5 study districts (2 of which were early program
districts), reported zero days of public works employment. Our more recent survey data indicate that the
state's implementation issues have persisted.
                                           LABOR RATIONING                                                9

Finally, in Table 1, we use data from the 2011 Indian Census to show how our study villages
compare to the average village in the five districts in Odisha where the experiment was run.
The study villages are slightly smaller than average, with 148 households per village in the
sample, compared to 176 households overall (p-val=0.299). However, our sample villages are
comparable on most dimensions. For example, 67.8% of residents are literate in our sample
compared to 66.1% overall (p-val=0.428), and 74.5% of males participate in the labor market
in our sample compared to 76.9% across all villages (p-val=0.306).

                                            3. Hypotheses

3.1. Definition of Labor Rationing. Suppose the prevailing wage for one day of work
in the casual daily market is w.12 We define a worker as rationed on a given day when the
following two conditions hold: (i) The worker wants to supply labor at wage w, but is unable
to find employment; (ii) The worker is qualified for jobs occupied by other villagers.

The first condition states that the worker is not on her labor supply curve. The second
condition states that a worker who wants a job but is unqualified for it (in the sense that
an employer would never find it profitable to hire her at wage w ) is not considered rationed.
Note that this takes no stance on the micro-foundation for rationing.

3.2. Predicted Impacts of a Hiring Shock. The core of our design is an experimental
hiring shock, through which a (random) subset of workers in the local labor market is hired
in external jobs outside the village. To diagnose rationing, we examine the effects of this
shock on local wages and employment--i.e., wages and employment in the local labor market,
excluding the external worksite jobs we create.

We model the experimental hiring shock as a supply shock to the local labor market. Through
our intervention, some workers are "removed" and placed in external jobsites. This consti-
tutes a reduction in the residual labor supply available to employers in the village; in other
words, the (residual) village labor supply curve shifts to the left. However, this modeling
choice is not consequential for our test. As we discuss below, we could model this as a
demand shock instead and would arrive at the exact same predictions for local wages and
employment under rationing.13

To lay out our predictions, we employ the simplest framework to interpret our results: a
stylized demand and supply framework. Panel A of Figure 1 shows the effects of a negative
labor supply shock under market clearing. Let E denote the level of local employment (in
12
  Our results hold if we use hourly wages as the basis for our definition instead.
13
  Under the typical definition of a demand shock, we would have posted the jobs, and then, as price takers,
hired workers at whatever equilibrium wage prevailed after posting. Instead, we purposely choose which
workers to "remove" at a pre-determined (high) wage. This parallels, e.g., workfare programs, which are also
typically modeled as supply shocks to the local private sector.
                                           LABOR RATIONING                                               10

terms of worker-days) in the village and w denote the village wage in the absence of our
intervention. A supply shock (a shift from S to S ) will:

   P1) Increase local wages from w to w ;

   P2) Decrease aggregate employment among workers who remain in the village (i.e. those
       who are not hired by us to work in jobsites), so that total employment after the shock
       E is less than E .

Panel B of Figure 1 shows the effects of a negative labor supply shock when there is excess
labor supply. As before, E denotes the level of employment in the village and w denotes the
village wage in the absence of our intervention. Rationing exists in this labor market, with
supply ES exceeding demand ED at wage w. Employment levels are therefore determined
by the labor demand curve. If the amount of labor rationing is weakly greater than the size
of the supply shock, then we predict that the shock (a shift from S to S ) will have:

   L1) No effect on local wages (the wage remains w);

   L2) No effect on aggregate employment levels (aggregate employment remains E );

   L3) Positive employment spillovers on individual workers, whose employment goes up due
       to reduced competition for job slots.

Note that these predictions are not sensitive to whether S is a parallel shift of the supply
curve; they hold even if the supply elasticity changes (i.e. due to a non-parallel shift). If
predictions L1-L3 hold, the size of our hiring shock is a lower bound on the level of rationing
in the economy.

Note that predictions L2 and L3 above are inherently related. Under rationing, workers who
would have otherwise been rationed fill in job slots that are now available because many other
laborers competing for the same jobs have become employed outside the village. The resul-
tant increase in the proportion of days employed among remaining workers is why aggregate
employment remains unchanged. Appendix Figure A.1 validates that predictions L1-L3 hold
under rationing if we model the hiring shock as a positive demand shock instead.14

This constitutes a revealed preference test for excess labor supply: If predictions L1-L3 hold,
workers reveal that they prefer jobs at w over their previous activity (e.g. unemployment or
14As  Appendix Figure A.1 makes clear, we would expect: (i) no change in the wage, and (ii) aggregate
employment (including the external hiring shock jobs) would increase one-for-one with the size of the hiring
shock--implying no change in aggregate local village employment (i.e. excluding the hiring shock). This
corresponds exactly to Predictions L1 and L2, respectively, and L3 follows mechanically from L2.
                                           LABOR RATIONING                                               11

self-employment), and employers reveal that workers are qualified to be hired for the jobs at
w.15

To enrich our understanding of labor market functioning, we undertake the above exercise
across different months of the year. This is motivated by earlier work in the development
labor literature, which argued that seasonality in labor demand is consequential for shaping
labor market equilibrium at different times of the year (e.g. Leibenstein, 1957; Dreze and
Mukherjee, 1989). Consistent with this work, we hypothesize that the peak season effects of
hiring shocks will be closer to those in Panel A of Figure 1, whereas the lean season effects
will match those in Panel B.

3.3. Self-employment and Disguised Unemployment. If there is excess supply, ra-
tioned individuals may appear as unemployed or may turn to less-productive self-employment
as a way to generate income--creating "disguised unemployment" or "forced entrepreneur-
ship" (Singh et al., 1986). For this group, self-employment earnings are below w, but above
their reservation wage.

Consequently, under rationing, when job slots open up through the hiring shock, a fraction
of both unemployed and/or self-employed workers will reveal that they prefer jobs at the
prevailing wage w over what they were previously doing. Among business owners, the mag-
nitude of this shift will provide a lower bound on the fraction of self-employed workers who
are disguised unemployed.16

3.4. Discussion of Predictions. Predictions L1-L3 diagnose rationing, with minimal other
assumptions about the labor market. For example, our test does not require assumptions
about the equilibrium in the absence of rationing--whether it is fully competitive (ED = ES )
or subject to monopsony or some other friction (ED > ES ). For example, if there were
monopsony in the labor market but no rationing, then our hiring shock would necessarily
lead to an increase in wages--contradicting prediction L1 (see Appendix Figure A.2).17
15To  illustrate these predictions, consider the following thought exercise. Suppose 10 workers want work in
the village at wage w, but only 5 job slots are available. As a result, 5 workers are employed at w, while
the other 5 workers are rationed: the employment rate is 50%. Now, suppose we remove 4 workers from
the village labor market. This frees up job slots, and a larger portion of the remaining workers can now
work in the village at wage w. Specifically, there are 6 workers left who want work and still 5 available
slots: the employment rate is now 83%. In contrast, if the 5 workers who are unemployed did not want
work, they would not accept employment at wage w; this provides a test of condition (i) in the rationing
definition above. In addition, the fact that workers who remain in the village are hired at wage w indicates
that employers perceive them as qualified for work at w; this provides a test of condition (ii) above.
16Since we do not take a stance on the rationing mechanism, we do not have an ex ante prediction on whether
unemployed or self-employed workers are more likely to be hired into empty job slots first. In addition, if
there are fixed costs of stopping and then going back to one's business, then this is another reason why the
estimates from this exercise will be a lower bound on disguised unemployment.
17If our hiring shock simply shifts the labor supply curve to the left, then the predictions under monopsony
are unambiguous--wages should rise and employment should fall. However, if the shock also changes the
                                           LABOR RATIONING                                                12

In addition, we do not take a specific stance on the reason for rationing; our test is valid
for a range of microfoundations. Overall, our test is chiefly powered to detect rationing that
is generated by some failure of wage adjustment to seasonal reductions in labor demand.
Rationing from effort efficiency wages (Shapiro and Stiglitz, 1984), for example, would not
generate the patterns we hypothesize. There, wages would respond to a reduction in labor
supply: because the hiring shock would lower the cost of unemployment, wages would need
to increase to restore incentives. Section 8.1 discusses microfoundations in light of our
results.

We also do not need to specify the rationing mechanism i.e. how jobs are allocated across
workers. There may be a distribution of ability levels among rationed workers, and this
distribution could even change with the shock. However, if we observe predictions L1 and
L3, it must be the case that there are workers in the village who prefer wage jobs and
employers are willing to hire them for those jobs at the prevailing wage w--satisfying the
two criteria in the definition for rationing.

Note that a key feature of our research design is that we can precisely quantify what fraction
of the labor force is "removed" through the hiring shock because our shocks are targeted --
available only to some workers who are offered the external jobs (see below). This stands
in contrast to other labor market shocks such as workfare programs, which are permanent
and impact all eligible workers by offering an outside option. This potentially increases
reservation wages and shifts the labor supply curve even among workers who do not ever
participate directly, making it difficult to know what fraction of workers is affected. Conse-
quently, it would be difficult to use a shock such as a workfare policy to quantify rationing.
Our transitory targeted shocks greatly simplify analysis, enabling us to bound the level of
rationing without needing to impose assumptions about labor supply responses.

                        4. Experiment: Design and Implementation

We engineer transitory hiring shocks in study villages. We exploit an opportunity to recruit
casual male workers for full-time manufacturing jobs for 2-4 weeks.18 The work occurs in
external jobsites within daily commuting distance from study villages.19 Such temporary
one-time contract jobs are a common source of non-agricultural employment for men in the
region. The external jobs are attractive -- the daily wage is weakly higher than the prevailing
market wage for casual labor, and there are positive compensating differentials (e.g., the work
labor supply elasticity facing the employer, then wages would still increase, but the employment effect is
ambiguous. One example is the canonical case of an increase in the minimum wage. See Chapter 2 of
Manning (2013) for a detailed discussion.
18In this cultural context, women are unwilling or unable to travel outside of the village for work.
19We leverage two separate field projects (Breza et al., 2018; Kaur et al., 2019) that involve hiring workers
for low-skill manufacturing jobs. See Appendix C for a full description of these jobs.
                                           LABOR RATIONING                                                13

occurs indoors and is not very physically demanding). This offers an advantage because it
draws interest from many workers in the village, enabling us to (randomly) draw from a
sizable swath of the labor force.

The external jobs are advertised in villages through flyers, village meetings, and door-to-door
visits to male adults. Hired workers are then drawn randomly from the subset of the village
labor force that signs up for the job. See Appendix C for more details about the recruitment
protocols and external jobs.

We randomize recruitment intensity at the village (i.e. local labor market) level, so that in
treatment villages we hire up to 60% of sign ups, and in control villages we hire 1-5 workers
only.20 We thus generate a large hiring shock in treatment villages, and a negligible shock in
control villages. We use a matched-pair, stratified research design, so as to achieve balance
by local region and time.

We implement these shocks in different months of the year, which correspond to different
levels of labor demand and employment. We limited our experiment to ten months of the
calendar year, omitting the two busiest months--August (peak planting) and December
(harvesting)--so as to not affect labor supply during important work periods. Thus, our
experiment does not run in the pure peak season, but rather in the lean and semi-peak (or
shoulder) months.

We use employment rates in control villages as our proxy for underlying labor market slack.
Months with above-median employment rates are classified as semi-peak periods, while
months with below-median employment rates are classified as lean periods of the year.

We run the experiment in 60 villages (labor markets) across 5 districts in Odisha, India,
between the years 2014 to 2018. We used a matched-pair randomization design, so we have
30 treatment and 30 control villages. 43% of the experimental rounds were conducted in
lean months, and the remaining 57% in semi-peak months. We have survey data for 2,379
workers in total.

Our experiment only has power to detect rationing if the labor market is not fully integrated
across villages--so that removing workers in one village constitutes a meaningful local sup-
ply shock from employers' perspective. Under full labor market integration, we would not
20We  set this limit of 60% in order to ensure there were enough workers left over in the village to comprise
a substantive spillover sample (on whom we could observe treatment effects), and to avoid the possibility
that the shock ended up being larger than the amount of rationing in lean seasons. In addition, we hired
no more than approximately 30 workers per village due to space constraints at the external worksites. Note
that workers were told in advance that the number of job slots would be determined based on contractor
needs, so that ex ante beliefs about hiring probability were the same across treatment and control villages.
                                      LABOR RATIONING                                        14

expect to find wage adjustment from our hiring shock in either the lean or semi-peak season.
Moreover, even in the presence of rationing, we would not detect employment spillovers.

The lack of full integration is a reasonable assumption in our context. Agricultural hiring
occurs primarily within the village, as described in Section 2 above. In addition, even for
non-agricultural jobs, it is common for contractors to recruit by coming to a village and
loading (a predetermined number of) workers onto a truck--providing scope for employment
spillovers even for jobs conducted outside the village.

                           5. Empirical Strategy and Data

5.1. Analysis Samples. Figure 2 summarizes the analysis samples across control villages
(Panel A) and treatment villages (Panel B). The dark grey areas denote workers who sign
up for the jobs and are "removed" to work in the external jobsites. The light grey shaded
areas denote workers who sign up but are not offered jobs -- these workers remain in the
village and constitute our intent-to-treat sample. We refer to these workers hereafter as the
spillover sample. Note that the spillover sample is larger in control villages (Panel A), since
only 1-5 workers are offered jobs in control villages.

For the analysis, we examine effects on two sets of samples. The first is the spillover sam-
ple, which is directly comparable to the workers who were removed from the village, and
therefore would be most likely to benefit from employment spillovers. The second is all
potential workers in the village--regardless of whether they signed up for our jobs--in order
to accurately assess effects on aggregate employment levels.

5.2. Estimation Strategy. To test how the experimental hiring shock impacts employment
and wages, we compare outcomes in treatment and control villages, separately for semi-peak
and lean months. Our base specification is:

(1)                                                            ¯0 +
      yitvr =  + HiringShockv + HiringShockv  SemiP eakr + r + X                    itvr
                                                                 ivr


where yitvr is an outcome for worker i on day t in village v and experimental round r.
HiringShockv is an indicator for treatment villages, and SemiP eakr is an indicator for
experimental rounds conducted in semi-peak months. We include the worker's baseline mean
employment rate and mean daily wage levels X    ¯ 0 in order to increase precision (and we also
                                                 ivr
report estimates without baseline controls). Regressions always include round (strata) fixed
effects (r ), and cluster standard errors by village.

To construct the SemiP eakr indicator, we calculate the mean month-wise employment rate
in control villages for each month in our sample, averaging across all rounds that started in
a given month (See Appendix Figure A.3). We then take the median of this variable across
                                            LABOR RATIONING                                                15

rounds in the sample. Months with above-median values are classified as semi-peak periods
of the year. In addition, in the analysis, we show robustness to replacing the SemiP eakr
binary variable with the continuous month-wise employment rate in the interaction with
HiringShockv .

Regressions using the spillover sample are unweighted because we survey 100% of spillover
workers. Regressions examining effects for all potential workers are weighted by inverse
sampling probabilities in order to be representative of the full labor force.

5.3. Data. We survey all workers who sign up for the external job (i.e. the "spillover
sample"). In addition, we survey a random sample of non-signups: prime-age males who
work in any capacity--the casual labor market, self-employment or salaried work--since ex-
ante we cannot distinguish who among these may potentially be interested in local wage
work. We refer to these non-signups plus those who signed up as "all potential workers",
and use this sample when testing how the shock affected the entire village labor market.
We conduct three waves of surveys: at baseline (immediately before workers are hired at
the external jobsites), at endline (during the last two weeks of the hiring shock), and at
post-intervention (two weeks after the end of the hiring shock, after all workers are back in
the village labor force).

Each survey includes a detailed daily employment grid, in which workers describe their em-
ployment activity separately for each day over a recall period, which was either 7, 10, or 14
days (see Appendix C). This includes rich data about wages: cash wages, details of in-kind
payments (e.g. tea, meals, and cash value of in-kind payments), whether the worker was
paid on time, etc. In addition, it includes detailed characteristics about employment status
(activity, length of breaks, hours worked, location) and self-reports of involuntary unem-
ployment for each day. This provides us with the core data needed to test the predictions
outlined in Section 3.2.

In addition to the worker surveys, we survey a subset of agricultural employers in the village
at endline.21 We discuss details in Appendix C.

5.4. Descriptive Statistics. Table 2 presents descriptive statistics and tests of balance
across treatment and control villages. Panel A presents characteristics for workers in the
main analysis sample (i.e. the spillover sample) drawn from the baseline survey. Panel B
presents village-level information. We show means and standard deviations for each covariate
21In each village, we consulted a village resident to obtain a (partial) list of employers, and surveyed these
in random order until we reached 20 employers. While this sample is not necessarily representative of all
employers, it can be used as supplementary data to check qualitative patterns, as well as what happens to
wages, given strong norms wherein employers pay workers the same wage within the village (Breza et al.,
2018).
                                          LABOR RATIONING                                             16

in control villages and coefficients and standard errors from a comparison of means across
treatment and control villages, obtained using a simple univariate regression with round
(strata) fixed effects. As expected, given randomization, the groups are well-balanced on
covariates.

Consistent with the characterization of the empirical context in Section 2, wage employment
rates are low, and self-employment is common among the workers in the spillover sample. On
average, respondents report some work on 36% of the recall period of 10 days -- including
wage employment on 18% of the days, and self-employment on 12% of days. However,
respondents report wanting wage work on only 18 days per month (i.e. 60% of days) on
average -- a proxy for full employment in our sample based on worker preferences. This
suggests that, scaling by this number, workers are employed in wage employment .18/.60 =
30% of the time that they would like. Our employment rate estimates match those in other
parts of India. For example, Muralidharan et al. (2020) report an average employment rate
in any private work (wage employment + self-employment) of 7.1 days per month, or 24%,
among their respondents in Andhra Pradesh in June. In the Odishan villages surveyed in the
Rural Economic and Demographic Survey (REDS), prime age males with small landholdings
are employed in wage labor 22.9% of the time in the lean season.22

Appendix Table B.3 presents descriptive statistics comparing those who signed up for the
external jobs with those who did not. As expected, those who did not sign up are less likely
to be in the labor force: they are 15-22 percentage points less likely to ever participate in the
casual labor market and have lower desired labor supply for wage labor. Consistent with this,
non-signups are likely to be wealthier--for example, they are less likely to be landless.

At endline, we manage to survey 90% of spillover sample workers. In Appendix Tables B.1
and B.2, we test for differential survey completion among workers in the main spillover and
non-signup samples, respectively. We find no evidence of differential survey attrition rates
by treatment assignment. Finally, in Appendix Table B.13, we present descriptive statistics
and balance for the employer survey.

                              6. Results I: Test for Rationing

6.1. Size of the Shock. On average, 42% of potential workers in the village sign up for
our external jobs (Table 2, Panel B). Even among workers who actively participate in the
casual labor market, one would not expect a 100% sign up rate for the external jobs. Over
85% have a household business, which may not be feasible to leave for a one month job. In
22Specifically,we consider individuals with less that 1.56 acres, which represents the 90th percentile of
landholdings in the spillover sample.
                                           LABOR RATIONING                                               17

addition, a job that requires regular attendance and hours may be a disamenity for some
workers (e.g. Blattman and Dercon, 2018).

Figure 3 summarizes the size of the hiring shock in treatment villages, measured as the
number of workers hired scaled by the size of the labor force of casual male workers in the
village. On average, 24% of the male labor force in treatment villages is hired in the external
jobs. In one village, take up is zero as harvesting began early. For the remaining villages,
the size of the shock ranges from 15-38%. Given that the number of workers hired from each
treatment village is similar across experimental rounds, the variation in shock size is driven
primarily by variation in the size of the male labor force across villages. The average shock
size in control villages is 3%.

Further, the size of the hiring shock is indistinguishable in lean and semi-peak months (p-
val=0.792). This greatly simplifies the interpretation of our analysis, which compares the
effects of the hiring shocks across lean and semi-peak months.23

6.2. Wages. We study the impact of the hiring shock on wages in the local labor market
(i.e. excluding our external worksite jobs). For each worker-day where the worker reports
hired employment for a daily wage, we construct two wage measures: (i) cash wages; and
(ii) total wages, which is the sum of cash wages and the monetary value of all in-kind wages
(e.g. tea, lunch).

Figure 4 compares the distributions of total wages for treatment and control villages, limiting
the sample to lean season observations (panel 1A) and to semi-peak season observations
(panel 1B). We cannot reject that the wage distributions in treatment and control villages are
equal in the lean months (p-value from a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is 0.370). In contrast, the
wage distribution for treatment villages is shifted to the right relative to the control villages
in the semi-peak months (p-val< 0.001), indicating a rise in equilibrium wages.

Panel A of Table 3 presents regression estimates for the spillover sample on log cash wages
(Col. 1) and log total wages (Cols. 2-3).24 At the bottom of the panel, we report the
p-value for the F-test of whether the total treatment effect on wages in semi-peak months is
significantly different from zero (i.e.  +  = 0 in Equation 1). Note from the control means
that wages paid in lean and semi-peak periods are extremely similar. This is consistent with
a failure of wage adjustment in the presence of seasonal changes to labor demand.
23See Table 6, Col. (4). One might expect the shock size to be weakly smaller in semi-peak months, due
to fewer signups when work is locally available. The fact that the worksite jobs were desirable led to ample
signups across months. This enabled us to hire enough workers for worksite jobs from among these signups
to maintain robust shock sizes across months. Note that if the shock size had been smaller in peak months,
this would make it more difficult to find the pattern of our expected results in the reduced form: no wage
or aggregate employment effects in lean months, but meaningful effects in peak months.
24Wages are winsorized. Appendix Table B.4 documents similar estimates using non-winsorized wages.
                                           LABOR RATIONING                                               18

Consistent with prediction L1, we find no evidence that wages increase in response to the
external hiring shock during lean months. However, during semi-peak months, the hiring
shock raises equilibrium wages by 5.0% (Col. 3, p-val=0.026) on average, consistent with
prediction P1. The results are similar if we examine effects on wage levels rather than log
wages (Col. 4, p-val=0.047).

In Col. (5), we document that the pattern of these findings is similar if we interact the
Hiring Shock treatment dummy with a continuous measure of the base employment rate
rather than the SemiPeak dummy. Note that the negative coefficients on Hiring Shock in
Cols. (5) and (6) do not have a clear interpretation, because there is no month in our data
with an employment rate of 0.25 Note however, we would expect the effect on wages to be
non-linear in the shock size when there is rationing. Under rationing, there would be no
change in the wage until the size of the supply shock is greater than the amount of rationing,
after which the wage would start increasing in the size of the supply shock. Consequently, we
would expect the coefficient on the continuous linear specification to be attenuated relative to
the true semi-peak wage effect. While we show the continuous specification for completeness,
we primarily focus on the binary specification in the analysis.

In Panel B of Table 3, we present estimates of Equation 1 on the full potential village labor
force (i.e. a sample of all village residents). In Cols. (1)-(2), we find that the predictions
hold with the full village sample -- there is no detectable change in equilibrium wages
in treatment villages in lean months (p-val=0.680 and p-val=0.630 respectively) , and an
increase in equilibrium wages in treatment villages in semi-peak months (p-val < 0.001).26
In Cols. (3)-(4), we further interact Equation 1 with an indicator for whether the worker
signed up for the external job. In treatment villages, equilibrium wages increase in semi-peak
months for both sign-ups (Col. 4, p-val=0.012) and non sign-ups (Col. 4, p-val=0.032), and
do not change for either group in lean months.27 This indicates that the wage results are not
driven simply by a compositional change in the labor force. In Cols. (5)-(6), we run a similar
analysis using information about cash and total wages reported by a sample of employers.
We find quite comparable effects, both qualitatively and quantitatively.

Our primary wage measure is in terms of the daily wage, since this is the most common form
of wage contract in these labor markets. In Table 4, we verify that our results are robust
25The    mean lean season employment rate in control villages is 0.145 (reported in Table 5 below). Using
the results in Table 3 Col. (5), this corresponds to an estimated wage effect of 0.0043 (s.e.=0.0204, p-
val=0.834)--consistent with no wage increase in the lean season.
26Because we sampled a small share of workers who did not sign up for the outside jobs, these weighted
full-village regressions have larger standard errors than those in Panel A.
27Note that these results are not powered to detect whether the wage effects on non-signups are different
from sign-ups, given the standard errors on the interaction terms. Our goal in this table is to test whether
overall wages for non-signups also went up in each season.
                                             LABOR RATIONING                                                 19

to measuring impacts on the hourly wage (rather than the daily wage). In addition, we find
little evidence of shifts in other aspects of the wage contract or compensating differentials
-- for example, the number of hours per workday, or expectation of receiving future benefits
from the employer such as work in the future. This helps assuage concerns that the effective
wage did increase in the lean season, but through non-price amenities. Moreover, such a
story would need to explain why wage levels adjust in semi-peak months but not in lean
times.

6.3. Individual-Level Employment Spillovers. To test for positive employment spillovers,
we measure effects on the spillover sample. These workers are exactly comparable to those
who were "removed", and therefore should benefit from the decreased competition for job
slots. We measure effects on all village residents when we examine effects on aggregate
employment below.

Table 5 provides estimates of Equation 1. The dependent variable is a dummy for whether
worker i was hired to work for someone else on day t in the local labor market for a wage.

Consistent with Prediction L3, in lean months, wage employment increases by 5.44 per-
centage points (p-val=0.005) on a base rate of 0.145 (Col. 2) -- implying a 38% increase in
employment among workers who remain in the village. This is consistent with our prediction
that workers who were previously rationed fill in available job slots. In contrast, we cannot
reject that there are no employment spillovers in semi-peak months (p-val=0.427). These
patterns are robust to using the continuous employment rate rather than the semi-peak
dummy (Col. 3).28 Panels 2A and 2B of Figure 4 verify these patterns visually.

6.4. Aggregate Employment. To test impacts on aggregate employment levels (Predic-
tions L2 and P2), we must measure employment for the entire potential labor force --
including those who did not sign up for our jobs. We undertake this analysis in Table 6.
We consider all potential workers in the village, which includes our spillover sample, the
individuals that were randomly selected to receive external jobs, and a random sample of all
other village residents.29 The dependent variable is the same as in Table 5: a dummy for
whether worker i was hired for paid wage work on day t in the local labor market (i.e. all
employment excluding our external worksite jobs).
28As discussed above, under rationing, employment effects will be non-linear in the size of the hiring shock.
One would expect positive employment spillovers in the lean season as long as the shock size is less than the
rationing level. Once the shock size exceeds this, and wages begin to rise, the employment effect should be
smaller, possibly even becoming negative--a potential non-monotonic effect in shock size.
29For those offered the external jobs, they could have worked in the local labor market on days they were not
at the external jobsites, such as weekends, absences, or if they quit the worksite job. Note that if some of the
employment spillovers accrue to those who did not sign up for jobs, the aggregate employment effect among
only the sign-ups could be negative in the lean season, even in the presence of rationing. We consequently
include all workers, including non-signups, in this test.
                                           LABOR RATIONING                                               20

Consistent with prediction L3, there is no detectable change in local aggregate employment
in response to an external hiring shock in lean months (Col. 1, p-val=0.628). This follows
directly from the results above -- because wages and local labor demand remain unchanged,
rationed workers fill up the job slots, leading to the same level of aggregate employment. In
contrast, in semi-peak months, the hiring shock reduces aggregate employment, consistent
with prediction P2. Local employment among all workers declines by 4.3 percentage points
overall (p-val=0.004) on a base rate of wage employment of 0.195 in semi-peak months. This
corresponds to a 22% decline in aggregate employment. Moreover, this decrease is detectably
different from the null result in lean months. Col. (2) shows that these effects are robust to
using the continuous employment rate.

This pattern of results is similar if we run the analysis at the village-day level instead
(summing up all employment within the village on each day) (Col. 3). Finally, in Panels 3A
and 3B of Figure 4, we plot the CDFs showing aggregate employment effects in semi-peak
vs. lean times -- providing visual verification of these patterns.

6.5. Crowd-Out. The findings in Cols. (1) and (2) of Table 6 help us understand the
extent to which an external hiring shock crowds out private wage employment. In the lean
season, giving full-time jobs to a quarter of workers generates no crowd-out in the private
labor market.

To quantify the crowd out in the semi-peak season, we must scale the employment estimates
by the number of worker-days of external work created through our hiring shock. In Cols. (3)
to (5) of Table 6, we run village-day level regressions using the hiring shock as an instrument
for employment in the external jobsites. Col. (3) presents the reduced-form result of the
hiring shock on village employment, constructed by adding up individual employment across
all potential workers in the village. Consistent with the worker-day level regression results
in Col. (1) of Table 6, we find no change in local aggregate employment in response to
the hiring shock in lean months, and a significant decline in semi-peak months. Col. (4)
presents the first stage, and shows that a substantial fraction of workers were "removed"
into the external job, with no detectable differences in lean versus semi-peak months. The
IV estimates in Col. (5) suggest that, in semi-peak months, each day of work that is created
in the external jobsites crowds out 0.264 days of private labor market employment (p-val
< 0.001).30

6.6. Persistence After the End of the Shock. We survey workers two weeks after the
hiring shock ends, when all workers are back in the village, to measure the persistence of the
30Incontrast, the estimate for lean months is much smaller in magnitude and noisily estimated (p-val=0.767),
implying that external jobs generate no detectable crowd-out in the private labor market in the lean season.
This is consistent with the reduced form results in the first two columns of Table 6.
                                           LABOR RATIONING                                              21

shock in both lean and semi-peak periods. Table 7 presents estimates of Equation 1 for our
main wage and employment outcomes using this post-shock data. Cols. (1)-(3) document
that the lean season spillover effects are transitory--lasting only as long as the hiring shocks
do. Once the shock ends and all workers are back in the village labor force, we see no more
employment spillovers and there remains no detectable difference in treatment and control
village wages. This is what one would expect if the initial response to our hiring shock
was due to rationing.31 It also rules out, for example, a wealth or aggregate demand effect
explanation for our lean season results (see Section 8 below).

In contrast, also consistent with excess labor supply, the semi-peak season hiring shocks
do have persistent effects. After wages go up, they do not adjust back down after the
transitory shock ends, leading to a drop in employment--consistent with a ratcheting effect
from downward wage rigidity (Kaur, 2019). These results point to a dynamic inefficiency in
labor market adjustment.

                           7. Results II: Rationing Implications

7.1. Self-Employment and Separation Failures. A worker who is rationed out of wage
labor may remain involuntarily unemployed or engage in a productive activity such as self-
employment to earn at least some money. In our setting, recall that 88% of workers in the
spillover sample report some form of self-employment at baseline, ranging from farming to
non-agricultural activities such as food preparation or selling firewood.

During the lean season, when job slots open up under the hiring shock, workers have the
option to switch from self-employment to wage employment at the prevailing wage. Such
a switch would indicate that these self-employed workers were rationed: they prefer wage
employment over what they were previously doing. Switching between self- and wage em-
ployment is plausible in our context because the vast majority of individuals with a business
participate actively in the casual labor market. 72% of those with a household business in
the spillover sample report casual labor as their primary occupation and an additional 24%
report casual labor as their secondary occupation.

We test for this pattern in Table 8. In lean months, the hiring shock leads to a 3.4 percentage
point (24%) decline in self-employment days (Col. 1, p-val=0.088).32 This implies that in
the spillover sample, at least 24% of lean season self-employment stems from workers being
31In some earlier rounds, follow-up surveys were implemented with longer lags. The results in Table 7 are
robust to restricting to rounds where follow-up surveys were within a month of the end of the hiring shock.
In addition, note that changes in mean control group employment rates between the endline and follow-up
surveys are not statistically different from each other.
32This effect is more precise when we restrict to a smaller recall period of 7 days--corresponding to a 31%
decline (p-val=0.004)--consistent with less measurement error (see Appendix Table B.5). In addition, in
Appendix Table B.6, we document that if we examine effects on hours of self-employment rather than days,
                                             LABOR RATIONING                                                   22

rationed out of wage work. This is likely a lower bound, both because our test is constructed
as such, and additionally because there may be fixed costs of switching from self-employment
to wage employment for a short duration of time. This reduction in self-employment accounts
for 62% of the employment spillovers documented in Table 5 above. Note that there is no
clear prediction on what should happen to self-employment in semi-peak months, since the
wage has gone up.33

Note that similar to the employment spillovers, the lean season effects on self-employment
are also transitory. Once the hiring shock ends, self-employment levels between treatment
and control villages are indistinguishable (documented above in Table 7, Col. 4). This
rules out the concern that our self-employment results simply reflect inter-temporal substi-
tution; under this explanation, there should be an increase in self-employment in the 2-week
follow-up after the shock ends. If anything, there is a persistent decline in self-employment,
potentially reflecting fixed costs.

In Table 8, Cols. (2) and (3) decompose the self-employment effects during the hiring
shock. Non-agricultural self-employment declines by 3.3 percentage points, corresponding
to a stark 50% decrease relative to the control group mean for small landholders (Col. 2).
This is consistent with the fact that most non-agricultural businesses in our sample have no
fixed assets, and a large fraction shut down in semi-peak months. Similarly, agricultural self-
employment goes down by 3.0 percentage points, but this average effect is not statistically
significant (Col. 3, p-val=0.193).34

Among farm households, a ration in the labor market is most likely to distort employment
when landholdings are small (relative to the number of adult workers in the household)
because the household's own farm will not be able to absorb all its labor.35 This is the key
prediction that is usually tested in the separation failures literature. Consistent with this,
we find that the decline in agricultural self-employment is concentrated among households
results are similar although noisier, consistent with difficulty in recall of self-employment hours (Arthi et al.,
2018).
33This increases the opportunity cost of self-employment, and so could decrease own business work. Al-
ternately, this could also lead to an increase in self-employment -- either to equate the shadow wage of
self-employment with external wage work, or if smallholder farm households are liquidity constrained in
their ability to pay for wage labor. The results indicate that on average, self-employment also declines in
semi-peak months.
34The analysis on agricultural work restricts to rounds where at least one person in the control village reports
working at least one day on his farm. This drops 5 rounds from the estimates. Having zero agricultural
work among all respondents indicates that the region is one where agriculture is non-existent, or that the
lean season production function is such that there is literally nothing to do on the land.
35This is closely related to the ubiquitous observation that smaller farms tend to use more labor per acre
than larger farms (e.g. Sen, 1962; Bardhan, 1973; Barrett, 1996; Foster and Rosenzweig, 2017). We find this
relationship in our baseline data as well (Appendix Figure A.4). See Gollin and Udry (2019) for a discussion
of the role of measurement error in interpreting this relationship.
                                     LABOR RATIONING                                        23

with below median levels of per capita landholdings (Table 8, Col. 4). Among these small
farms, there is a 7.2 percentage point reduction in agricultural self-employment during the
lean season (off a base of 14.3 percentage points in control villages). In contrast, we cannot
reject there is no change in lean season self-employment among larger farms. In Col. (5), we
document that this corresponds to a 43% reduction in total labor use on the farm -- own
family labor plus hired labor. This matches the key findings of prior work examining the
implications of separation failures (e.g., Benjamin, 1992; Udry, 1996; LaFave and Thomas,
2016; Dillon et al., 2019; Jones et al., 2020; Kaur, 2019). Moreover, we trace a direct link
from labor rationing to separation failures. Our findings imply that among small farms in
lean months, 50% of self-employment is driven by rationing. These workers would prefer to
divert the majority of their farm-work time to wage labor at the prevailing wage if jobs were
available.

If workers switch to wage work, other family members may substitute into working on the
family enterprise. While this in itself would not undermine our interpretation of rationing,
in Col. (6), we empirically examine the effect of the hiring shock on total household self-
employment across all adult members. Consistent with the results in Col. (1), total house-
hold self-employment declines by 33% in lean months (p-val= 0.012). In Col. (7), we repeat
this analysis for the all potential workers sample, with similar results: a 38% decline (p-
val= 0.085). We repeat the analysis from Cols. (3)-(5) for all potential workers in Appendix
Table B.7. Overall, our findings indicate that the hiring shock leads to a sizable aggregate
decline in self-employment across the village as a whole in lean months.

7.2. Measuring Involuntary Unemployment in Surveys. In Table 9, we examine
survey-based measures of unemployment status. In Cols. (1) and (2), we first begin by
testing the effect of the hiring shocks on an indicator for whether worker i did any private
sector work on day t in the local labor market (wage employment or self-employment). There
is no detectable change in overall reported work status. This is consistent with "disguised
unemployment" -- because rationed workers had switched to other work activities, the hiring
shocks in lean months appear inconsequential.

Next, we assess the traditional measure for involuntary unemployment used in surveys. This
lists "would have liked to work but was unable to find any" as one of the options for the
activity for that day. Workers can choose this option if they do not report having work
in some other activity. This is how involuntary unemployment is measured in virtually all
surveys, from India's National Sample Survey to Labor Bureau surveys in the US. However,
when there is disguised unemployment -- such that self-employment masks rationing --
these measures would not accurately reflect labor market slack. Consistent with this, in
Cols. (3) and (4), we cannot detect an effect of the hiring shocks on lean month involuntary
                                      LABOR RATIONING                                        24

unemployment: the coefficient is negative but insignificant (p-val=0.173 and p-val=0.242
respectively).

To address this challenge, we wrote an alternate survey question which asks workers to state
whether they would have accepted a job at the prevailing wage that day over whatever else
they had been doing (i.e., even if they were self-employed). Consequently, it should be less
sensitive to the presence of disguised unemployment. The exact phrasing of this question
was: "Suppose someone offered you work at the prevailing wage in your village on this day.
Would you have accepted the work?" To denote the "prevailing wage", we used the phrase
in the local language (Odiya) that denotes the standard going rate for a day of agricultural
work in the village. Using this measure, the hiring shocks reduce involuntary unemployment
by 7.0 percentage points in the lean season (Col. 5, p-val=0.008). This magnitude closely
matches the size of the revealed preference response from our employment spillover effects
(see Table 5). Moreover, the lean season estimate in Col. (5) is statistically different from
that in Col. (3) (p-val=0.067).

While this alternate question offers benefits over the traditional measure, and its movement
contains signal about labor market conditions, it may suffer from its own issues. For example,
it could overstate involuntary unemployment if business owners intertemporally substitute
self-employment across days. As with any self-reported measure, it could also overestimate
slack if workers are hesitant to admit that they are voluntarily unemployed, or searching for
an unattainable job. Consistent with such concerns, the means of this variable are unrealisti-
cally high. For example, the sum of involuntary unemployment plus wage employment days
is greater than workers' self-reported preferred "full-employment" rate of 60% (see Table 2).
Overall, this highlights challenges with using self-reported survey measures.

7.3. Effects on Employers. If there is severe rationing in lean months, then removing
a quarter of workers may not have any negative consequences on employers in the lean
season. We examine this idea using proxies from an employer survey conducted at endline in
Appendix Table B.8. In lean months, the hiring shocks, do not negatively disrupt agricultural
work (Cols. 1 and 2), do not make it harder to find workers (Cols. 3 and 4), and do not
change the perceived quality of workers (Col. 5).

In contrast, in semi-peak months, the hiring shocks appear to negatively impact employers
using these proxies. Employers are 6.4 percentage points more likely to have to resort to
hiring workers from outside the village, an 82% increase relative to the control mean (Panel
B Col. 3, p-val <0.001). The results also suggest that employers did not undertake as many
cultivation activities as they would have liked, or as early as they would have liked (Panel B
Cols. 1-2, p-val= 0.060 and p-val=0.082, respectively). Interestingly, there is some indication
                                            LABOR RATIONING                                                25

that in the semi-peak season, the wage increase enables employers to attract better quality
workers, as evidenced by employer's ratings of worker quality (Panel A, Col. 5). These
results should only be taken as suggestive given that we did not survey a random sample of
employers (see footnote 21).

Overall, these patterns are consistent with the idea of "surplus labor" in lean months only.36
They match Leibenstein's predictions of "under-utilized labor". In lean times, there exist
workers who can be removed from the labor market with little apparent impact. However,
in semi-peak times, the marginal product of the marginal worker is meaningfully large.

7.4. Allocation Mechanism. In the presence of rationing, the wage no longer plays an
allocative role--raising the question of the rationing mechanism: are higher ability workers
hired first, or are job slots randomly assigned? In our setting, queuing by ability is possible
for hiring within the village for agricultural work (since farmers know the workers) but less
likely for casual work in the non-agricultural sector (where contractors come to villages to
load workers onto trucks in a more arms-length fashion) (see Section 2). If higher ability
workers are hired first, then the employment spillovers we document should accrue to less
able workers, who would be next in line for jobs.

We empirically investigate this in Appendix Table B.9 by examining heterogeneous treatment
effects by commonly used proxies for worker ability. In Col. (1), we find little evidence
that in lean months, spillover effects accrue to workers who receive worse baseline ability
ratings from employers in the village. In Col. (2), we do see suggestive evidence that
those with higher baseline employment are less likely to benefit from employment spillovers:
a one standard deviation increase in baseline employment rate is associated with a 4.41
percentage point reduction in the hiring shock treatment effect in the lean season, but the
coefficient is insignificant (p-val=0.149). In Col. (3), we find no detectable differences in
employment spillovers by baseline wages. However, in our context, wages are unlikely to
convey information about worker ability because casual wages are compressed--limiting the
scope for any differential impacts (e.g. Breza et al., 2018). Overall, these findings do not offer
conclusive evidence on whether there is queuing by ability--an interesting topic for future
research.

The allocation mechanism is potentially consequential for employer surplus. Removing work-
ers from the labor force will have no effect on employer profits under random rationing, but
may decrease profits under queuing if enough high ability workers are removed. Note that
this does not alter the interpretation of the amount of rationing detected by our hiring
shocks: in both cases unemployed workers' marginal product is above the prevailing wage,
36A crisper test of the surplus labor hypothesis would entail measuring impacts on yields or profits. However,
since our shocks lasted as little as 2-3 weeks in some rounds, this would be an under-powered test.
                                            LABOR RATIONING                                                 26

in line with the definition of rationing (see Section 8.2 below). In addition, if workers are
heterogeneous in ability, this would imply that one can remove the lowest ability workers
(whose marginal product may still be above the prevailing wage) in lean months without any
change in output--a more nuanced interpretation of the idea of "under-utilized labor".

       8. Discussion: Potential Microfoundations and Threats to Validity

We next turn to two important discussions. First, we consider possible microfoundations
that could give rise to excess labor supply. This is important because many questions
of efficiency and welfare depend on understanding why the labor market looks this way.
Second, we consider several potential threats to validity that could, in principle, confound
the interpretation of our results.

8.1. Potential Microfoundations. We examine possible microfoundations for rationing in
light of our results. The canonical moral hazard efficiency wage model (Shapiro and Stiglitz,
1984) produces involuntary unemployment in equilibrium. However, this model would pre-
dict that our hiring shocks would increase wages to maintain equilibrium unemployment
to restore incentives.37 It is also unclear why rationing would exist differentially in lean
months relative to semi-peak ones. Nutrition efficiency wages can also generate involuntary
unemployment (Dasgupta and Ray, 1986). However, in semi-peak months, our finding of a
ratcheting effect--wages remain higher even after the transitory hiring shock ends--is incon-
sistent with a nutrition efficiency wage, since wages should be able to fall back down to their
pre-shock levels if the wage floor was based on the cost of purchasing a certain number of
calories. Thus, both of these efficiency wage models are inconsistent with our findings.

In addition, dynamic contracting or implicit insurance models--e.g., in which employers
smooth wages for their more risk averse workers across seasons--could generating rationing
in some demand states (e.g. Azariadis, 1975; Rosen, 1985).38 The most straightforward
versions of these models should not generate a ratcheting effect on wages, leading to a drop
in employment--contradictory to our results. However, our results do not definitively rule
out the potential relevance of dynamic contracting between workers and employers.

Two other microfoundations are potentially more compatible with our results. First, a feature
of workers' preferences may lead them to resist wage cuts (e.g. Keynes, 1937; Akerlof and
Yellen, 1990; Fehr et al., 2009). Second, monopoly power on the part of workers could also
37As we discuss in Section 3.2, our test is not powered to detect rationing from this class of models.
38Some  versions of these models would imply that while there is rationing, it is not inefficient--the wage is
simply not playing an allocative role. Our ratcheting effect suggests that rationing can lead to inefficiencies
in employment levels.
                                            LABOR RATIONING                                                 27

generate rationing. In a similar setting, Breza et al. (2019) find evidence that workers behave
as an informal union to prop up wages.39

Our findings only allow a suggestive glimpse into microfoundations. Ultimately, which mi-
crofoundations are responsible for rationing will determine its welfare and efficiency conse-
quences. This provides impetus for future work on micro-foundations.

8.2. Threats to Validity. There are several potential confounds that could give rise to (a
subset of) predictions L1-L3 even if there is no rationing. Any alternate explanation would
need to explain all three of our lean month findings, and also explain why this confound
would only operate in lean months but not peak months (during which we observe drastically
different results).

Change in composition of workers. There may be some selection into which workers sign up
for the external worksite jobs, potentially changing the composition of workers left behind
in treatment villages. If this decreases the average quality of workers in lean months, it
could put downward pressure on the wage--counteracting the upward wage pressure from
the supply shift, generating no change on average (confounding prediction L1). Note that
for this to also generate prediction L3, the demand elasticity would need to be such that
employers would still want to hire the same number of workers at w, even though worker
quality has changed. More directly, in Section 7.3, we show that employer perceptions
of worker quality are no different in treatment versus control villages during lean months
(Appendix Table B.8 Col. 1). In addition, recall from Section 6.2 that our wage results look
very similar among those who signed up for the external job (Table 3 Panel A), and those
who did not (Table 3 Panel B).

Note that our test allows for workers to be heterogeneous in ability and for some workers
to be unqualified to work at the market wage. Even if the average ability of workers that
are left behind did change, this would not confound our test for the level of rationing. By
revealed preference, any worker that receives employment spillovers from the hiring shock
must be sufficiently productive to be employed at the market wage rate. In other words,
what matters for rationing is workers' absolute marginal product level being above w.

Wealth and aggregate demand effects. The external jobs created under the hiring shocks
generate an infusion of wealth in treatment villages. A potential concern is that this may
39Work   in the development labor literature has documented other frictions that can generate inefficiencies in
employment levels--such as information frictions where the employer does not know if the worker is qualified
for the job (e.g. Foster and Rosenzweig, 1996; Beaman and Magruder, 2012). The primary microfoundations
we consider in this section are based on our definition of rationing. In our test, employers reveal that they
consider the worker to be employable at the current wage, suggesting they knew that rationed workers are
qualified.
                                          LABOR RATIONING                                             28

subsequently lead to an expansion of local labor demand, which could counteract the supply
shift and subsequently generate no change in aggregate employment (confounding prediction
L3). However, if this alternate explanation were true, this should put even more upward
pressure on wages, which would be inconsistent with prediction L1.

Results from the 2-week follow-up survey (Table 7, Section 6.6) also help rule out this
confound. The laborers hired in the external jobs received their final wage payment on the
last day of work. If households began consuming more, we would expect that immediately
after the transitory hiring shock ends, there should still be a demand expansion. However, we
find that as soon as the transitory shock ends, the labor market returns exactly to where it
was before the shock--indicating that any wealth impacts on employment are minimal.

Substitution in work activities across household members. In Appendix Table B.10, we show
impacts of the hiring shock on family members of spillover sample workers.40 If other house-
hold members are also participants in the casual wage market, we should expect their employ-
ment to mirror that of our spillover sample: positive employment spillovers and reduction in
self-employment in lean months. In Col. (2), we detect positive lean-season hiring spillovers
onto the family members that participate in the casual labor market, providing robustness
to our main findings. In Col. (5), we find a negative and statistically significant impact of
the lean-season hiring shock on self-employment, implying that total work days in household
enterprises fall when labor market opportunities improve. This indicates that there is not
some substitution in activities across household members driving our results.

Integrated labor markets. If the labor market is integrated across villages, our hiring shock
would only constitute a small supply shock to employers--potentially explaining the lack
of wage effects in lean months. However, in this case, we should also see no employment
spillovers in the lean season. This could also not explain why wages rise in semi-peak
months.

Perfectly elastic labor supply. If labor supply is perfectly elastic at the market wage, this
could generate predictions L1-L3 even when there is no rationing. Appendix Figure A.5
summarizes results from a labor supply elicitation exercise, conducted in the same districts
as our experimental sample. Breza et al. (2019) partner with agricultural employers to
randomize individual wage offers to workers in the local labor market. When the wage offer
40Each
     spillover sample respondent reported the number of days in the prior week that other adult household
members worked in wage employment and self employment.
                                            LABOR RATIONING                                                 29

is reduced from the prevailing wage to a 10% cut, take-up of the job declines from 26% to
18%.41 This suggests that labor supply in this setting is far from perfectly elastic.

Power to detect wage increases. Because there is a confidence interval around our wage
effect estimates, one potential concern is that in the lean season, there may have been a
meaningful wage increase (contradicting L1), but we are under-powered to detect it precisely.
We examine this concern by taking the confidence intervals around the wage and employment
effects seriously. Suppose the wage increased by the magnitude corresponding to the right
side of the wage effect confidence interval: 1.92%, and that aggregate employment does
not change. The 95% confidence interval around the employment spillover effect in lean
months is [.018, 0.091], corresponding to a percentage increase of [12.4%, 62.6%]. From
the perspective of an individual (atomistic, price-taking) worker, this would indicate that
seeing a wage increase of 1.92% led him to increase his labor supply by 12.4-62.6%. The
labor supply elasticity required to induce this employment response for an individual worker
remaining in the village is in the range of 6.47 - 32.59.42 This is implausibly high and
substantively larger than the residual labor supply elasticity estimates derived by Breza
et al. (2019) and Goldberg (2016). The aggregate semi-peak labor supply elasticity implied
by our experimental results is also much smaller. (See Appendix E.) Such an overly large
individual supply elasticity estimate is exactly what one would expect under excess labor
supply.

Repeated Contracts and Implicit Insurance. Because workers and employers participate in
the same local labor market, there is potential scope for repeated or reciprocal relationships
(e.g., Bardhan, 1983; Mukherjee and Ray, 1995; Anderson et al., 2015; Rosen, 1985).

One might worry that repeat relationships might mask wage increases in lean months because
employers could compensate workers through other channels such as promises of future
work. Such concerns amount to potential mismeasurement of the wage (contradicting L1).
However, in Table 4, workers do not report differential expectations of future work between
treatment and control villages in either season. Moreover, if these unpriced favors are costly
to the employers, then we should also expect aggregate village employment to decrease in
treated villages in lean months, which we do not observe empirically.

It might also be the case that workers and employers insure one another against unanticipated
labor market shocks, such as the experimentally-induced shock studied here. While possible
41These  estimates use the take-up of jobs under the "private" condition. We view this as reflecting true
residual labor supply and offering the best estimate of the residual supply elasticity under a wage increase--
since that is the relevant direction for wage changes under our negative supply shock.
42For this exercise, we allow for correlation between the wage and employment spillover regressions when
calculating the confidence intervals using SUR. If instead, we use the confidence intervals directly from the
regressions in Tables 3 and 5 (assuming independence), the implied labor supply range elasticity is 4.82-25.68.
                                      LABOR RATIONING                                         30

in principle, such an explanation would involve poorer workers providing insurance to the
wealthier employers, whereas the literature normally posits insurance flowing the opposite
way. In addition, our semi-peak findings would indicate that insurance provision by workers
only occurs in lean times--when workers themselves are poorest.

Finally, as we discuss in Section 8.1 above, there is a class of dynamic contracting or implicit
insurance models that could generate labor rationing. However, in this case, these would not
be a confounding explanation but rather a potential microfoundation for our findings.

         9. Extension: Labor market shocks and labor market slack

Our experimental results highlight how the same labor supply shock can have dramatically
different impacts in periods of high versus low labor market slack. This finding has im-
plications for labor market policies. In Appendix Figure A.6, we document high levels of
variation in employment rates across districts in India (Panel A) and across the months of
the year (Panel B). The interquartile range of cross-district employment levels spans 0.76
to 2.07 days per week. Moreover, the median state has more than a 100% employment in-
crease between the month with the lowest versus highest employment rate within the year. If
baseline employment rates correlate with labor market slack, then this spatial and temporal
variation suggests that the same policy implemented nation-wide and year-long might have
heterogenous impacts, absorbing rationed workers in some cases and crowding out private
sector employment in others.

In a suggestive exercise, we analyze India's workfare program, the National Rural Employ-
ment Guarantee Act (NREGA), through this lens. Like many workfare programs around
the world, NREGA guarantees work in public works at a government-mandated wage.
While such programs primarily operate during agricultural lean seasons, NREGA does occur
throughout the year (Appendix Figure A.7).

We note that our experimental hiring shock is not directly comparable to a workfare policy.
Such programs constitute a permanent shock that impacts all eligible workers by offering
an outside option. This potentially increases reservation wages and shifts the entire labor
supply curve, even among those who never participate in the program. Consequently, such
programs are more likely to lead to wage increases than our shock, which was both transitory
and available only to the participants we randomly selected.

We examine the phased roll-out of NREGA across districts in India, following Imbert and
Papp (2015). Further, we consider differences in the program's impacts by baseline employ-
ment levels. We use worker-level employment data from the National Sample Survey (NSS),
rounds 61 (July 2004- June 2005) and 64 (July 2007- June 2008). The NREGA phase-in
                                         LABOR RATIONING                                            31

began in 2006, and by April 2007, 330 of India's 610 districts had received the program. We
estimate the following triple-differences regression:



(2) yidmt = N REGAdt + N REGAdt × Highdm + Highdm + d + mt + Xidmt + idmt

where i indexes the individual, d indexes the district, m is calendar month and t is year.
N REGAdt is the program indicator, equal to 1 in districts that had already received the
program in round 64. Highdm is a binary indicator for whether a district x month pair had
above-median casual employment (low slack) prior to NREGA, averaging across households
surveyed in rounds 60 and 61.43 Note that this captures both cross-district spatial variation
and within-district seasonal variation in casual employment. d and mt denote district and
month-by-year fixed effects. Xidmt is a vector of controls, including worker characteristics
by round (gender, education, age), baseline agricultural yields by round, and district-by-
month baseline means of casual employment, wages, and self-employment. We predict that
when there is less slack in the labor market, labor market shocks such as NREGA should
put more upward pressure on wages, leading to relatively more crowd-out of private sector
employment, w > 0 and e < 0.44

We view this exercise as merely suggestive because of one important caveat. While the
national program phase-in can be taken as quasi-exogneous under the assumptions laid out
in Imbert and Papp (2015), the size of the NREGA program in a given district-month is
endogenous. Importantly, the demand and supply of NREGA jobs, conditional on having
the program, may be directly related to labor market slack at the time. Consequently, we
cannot use findings from this analysis to make any strong causal claims.

Appendix Table B.11 presents the results. There is a strong first stage: districts that received
the program by 2007 have more employment in public works (Col. 1). If anything, there is
more public works in settings with higher baseline employment, though the coefficient is not
statistically significant.

Consistent with our predictions, we find that labor market slack mediates NREGA's reduced
form impacts. In Col. (2), we find no evidence for NREGA-driven wage increases in places
with below-median employment rates. However, the daily wage rises in places with above-
median employment rates (p-val=0.014). In Cols. (3)-(4), we find no evidence of private
43In some cases, the survey months for a district in rounds 60-61 do not overlap with the survey months
in round 64. We thus control for whether the heterogeneity measure is not well defined for a round 64
observation. We code such cases as not having high baseline employment.
44We do not have strong predictions on  and beta given the size of the NREGA shock and its relevance
                                          w         e
for the wages of all workers in the labor market.
                                     LABOR RATIONING                                        32

sector employment crowd-out in district-months with below-median baseline employment.
However, NREGA does puts downward pressure on private sector employment in district-
months with above-median employment. The program crowds out agricultural employment
by almost 20% (p-val=0.031) when the labor market appears tighter. Finally, the program
decreases self-employment when there is more slack (Col. 5); consistent with Section 7.1, we
observe people switching out of self-employment, despite no change in the wage.

This suggests that programs like NREGA can be implemented with little crowd-out in places
and times of year where slack is high. However, when slack is low, the story is different.
If the policy goal is to provide work opportunities to rationed workers, then this could be
accomplished at substantially lower cost (and reduced private sector crowd-out) by improved
geographical and temporal targeting.

                                     10. Conclusion

We document the coexistence of two markedly different labor market paradigms. During
lean periods, over a quarter of labor supply is rationed, while during semi-peak periods, the
labor market adjusts rapidly to shocks. These patterns of seasonality match Leibenstein's
predictions of "under-utilized labor." Moreover, during lean periods, we find no evidence of
adverse impacts on employers in treated labor markets. Taken at face value, this suggests
that workers can be "removed" from the labor market, but only during slack periods. Because
semi-peak season aggregate employment does decrease in response to a labor supply shock,
permanently "removing" workers through long-term out-migration, for example, would likely
have negative productivity impacts.

Our results have important implications for rural labor market analysis. The prevalence of
rationing in our context suggests that there are periods when workers are not on their labor
supply curve, and subsequently, wages do not play an allocative role. Therefore, in these
settings, prices are uninformative (De Janvry et al., 1991) -- the wage does not reflect the
marginal product of labor. Moreover, analyses that aggregate labor market data to an annual
horizon, averaging across lean and peak periods, will likely produce misleading estimates.
This underscores the need to incorporate seasonality into labor market analysis.

As discussed above, these findings also have implications for the design of labor market poli-
cies. We provide suggestive evidence that private sector crowd-out from workfare programs
is mediated by underlying labor market conditions. Our results also have implications for
designing incentives for temporary migration (Bryan et al., 2014; Akram et al., 2018). How-
ever, we also acknowledge that some policy decisions require a better understanding of the
specific microfoundations that give rise to labor rationing. That we find so much excess
labor supply should be an impetus for more research into understanding its causes.
                                     LABOR RATIONING                                        33

Finally, our lean season results highlight how high rates of self-employment in our context
make it difficult to diagnose rationing. We show that in lean seasons, so-called "disguised"
unemployment (Singh et al., 1986) explains 23% of the labor workers supply to household
enterprises in lean months, with this number rising to 75% for smallholder farms. This
also sheds light on the nature of many small businesses in developing countries. If at least
a quarter of self-employment among workers is quickly abandoned in favor of wage work,
then perhaps it is not surprising that the average developing country business shows low
growth and low returns to blanket interventions such as credit or skills training (Banerjee
et al., 2015; McKenzie and Woodruff, 2014). This view is supported by De Mel et al. (2010),
Schoar (2010) and Adhvaryu et al. (2019), who relate low-productivity entrepreneurship by
workers to poor labor market prospects. This creates a rationale for targeting interventions
like subsidized capital drops or skills training on "true," rather than "forced" entrepreneurs
(e.g., Banerjee et al., 2019; Hussam et al., 2020).

                                       References

Adhvaryu, A., N. Kala, and A. Nyshadham (2019): "Booms, Busts, and House-
 hold Enterprise: Evidence from Coffee Farmers in Tanzania," The World Bank Economic
 Review.
Akerlof, G. A. and J. L. Yellen (1990): "The Fair Wage-Effort Hypothesis and Un-
 employment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105, 255­283.
Akram, A. A., S. Chowdhury, and A. M. Mobarak (2018): "Effects of Emigration
 on Rural Labor Markets," NBER Working Paper 23929.
Anderson, S., P. Francois, and A. Kotwal (2015): "Clientelism in Indian villages,"
 American Economic Review, 105, 1780­1816.
Arthi, V., K. Beegle, J. De Weerdt, and A. Palacios-Lo          ´ pez (2018): "Not your
 average job: Measuring farm labor in Tanzania," Journal of Development Economics, 130,
 160­172.
Azariadis, C. (1975): "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria," Journal of
 Political Economy, 83, 1183­1202.
Banerjee, A., E. Breza, E. Duflo, and C. Kinnan (2019): "Can Microfinance Unlock
 a Poverty Trap for Some Entrepreneurs?" NBER Working Paper 26346.
Banerjee, A., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2015): "Six randomized evaluations of
 microcredit: Introduction and further steps," American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
 nomics, 7, 1­21.
Banerjee, A. V. and E. Duflo (2007): "The economic lives of the poor," Journal of
 economic perspectives, 21, 141­168.
                                    LABOR RATIONING                                       34

Bardhan, P. K. (1973): "Size, productivity, and returns to scale: An analysis of farm-level
  data in Indian agriculture," Journal of Political Economy, 81, 1370­1386.
------ (1983): "Labor-tying in a poor agrarian economy: A theoretical and empirical anal-
  ysis," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98, 501­514.
Barrett, C. B. (1996): "On price risk and the inverse farm size-productivity relationship,"
  Journal of Development Economics, 51, 193­215.
Beaman, L. and J. Magruder (2012): "Who gets the job referral? Evidence from a
  social networks experiment," American Economic Review, 102, 3574­93.
Beegle, K. and L. Christiaensen (2019): Accelerating poverty reduction in Africa, The
  World Bank.
Beegle, K., E. Galasso, and J. Goldberg (2017): "Direct and Indirect Effects of
  Malawi's Public Works Program on Food Security," Journal of Development Economics,
  1­23.
Behrman, J. R. (1999): "Labor markets in developing countries," Handbook of labor eco-
  nomics, 3, 2859­2939.
Benjamin, D. (1992): "Household Composition, Labor Markets, and Labor Demand: Test-
  ing for Separation in Agricultural Household Models," Econometrica, 287­322.
Bertrand, M., B. Cre    ´pon, A. Marguerie, and P. Premand (2017): "Contempora-
  neous and post-program impacts of a public works program: evidence from C^  ote d'Ivoire,"
  Working Paper.
Blattman, C. and S. Dercon (2018): "The impacts of industrial and entrepreneurial
  work on income and health: Experimental evidence from Ethiopia," American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 10, 1­38.
Bound, J., C. Brown, and N. Mathiowetz (2001): "Measurement error in survey
  data," in Handbook of econometrics, Elsevier, vol. 5, 3705­3843.
Breza, E., S. Kaur, and N. Krishnaswamy (2019): "Scabs: The Social Suppression of
  Labor Supply," NBER Working Paper 25880.
Breza, E., S. Kaur, and Y. Shamdasani (2018): "The Morale Effects of Pay Inequality,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 611­663.
Breza, E. and C. Kinnan (2018): "Measuring the Equilibrium Impacts of Credit: Evi-
  dence from the Indian Microfinance Crisis," NBER Working Paper 24329.
Bryan, G., S. Chowdhury, and A. M. Mobarak (2014): "Underinvestment in a
  Profitable Technology: The Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh," Econometrica,
  82, 1671­1748.
Card, D. (2011): "Origins of the unemployment rate: The lasting legacy of measurement
  without theory," The American Economic Review, 101, 552­557.
                                    LABOR RATIONING                                      35

Cre´pon, B., E. Duflo, M. Gurgand, R. Rathelot, and P. Zamora (2013): "Do
  Labor Market Policies have Displacement Effects? Evidence from a Clustered Randomized
  Experiment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 531­580.
Dasgupta, P. and D. Ray (1986): "Inequality as a determinant of malnutrition and
  unemployment: Theory," The Economic Journal, 96, 1011­1034.
De Janvry, A., M. Fafchamps, and E. Sadoulet (1991): "Peasant household be-
  haviour with missing markets: Some paradoxes explained," The Economic Journal, 101,
  1400­1417.
De Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff (2010): "Who are the microenterprise
  owners? Evidence from Sri Lanka on Tokman versus De Soto," in International differences
  in entrepreneurship, University of Chicago Press, 63­87.
Dillon, B., P. Brummund, and G. Mwabu (2019): "Asymmetric non-separation and
  rural labor markets," Journal of Development Economics, 139, 78­96.
Donaldson, D. and D. Keniston (2016): "Dynamics of a Malthusian Economy: India
  in the Aftermath of the 1918 Influenza," Working Paper.
Dreze, J., L. Leruth, and A. Mukherjee (1986): "Rural Labour Markets in India:
  Theories and Evidence," in 8th World Congress of the International Economic Association,
  New Delhi, December.
Dreze, J. P. and A. Mukherjee (1989): "Labour contracts in rural india: Theories
  and evidence," in The balance between industry and agriculture in economic development,
  Springer, 233­265.
Egger, D., J. Haushofer, E. Miguel, P. Niehaus, and M. W. Walker (2019):
  "General equilibrium effects of cash transfers: experimental evidence from Kenya," NBER
  Working Paper 26600.
Faberman, R. J. and A. Rajan (2020): "Is the Unemployment Rate a Good Measure of
  People Currently Out of Work?" Chicago Fed Insights.
Fafchamps, M. (1993): "Sequential labor decisions under uncertainty: An estimable house-
  hold model of West-African farmers," Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society,
  1173­1197.
Fehr, E., L. Goette, and C. Zehnder (2009): "A Behavioral Account of the Labor
  Market: The Role of Fairness Concerns," Annual Review of Economics, 1, 355­384.
Fellner, W. (1976): Towards a Reconstruction of Macroeconomics, American Enterprise
  Institute.
Fink, G., B. K. Jack, and F. Masiye (2018): "Seasonal Liquidity, Rural Labor Markets
  and Agricultural Production," NBER Working Paper 24564.
Foster, A. D. and M. R. Rosenzweig (1996): "Comparative advantage, information
  and the allocation of workers to tasks: Evidence from an agricultural labour market," The
                                    LABOR RATIONING                                       36

  Review of Economic Studies, 63, 347­374.
------ (2017): "Are there too many farms in the world? Labor-market transaction costs,
  machine capacities and optimal farm size," NBER Working Paper 23909.
Gautier, P., P. Muller, B. van der Klaauw, M. Rosholm, and M. Svarer (2018):
  "Estimating equilibrium effects of job search assistance," Journal of Labor Economics, 36,
  1073­1125.
Goldberg, J. (2016): "Kwacha gonna do? Experimental Evidence about labor supply in
  rural Malawi," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8, 129­149.
Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. E. Waugh (2014): "The agricultural productivity
  gap," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 939­993.
Gollin, D. and C. Udry (2019): "Heterogeneity, measurement error and misallocation:
  Evidence from african agriculture," NBER Working Paper 25440.
Hussam, R., N. Rigol, and B. N. Roth (2020): "Targeting High Ability Entrepreneurs
  Using Community Information: Mechanism Design in the Field," Working Paper.
Imbert, C. and J. Papp (2015): "Labor market effects of social programs: Evidence
  from India's employment guarantee," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  7, 233­263.
------ (2020): "Short-term Migration, Rural Public Works, and Urban Labor Markets:
  Evidence from India," Journal of the European Economic Association, 18, 927­963.
Jayachandran, S. (2006): "Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity Shocks
  in Developing Countries," Journal of Political Economy, 114, 538­575.
Jones, M. R., F. Kondylis, J. A. Loeser, and J. Magruder (2020): "Factor Market
  Failures and the Adoption of Irrigation in Rwanda," Working Paper.
Kaur, S. (2019): "Nominal Wage Rigidity in Village Labor Markets," American Economic
  Review, 109, 3585­3616.
Kaur, S., S. Mullainathan, S. Oh, and F. Schilbach (2019): "Does Financial Strain
  Lower Productivity?" Working Paper.
Keynes, J. M. (1937): "The general theory of employment," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 209­223.
LaFave, D. and D. Thomas (2016): "Farms, families, and markets: New evidence on
  completeness of markets in agricultural settings," Econometrica, 84, 1917­1960.
LaFave, D. R., E. D. Peet, and D. Thomas (2020): "Farm Profits, Prices and House-
  hold Behavior," NBER Working Paper 26636.
Leibenstein, H. (1957): Economic backwardness and economic growth : Studies in the
  theory of economic development., New York: Wiley.
Lewis, W. A. (1954): "Economic Development With Unlimited Supplies of Labour," The
  Manchester School, 22, 139­191.
                                    LABOR RATIONING                                       37

Manning, A. (2013): "Monopsony in Motion: Imperfect Competition in Labor Markets,"
  in Monopsony in Motion, Princeton University Press.
McKenzie, D. and C. Woodruff (2014): "What are we learning from business train-
  ing and entrepreneurship evaluations around the developing world?" The World Bank
  Research Observer, 29, 48­82.
McMillan, M. S. and D. Rodrik (2011): "Globalization, structural change and produc-
  tivity growth," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Mukherjee, A. and D. Ray (1995): "Labor tying," Journal of Development Economics,
  47, 207­239.
Muralidharan, K., P. Niehaus, and S. Sukhtankar (2020): "General Equilibrium
  Effects of (Improving) Public Employment Programs: Experimental Evidence from India,"
  Working Paper.
Pitt, M. and M. Rosenzweig (1986): "Agricultural prices, food consumption, and the
  health and productivity of Indonesian farmers," Agricultural household models: Exten-
  sions, applications and policy, 153­182.
Rosen, S. (1985): "Implicit Contracts: A Survey," Journal of Economic Literature, 23,
  1144­1175.
Rosenzweig, M. R. (1988): "Labor markets in low-income countries," in Handbook of
  Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 1, 713­762.
Schoar, A. (2010): "The divide between subsistence and transformational entrepreneur-
  ship," Innovation policy and the economy, 10, 57­81.
Schultz, T. W. (1964): Transforming traditional agriculture., Yale University Press.
Sen, A. K. (1962): "An aspect of Indian agriculture," Economic Weekly, 14, 243­246.
------ (1967): "Surplus labour in India: A critique of Schultz's statistical test," The Eco-
  nomic Journal, 154­161.
Shapiro, C. and J. E. Stiglitz (1984): "Equilibrium unemployment as a worker disci-
  pline device," The American Economic Review, 433­444.
Singh, I., L. Squire, J. Strauss, et al. (1986): Agricultural Household Models: Exten-
  sions, Applications, and Policy, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Taylor, J. (2008): "Involuntary unemployment," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Eco-
  nomics, Second Edition.
Udry, C. (1996): "Efficiency and market structure: Testing for profit maximization in
  African agriculture," Working Paper.
Zimmermann, L. (2020): "Why Guarantee Employment? Evidence from a Large Indian
  Public-Works Program," Working Paper.
Zoutman, F. T., E. Gavrilova, and A. O. Hopland (2018): "Estimating both supply
  and demand elasticities using variation in a single tax rate," Econometrica, 86, 763­771.
                                      LABOR RATIONING                                              38

                                           Figures

Wage                                               Wage
                             S (treatment)                                   S (treatment)
                             S                                               S
                                                   w

w
w


                             D                                               D
                                   Village Empl.                                   Village Empl.
          EE                                           E = ED      ES   ES
             text to align                                 Rationing
    (a) H0 : No Rationing (ED  ES )                       (b) H1 : Rationing (ED < ES )

              Figure 1. Effects of a Negative Labor Supply Shock

Note: Figure shows the effects of a negative supply shock on employment
and wages under no rationing (ED  ES ) in panel A, and under rationing
(ED < ES ) in panel B.



                        Did not sign up             Did not sign up

                                                    Not Offered Job
   All                  Not Offered Job            (Spillover Sample)                All
 Potential      All    (Spillover Sample)                                 All      Potential
 Workers       Sign                                                      Sign      Workers
               -Ups                                                      -Ups
                                                       Offered Job

                             Offered Job
             (a) No hiring shock                                (b) Hiring shock

                                 Figure 2. Analysis Samples

Note: Figure summarizes the analysis samples in control villages in panel A,
and treatment villages in panel B. The dark grey area denotes workers who
sign up and are offered employment at the external job sites (i.e. "removed"
from the village). The light grey shaded area denotes workers who sign up but
are not offered jobs--this constitutes the spillover sample (the main analysis
sample). The sum across all three areas denotes the entire potential labor
force of workers in the village.
                                LABOR RATIONING                                39




                  .1
                Fraction
             .05  0




                           0   .1                .2                .3   .4
                                    Fraction of male labor force



             Figure 3. Size of the Experimental Hiring Shock

Note: Figure shows the size of the experimental hiring shock in treatment
villages. This is measured as number of workers hired divided by the size of
the male labor force in the village. The mean shock size (indicated by the
dashed vertical line) is 0.24.
                                                                            LABOR RATIONING                                                                                        40




               1




                                                                                                        1
               .8




                                                                                                        .8
               .6




                                                                                                        .6
    Fraction




                                                                                             Fraction
               .4




                                                                                                        .4
               .2




                                                                                                        .2
                                                           p-val (KS) = 0.370                                                                    p-val (KS) = 0.000
               0




                                                                                                        0
                    0           100             200         300             400        500                   0          100             200       300             400        500

                                      (1A) Wage - Lean                                                                  (1B) Wage - Semi-peak
               1




                                                                                                        1
               .8




                                                                                                        .8
               .6




                                                                                                        .6
    Fraction




                                                                                             Fraction
               .4




                                                                                                        .4
               .2




                                                                                                        .2

                                                           p-val (KS) = 0.050                                                                    p-val (KS) = 0.738
               0




                                                                                                        0




                    0       1           2          3       4           5          6     7                    0      1           2          3     4           5          6     7

                        (2A) Employment Spillovers - Lean                                                        (2B) Empl. Spillovers - Semi-peak
               1




                                                                                                        1
               .8




                                                                                                        .8
               .6




                                                                                                        .6
    Fraction




                                                                                             Fraction
               .4




                                                                                                        .4
               .2




                                                                                                        .2




                                                           p-val (KS) = 0.482                                                                    p-val (KS) = 0.000
               0




                                                                                                        0




                    0       1           2          3       4           5          6     7                    0      1           2          3     4           5          6     7

                        (3A) Aggregate employment - Lean                                                         (3B) Aggregate empl. - Semi-peak
               1




                                                                                                        1
               .8




                                                                                                        .8
              .6




                                                                                                       .6
      Fraction




                                                                                               Fraction
    .4




                                                                                             .4
               .2




                                                                                                        .2




                                                           p-val (KS) = 0.195                                                                    p-val (KS) = 0.974
               0




                                                                                                        0




                    0       1           2          3       4           5          6     7                    0      1           2          3     4           5          6     7

                                      Control villages            Treatment villages                                          Control villages          Treatment villages


                          (4A) Self employment - Lean                                                            (4B) Self employment - Semi-peak


                                                         Figure 4. Impacts of Hiring Shock

Note: Figure compares the distribution of wages, employment spillovers, aggregate employ-
ment and self-employment for treatment and control villages, limiting the sample to lean
month observations only in panel A, and semi-peak month observations only in panel B. We
report the p-value for the equality of distributions from a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test in the
bottom right corner of each graph.
                         LABOR RATIONING                                 41

                              Tables
          Table 1. Representativeness of Study Villages

                                     (1)          (2)            (3)
                               Study villages All villages      P-val
Total population                    648.5        773.3          0.286
                                 (335.075)     (850.876)
Total households                    147.9        175.5          0.299
                                  (80.252)     (193.128)
Total SC/ST population              279.4        262.9          0.729
                                 (237.695)     (347.685)
Male population share               0.513        0.511          0.650
                                   (0.019)      (0.038)
Literacy rate                       0.678        0.661          0.428
                                   (0.117)      (0.155)
Worker share                        0.431        0.402          0.083
                                   (0.133)      (0.124)
Male worker share                   0.745        0.769          0.306
                                   (0.176)      (0.172)
Main worker share                   0.629        0.642          0.730
                                   (0.221)      (0.273)
Agricultural labor share            0.164        0.166          0.940
                                   (0.175)      (0.191)
Cultivator share                    0.228        0.216          0.637
                                   (0.149)      (0.195)
Non-farm self-employment share      0.397        0.380          0.650
                                   (0.226)      (0.271)
Other workers share                 0.211        0.239          0.332
                                   (0.161)      (0.207)
Notes: Observations in Col. (1) are from villages in this study, which
span five districts across Odisha. We were able to match 88% of
our study villages to the 2011 Census village directory (N=53). Ob-
servations in Col. (2) are from all other Census villages in the five
study districts (N=8442). Col. (3) reports p-values from a compari-
son of means across Cols. (1) and (2). Data on village characteristics
comes from the 2011 Indian Population Census. A worker is a person
who participated in any economically productive activity in the last
year; a main worker worked for more than 6 months in the last year.
Worker share = total workers/total population. The four mutually
exclusive employment categories (agricultural labor, cultivator, non-
farm self-employment and other work) are based on workers' primary
occupation status over the past year. Details on the construction of
each variable can be found in Appendix D.
                                  LABOR RATIONING                                             42

                         Table 2. Baseline Characteristics

                                                                (1)                 (2)
Panel A: Worker-Level                                     No hiring shock       Difference
Landless                                                       0.373              -0.019
                                                              (0.484)            (0.039)
HH Members (age 12+)                                           3.965              -0.039
                                                              (1.543)            (0.104)
Any activity                                                   0.358               0.040
                                                              (0.363)            (0.031)
Employment rate: Hired wage employment                         0.178               0.034
                                                              (0.288)            (0.027)
Total wage (Rs.)                                             251.968              -1.863
                                                             (60.904)            (9.040)
Public works employment                                        0.005               0.003
                                                              (0.058)            (0.004)
Has HH business                                                0.879              -0.026
                                                              (0.326)            (0.024)
Self employment                                                0.115              -0.017
                                                              (0.244)            (0.021)
Days would like to work in labor market (in next 30 days)     18.217              -0.216
                                                              (8.496)            (0.406)

Panel B: Village-Level
Fraction of sign-ups                                                0.423        0.00967
                                                                   (0.104)        (0.021)
Total households                                                    145.1          21.67
                                                                  (92.731)       (16.276)
Total SC/ST population                                              319.0          -71.62
                                                                 (266.111)       (46.122)
Literacy rate                                                       0.679        -0.00186
                                                                   (0.126)        (0.023)
Worker share                                                        0.408         0.0382
                                                                   (0.131)        (0.032)
Main worker share                                                   0.647         -0.0282
                                                                   (0.221)        (0.066)
Notes: Panel A presents baseline characteristics for the spillover sample (workers who
signed up for external jobs but were not offered employment) at the worker level (N=992).
Panel B presents baseline characteristics at the village level using data from the experi-
ment (N=60) as well as data from the 2011 Indian Population Census (N=53; 88% match
rate between our study villages and 2011 Census villages). A worker is a person who par-
ticipated in any economically productive activity in the last year; worker share = total
workers/total population. A main worker is a person who worked for more than 6 months
in the last year; main worker share = total main workers/total workers. Details on the
construction of the Census variables can be found in Appendix D. Col. (1) presents base-
line means and standard deviations of characteristics in control villages. Col. (2) reports
coefficients from regressing the covariate in each row on a dummy for treatment with
round (strata) fixed effects and standard errors clustered at the village level.
                                                              LABOR RATIONING                                                                          43

                                                                Table 3. Wage Effects

                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)                   (4)               (5)                 (6)
Panel A: Spillover Sample                      Log cash wage Log total wage Log total wage          Total wage      Log total wage        Total wage
Hiring shock                                      -0.0202       -0.0113        -0.0183                -5.632           -0.0620              -19.24
                                                  (0.021)       (0.022)        (0.019)               (3.925)           (0.050)             (11.425)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak                           0.0733           0.0676           0.0684            18.57
                                                   (0.031)          (0.032)          (0.029)          (7.595)

Hiring Shock * Empl. Level                                                                                                0.457              133.3
                                                                                                                         (0.240)           (57.182)
Sample                                            Spillover        Spillover        Spillover        Spillover          Spillover          Spillover
Baseline controls                                    No               No              Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak                      0.0239           0.0227           0.0256           0.0472                .                  .
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak                        0.0229           0.0241           0.0219            6.379                .                  .
Control mean: lean                                 5.458            5.500            5.500            253.8               5.500              253.8
Control mean: semi-peak                            5.428            5.504            5.504            251.6               5.504              251.6
N (worker-days)                                     1543             1544             1544             1545               1544               1545


Panel B: Full Village Labor Force              Log cash wage Log total wage Log cash wage Log total wage             Log cash wage      Log total wage
Hiring shock                                      -0.0149       -0.0159        -0.0108       0.00518                    0.00330           0.000439
                                                  (0.036)       (0.033)        (0.036)       (0.037)                    (0.033)            (0.032)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak                           0.0693           0.0802           0.0661           0.0506            0.0759               0.112
                                                   (0.039)          (0.038)          (0.042)          (0.043)           (0.041)             (0.044)

Hiring shock * Non Sign-Ups                                                         -0.00835          -0.0423
                                                                                     (0.097)          (0.098)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak * Non Sign-Ups                                             0.00423           0.0527
                                                                                    (0.106)           (0.107)

Semi-peak * Non Sign-Ups                                                            0.00718           0.00492
                                                                                    (0.091)           (0.088)

Non Sign-Ups                                                                         0.0103           0.0115
                                                                                     (0.086)          (0.083)
Sample                                          All Potential    All Potential    All Potential    All Potential        Village             Village
                                                  Workers          Workers          Workers          Workers           Employers          Employers
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak                     0.000732         0.000645          0.0131           0.0122            0.00295            0.000619
Pval: Shock + Shock*Non Sign-Ups (NSU)                .                .              0.805            0.631               .                   .
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak                         .                .             0.0538           0.0322               .                   .
+ Shock*NSU + Shock*Semi-peak*NSU
Pval: Shock*NSU + Shock*Semi-peak*NSU                .                .              0.918            0.806               .                 .
Control mean: lean                                 5.468            5.527            5.468            5.527             5.321             5.355
Control mean: semi-peak                            5.428            5.505            5.428            5.505             5.381             5.422
N                                                  2691             2692             2691             2692               346               346
Level of observations                           worker-days      worker-days      worker-days      worker-days     employer-activity employer-activity
Notes: Observations in Panel A are from the spillover sample (workers who signed up for external jobs but were not offered employment). Observations
in Cols. (1)-(4) of Panel B are from all potential workers in the village with appropriate weights, and observations in Cols. (5)-(6) of Panel B are from
a sample of employers surveyed in the village. Total wage = cash + in-kind wages. We winsorize the top one percentile of the cash and total wage
distributions. In control villages, mean total wages for the spillover sample are Rs. 253.8 (lean) and Rs. 251.6 (semi-peak), and for the non sign-ups
are Rs. 279.8 (lean) and Rs. 251.5 (semi-peak). Controls in Panel A and Cols. (1)-(4) of Panel B include worker-level mean employment and wage
levels at baseline. Regressions include round (strata) FEs. Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses.
                                     Table 4. Alternate Measures of Wages & Wage Contract

                                          (1)            (2)                (3)             (4)            (5)              (6)
                                  Hourly total wage Hours per day Expected Days of Work Expect Loan Paid Immediately Paid an Advance
Hiring shock                            -0.504        0.00710             -0.179          -0.0943        0.0906          -0.0663
                                       (1.070)         (0.116)           (4.426)          (0.065)        (0.048)          (0.040)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak                4.211            0.0998                -0.125               0.198            -0.112            0.0840
                                       (2.140)           (0.224)              (5.500)              (0.106)          (0.096)            (0.073)
Sample                                Spillover         Spillover            Spillover            Spillover        Spillover          Spillover
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak          0.0505             0.580                0.927                0.229            0.802              0.774
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak             1.854             0.192                3.265               0.0835           0.0827             0.0608
Control mean: lean                      42.74             6.354                14.96                0.342            0.849             0.0959
Control mean: semi-peak                 44.04             5.910                15.04                0.343            0.806              0.104
N                                       1470              1470                  223                  262              262                262
Level of observations                worker-day        worker-day             worker               worker           worker             worker




                                                                                                                                                      LABOR RATIONING
Notes: Observations are from the spillover sample (workers who signed up for external jobs but were not offered employment). Hourly total wage
= total (cash + in-kind) wages/total hours worked that day. Hours per day = total hours worked that day. For a subset of experimental rounds,
workers were asked a series of questions about all the employers they had worked for in the past 10 days -- these responses are summarized in Cols.
(3) to (6). Expected days of work = total number of days of work till the next harvest they expect from these employers. Expect Loan = 1{expect a
loan from these employers}. Paid immediately = 1{paid immediately for work by these employers}. Paid an advance = 1{paid an advance by these
employers}. Regressions include round (strata) FEs. Standard errors are clustered at the village level in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                      44
                                  LABOR RATIONING                                            45

                         Table 5. Employment Spillovers

                                         (1)              (2)              (3)
                                  Hired wage empl. Hired wage empl. Hired wage empl.
Hiring shock                           0.0684           0.0544            0.138
                                       (0.021)          (0.019)          (0.045)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak               -0.0737            -0.0735
                                       (0.034)            (0.030)

Hiring Shock * Empl. Level                                                     -0.706
                                                                              (0.254)
Sample                                Spillover          Spillover           Spillover
Baseline controls                        No                Yes                  Yes
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak           0.840             0.427                   .
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak            0.0265             0.0239                  .
Control mean: lean                      0.145             0.145                0.145
Control mean: semi-peak                 0.216             0.216                0.216
N (worker-days)                         8906               8906                 8906
Notes: Observations are from the spillover sample (workers who signed up for external jobs
but were not offered employment). Hired wage employment = 1{worker hired that day
and paid a wage}. Controls comprised of worker-level mean employment and wage levels
at baseline. Regressions include round (strata) FEs. Standard errors are clustered at the
village level in parentheses.
                               Table 6. Aggregate Employment Effects and Crowd-Out

                                          (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)
                                   Hired wage empl. Hired wage empl. Hired wage empl. Hiring shock empl. Hired wage empl.
Hiring shock                            0.0108           0.0693          -0.00604            0.188
                                        (0.022)          (0.048)          (0.021)           (0.012)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak                -0.0534                                 -0.0450              0.00611
                                        (0.026)                                 (0.024)              (0.019)

Hiring Shock * Empl. Level                                    -0.506
                                                             (0.234)

Hiring shock empl.                                                                                                        -0.0313
                                                                                                                          (0.106)

Hiring shock empl. * Semi-peak                                                                                             -0.232




                                                                                                                                          LABOR RATIONING
                                                                                                                          (0.120)
Sample                                All Potential       All Potential       All Potential       All Potential        All Potential
sample2                                 Workers             Workers             Workers             Workers              Workers
Baseline controls                          Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak           0.00395                 .               0.00150             3.32e-20             0.000167
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak              0.0142                 .                0.0153              0.0140               0.0700
Control mean: lean                        0.135               0.135               0.169              0.0357                0.169
Control mean: semi-peak                   0.195               0.195               0.205              0.0233                0.205
Specification                                                                      RF                  FS                    IV
N                                       21085               21085                  738                 738                  738
Level of observations                 worker-days         worker-days         village-days        village-days         village-days
Notes: Observations are from all potential workers in the village. Each observation in Cols. (1) and (2) is at the worker-day level,
with appropriate weights. Controls in Cols. (1) and (2) comprised of worker-level and village-level mean employment and wage
levels at baseline. Each observation in Cols. (3) to (5) is an average at the village-day level. Controls in Cols. (3) to (5) comprised
of mean employment and wages at the village-day level at baseline, averaging both across the whole village sample and the sub-
set of individuals with an employment observation on that day. Regressions in Cols. (3) to (5) use analytical weights to weigh by
the number of endline observations present in the village on each day. Regressions include round (strata) FE. Standard errors are
clustered at the village level in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                          46
                            Table 7. Impacts 2 Weeks After End of Hiring Shock

                                        (1)            (2)                (3)                (4)
                                  Log total wage Log total wage Hired wage employment Self employment
Hiring shock                         -0.0241        0.00410            -0.00846            -0.0177
                                     (0.038)        (0.035)             (0.027)            (0.015)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak               0.0673           0.0362               -0.0378                -0.0193
                                       (0.044)          (0.042)              (0.034)                (0.024)
Sample                                Spillover        Spillover            Spillover              Spillover
Baseline controls                        No               Yes                  Yes                    Yes
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak          0.0537            0.109                0.0255                 0.0531
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak            0.0219           0.0247               0.0201                  0.0187
Control mean: lean                      5.529            5.529                0.177                  0.162




                                                                                                                   LABOR RATIONING
Control mean: semi-peak                 5.532            5.532                0.211                  0.134
N (worker-days)                         1328             1328                  7623                   7623
Notes: Observations are from the spillover sample (workers who signed up for external jobs but were not offered
employment). Total wage = cash + in-kind wages. Hired wage employment = 1{worker hired that day and
paid a wage}. Self employment = 1{worker self-employed that day}. Controls in Cols. (2)-(3) comprised of
worker-level mean employment and wage levels at baseline. Controls in Col. (4) include worker-level indicators
for any self-employment activities at baseline. Regressions include round (strata) FE. Standard errors clustered
at the village level in parentheses.




                                                                                                                   47
                                                       Table 8. Self-Employment

                                         (1)             (2)            (3)          (4)              (5)            (6)           (7)
                                     Self empl.    Self: non-agri    Self: agri   Self: agri   Total farm labor HH self empl. HH self empl.
Hiring shock                          -0.0336         -0.0333         -0.0300      -0.0716          -2.066         -1.117        -0.569
                                      (0.019)          (0.011)        (0.023)      (0.028)         (0.801)        (0.431)       (0.324)

Hiring shock                                                                       0.0690            1.213
* Above Median Land Per Capita                                                     (0.049)          (1.219)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak               0.00289       -0.00337         0.0207        0.118            2.333             1.019           0.692
                                       (0.027)        (0.019)         (0.027)      (0.036)          (0.868)           (0.531)         (0.354)

Hiring shock* Semi-peak                                                              -0.181          -2.587
* Above Median Land Per Capita                                                      (0.060)         (1.301)
Sample                                Spillover      Spillover       Spillover     Spillover       Spillover         Spillover     All Potential
                                                                                                                                     Workers




                                                                                                                                                    LABOR RATIONING
Baseline controls                       Yes            Yes              Yes         Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak          0.118         0.0213            0.548      0.0548            0.476             0.763            0.524
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak           0.0193         0.0151           0.0154      0.0236            0.372             0.323            0.191
Control mean: lean                     0.139         0.0443            0.149       0.149            4.802             3.432            1.499
Control mean: semi-peak                0.109         0.0441           0.0823      0.0823            1.607             1.627            1.318
N                                      8381           5007             7513        7513              813               914             2180
Level of observations               worker-days    worker-days      worker-days worker-days       households        households      households
Notes: Observations are from the spillover sample (workers who signed up for external jobs but were not offered employment) in Cols. (1)-(6),
and from all potential workers in the village with appropriate weights in Col. (7). Self employment = 1{worker self-employed that day}. Self
employment: non-agri = 1{worker self-employed in non-agriculture that day}. Self employment: agri = 1{worker self-employed in agriculture
that day}. Total farm labor = total number of worker-days (own family labor + hired labor) used on the farm over the past week. Household
self employment = total number of worker-days in self-employment across all household members in the past week. We restrict the sample
to experimental rounds with non-zero self-employment in control villages at endline in Cols. (1), (6) and (7), non-zero non-agricultural self-
employment in control villages at endline in Col. (2), and non-zero agricultural self-employment in control villages at endline in Cols. (3)-(5).
Controls include worker-level indicators for any self-employment activities at baseline. Regressions include round (strata) FE. Standard errors
clustered at the village level in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                    48
                                Table 9. Measuring Involuntary Unemployment

                                      (1)       (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
                                     Any       Any      Invol unempl Invol unempl Invol unempl Invol unempl
                                     work      work     (traditional) (traditional) (alternate)  alternate)
Hiring shock                        0.0222    0.0153       -0.0385       -0.0322      -0.0699     -0.0611
                                    (0.028)   (0.023)      (0.028)       (0.027)      (0.026)     (0.026)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak       -0.0264 -0.0282             0.0296          0.0300         0.0638         0.0647
                               (0.035)   (0.029)           (0.039)         (0.038)        (0.039)        (0.038)
Sample                        Spillover Spillover         Spillover       Spillover      Spillover      Spillover
Baseline controls                No        Yes               No              Yes            No             Yes
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak   0.842     0.477             0.741           0.932          0.837          0.900
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak    0.0207    0.0181            0.0267          0.0260         0.0297         0.0285




                                                                                                                       LABOR RATIONING
Control mean: lean              0.341     0.341             0.482           0.482          0.580          0.580
Control mean: semi-peak         0.398     0.398             0.395           0.395          0.540          0.540
N (worker-days)                 8906      8906              8906            8906           8906           8906
Notes: Observations are from the spillover sample (workers who signed up for external jobs but were not offered em-
ployment). Any work = 1{worker reports any work that day}. Involuntary unemployment (traditional) = 1{worker
reports "would have liked to work but was unable to find any" as his activity status for that day}. Involuntary un-
employment (alternate) = 1{worker states that they would have accepted a job at the prevailing wage over whatever
else they had been doing that day}. Controls include worker-level mean employment and wage levels at baseline.
Regressions include round (strata) FE. Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. Test comparing
the coefficients in Cols. 3 vs. 5: p-val = 0.0674. Test comparing the coefficients in Cols. 4 vs. 6: p-val = 0.1147.




                                                                                                                       49
                                 LABOR RATIONING                                            50

                           FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION

                      Appendix A. Appendix Figures

Wage                                          Wage


                           S                                            S
                                              w

w
w
                           D (treatment)                                D (treatment)

                           D                                            D
                               Village Empl                                  Village Empl
             EE                                   E = ED ED     ES
           text to align                                 Rationing
    (a) H0 : No Rationing (ED  ES )                  (b) H1 : Rationing (ED < ES )

          Figure A.1. Effects of a Negative Labor Demand Shock

Note: Figure shows the effects of a negative demand shock on employment
and wages under no rationing (ED  ES ) in panel A, and under rationing
(ED < ES ) in panel B.
                                                                  LABOR RATIONING                                      51

            Wage



                                                                            M CL



                                                                                            S


           w
           w



                                                                                          M RP L
                                                                                                     Employment
                                                         EE

Figure A.2. Effects of a Negative Labor Supply Shock Under Monopsony

Note: Figure shows the effects of a negative supply shock on employment and
wages under monopsony. A parallel shift in labor supply leads wages to rise
and employment to fall, the same qualitative predictions as in the benchmark,
market clearing model. Because the marginal cost of labor curve is steeper than
the labor supply curve, the wage increases by less and employment decreases
by more under monopsony, relative to market clearing.
                              .3           .25
               Average Hired Wage Employment
             .05     .1      .15
                              0     .2




                                                 Jan. Feb. Mar.   Apr. May. Jun.   Jul.   Aug. Sep. Oct.   Nov. Dec.



      Figure A.3. Average Hired Wage Employment Rate by Month

Note: Figure plots average wage employment rates in control villages by cal-
endar month. The median employment rate is 0.19.
                                                          LABOR RATIONING                                  52




                   6
          Labor use per acre
           2       0   4




                               0                      1                     2                      3   4
                                                                          Acres

                                                               95% CI                   lpoly smooth
                               kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 2, bandwidth = .81, pwidth = 1.21




                                   Figure A.4. Inverse Farm-Size Relationship

Note: Figure plots intensity of labor use against farm size. The y-axis measures
total labor inputs per acre on the farm in the past week (own family labor +
hired labor).




                                                  Figure A.5. Job take-up

Note: Figure illustrates take up of a job offer made in private at different
wage rates among casual workers in villages similar to our study sample, in
the same districts of Odisha, India. This data comes from a labor supply
estimation exercise conducted by Breza et al. (2019).
                              LABOR RATIONING                                  53




       (a) Average Casual Employ-           (b) Percent Increase in Ca-
       ment Across Districts                sual Employment from Low-
                                            est to Highest Month Across
                                            States

 Figure A.6. India-wide Variation in Employment by District and Month

Note: Data is from from the rural sample of Round 61 of the National Sam-
ple Survey, pre-NREGA roll-out. Panel A shows the distribution of weekly
average casual employment across districts in India. Panel B shows the dis-
tribution of the percent difference between the months with the highest and
lowest rate of casual employment across states. For both panels, the sample
is restricted to individuals whose primary or secondary occupation is casual
labor or agricultural self employment.




      Figure A.7. Average Weekly Days in Public Works by Month

Note: Figure plots weekly average public works employment in each month
using data from Round 64 of the National Sample Survey (post-NREGA roll-
out). The sample is restricted to districts that received the NREGA program
by Round 64.
                            LABOR RATIONING                                  54

                   Appendix B. Appendix Tables
          Table B.1. Survey Completion in Spillover Sample

                          (1)                       (2)
             Baseline Survey Completion Endline Survey Completion
Hiring shock            0.0160                    0.0125
                        (0.019)                   (0.014)
Sample                 Spillover                 Spillover
Dep Var Mean             0.934                     0.896
N (workers)              1094                      1108
Notes: Observations are from the spillover sample (workers who signed up
for external jobs but were not offered employment). The dependent vari-
able is a binary indicator for whether the survey respondent completed the
survey. Col. (1) examines baseline survey responses and Col. (2) examines
endline survey responses. Regressions include round (strata) FEs. The
regression in Col. (2) includes a control for baseline survey completion.
Standard errors are clustered at the village level in parentheses.
                                Table B.2. Sample Sizes & Survey Completion Rates

                                                    Lean                        Semi-Peak               Hiring shock
                                         (1)            (2)         (3)           (4)            (5)
                                   No hiring shock Difference No hiring shock Difference Lean vs Semi-Peak
Total Sign-Ups                          28.15         1.538        33.53         3.353          1.814
                                       (13.53)       (2.675)      (12.08)       (3.923)        (4.749)
EL Survey Completion: Spillover         0.877        0.0260        0.901       0.00409         -0.0219
                                       (0.329)      (0.0254)      (0.298)      (0.0157)       (0.0297)
Total Non Sign-Ups                        15          -1.500       15.43        -0.0714         1.429
                                       (4.721)       (0.512)      (7.703)       (0.898)        (1.034)
EL Survey Completion: Non Sign-Ups      0.770        0.0336        0.898        -0.0304        -0.0640
                                      (0.0877)      (0.0548)      (0.102)      (0.0415)       (0.0687)




                                                                                                                            LABOR RATIONING
Share of Non Sign-Ups Surveyed          0.177        -0.0219       0.169        -0.0133       0.00862
                                      (0.0451)      (0.0116)     (0.0418)      (0.0133)       (0.0177)
Notes: Cols. (1) and (3) present means and standard deviations of village-level outcomes in control villages in lean
and semi-peak months respectively. Col. (2) reports differences in outcomes by treatment status in lean months, Col.
(4) reports differences in outcomes by treatment status in semi-peak months, and Col. (5) reports differences in out-
comes across lean and semi-peak months, for treated villages. These differences are coefficients from a regression of the
covariates in each row on dummies for treatment and treatment interacted with semi-peak, with round (strata) fixed
effects and robust standard errors. Total sign-ups = number of workers who sign up for the external job. EL survey
completion: spillover = 1{spillover worker completed the endline survey}. Total non sign-ups = number of non sign-
ups selected for the endline survey. EL survey completion: non sign-ups = 1{non sign-up worker completed the endline
survey}. Share of non sign-ups surveyed = share of total non sign-ups selected for the endline survey.




                                                                                                                            55
                          Table B.3. Baseline Characteristics: Sign-Ups and Non Sign-Ups

                                                                          Lean                           Semi-Peak
                                                              (1)       (2)     (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)
                                                          Sign-Ups Difference pval Sign-Ups Difference     pval
Ever participate in casual labor market                        1      -0.149  0.0321    0.986    -0.215 0.000788
                                                            (0.000)  (0.061)           (0.118)  (0.052)
Days would like to work in labor market (in next 30 days)    16.60    -4.707  0.0268    19.10    -6.517  0.00366
                                                            (9.005)  (1.843)           (8.079)  (1.917)
Total wage (Rs.)                                             254.6     31.27  0.0135    251.2     8.708   0.254
                                                           (67.723) (10.202)          (56.468)  (7.347)
Weekly wage earnings                                         675.4     23.96   0.804    637.7    -20.73   0.787
                                                          (514.302) (94.285)         (545.994) (75.464)
Any activity                                                 0.389    0.0961   0.363    0.331   -0.0408   0.400




                                                                                                                                  LABOR RATIONING
                                                            (0.367)  (0.101)           (0.352)  (0.047)
Employment rate: Hired wage employment                       0.179   -0.0564   0.395    0.176   -0.0688   0.155
                                                            (0.282)  (0.064)           (0.288)  (0.046)
Public works employment                                     0.0124       0       1   0.000366       0        1
                                                            (0.093)  (0.000)           (0.007)  (0.000)
Has HH business                                              0.859   -0.0213   0.754    0.890   -0.0385   0.0853
                                                            (0.348)  (0.066)           (0.313)  (0.021)
Self employment                                              0.164   0.0597    0.156   0.0874    0.0283   0.120
                                                            (0.281)  (0.039)           (0.216)  (0.017)
Landless                                                     0.506    -0.116  0.0196    0.295   -0.0289   0.401
                                                            (0.501)  (0.043)           (0.457)  (0.034)
HH members (age 12+)                                         3.988    -0.143   0.486    3.952    -0.175   0.189
                                                            (1.696)  (0.198)           (1.422)  (0.128)
Social category: Scheduled caste/tribe                       0.817   -0.0433   0.594    0.752    -0.166  0.0424
                                                            (0.388)  (0.076)           (0.433)  (0.070)
Notes: Cols. (1) and (4) present baseline means and standard deviations of worker-level characteristics in control villages for
workers who sign up for external jobs in lean and semi-peak months respectively. Cols. (2) and (5) report coefficients from
regressing the covariate in each row on a dummy for non sign-ups in lean and semi-peak months respectively, with round
(strata) fixed effects and standard errors clustered at the village level. Cols. (3) and (6) report corresponding p-values for
the regression coefficients presented in Cols. (2) and (5) respectively.




                                                                                                                                  56
                                Table B.4. Wage Effects using Non-Winsorized Wages

                                       (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                  Log cash wage Log total wage Log total wage Total wage Log total wage Total wage
Hiring shock                         -0.0202       -0.0113        -0.0183       -5.632      -0.0620       -19.24
                                     (0.021)       (0.022)        (0.019)      (3.925)      (0.050)      (11.425)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak             0.0740           0.0676          0.0684          18.57
                                     (0.031)          (0.032)         (0.029)        (7.595)

Hiring Shock * Empl. Level                                                                           0.457         133.3
                                                                                                    (0.240)       (57.182)
Sample                               Spillover       Spillover        Spillover     Spillover      Spillover      Spillover
Baseline controls                       No              No               Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak         0.0232          0.0227           0.0256        0.0472            .              .




                                                                                                                               LABOR RATIONING
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak           0.0231          0.0241           0.0219        6.379             .              .
Control mean: lean                     5.458           5.500            5.500         253.8          5.500          253.8
Control mean: semi-peak               5.428            5.504            5.504         251.6          5.504          251.6
N (worker-days)                        1543            1544             1544          1545           1544           1545
Notes: Observations are from the spillover sample (workers who signed up for external jobs but were not offered employment).
Total wage = cash + in-kind wages. Controls include worker-level mean employment and wage levels at baseline. Regressions
include round (strata) FEs. Standard errors are clustered at the village level in parentheses.




                                                                                                                               57
                           Table B.5. Treatment Effects Restricting to 7-day Recall Window

                                        (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)             (5)          (6)
                                 Hired wage empl. Log total wage Self empl. Hired wage empl. Log total wage Self empl.
Hiring shock                          0.0518         -0.00613     -0.0534        0.00530        0.00616      -0.00282
                                      (0.023)         (0.015)     (0.018)        (0.031)        (0.036)       (0.017)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak              -0.0855           0.0450       0.0260         -0.0658           0.0247        -0.0236
                                      (0.032)           (0.028)      (0.025)        (0.038)           (0.044)       (0.025)
Sample                               Spillover         Spillover    Spillover      Spillover         Spillover     Spillover
Baseline controls                       Yes               Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak          0.140            0.0948        0.150        0.00764             0.230          0.159
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak           0.0226            0.0229       0.0188          0.0218           0.0254         0.0185
Control mean: lean                     0.156             5.526        0.171          0.188             5.543         0.174
Control mean: semi-peak                0.232             5.502        0.107          0.222             5.529         0.130




                                                                                                                               LABOR RATIONING
N (worker-days)                        6944              1274         6545            6196             1131           6196
Notes: Observations are from the spillover sample (workers who signed up for external jobs but were not offered employment).
Hired wage employment = 1{worker hired that day and paid a wage}. Total wage = cash + in-kind wages. Self employment =
1{worker self-employed that day}. Cols. (4) to (6) examine impacts two weeks after the end of the hiring shock. Regressions
include round (strata) FEs. Standard errors are clustered at the village level in parentheses.




                                                                                                                               58
                                                 Table B.6. Self-Employment Hours

                                          (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)          (5)           (6)            (7)
                                      Self emp       Self emp    Self: non-agri    Self: agri   Self: agri     Self emp       Self emp
Hiring shock                            -0.164         -0.158        -0.122          -0.145       -0.326        0.0498       -0.000103
                                       (0.091)        (0.105)       (0.098)         (0.117)      (0.149)        (0.112)        (0.100)

Hiring shock                                                                                      0.341
* Above Median Land Per Capita                                                                   (0.233)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak               0.0239         -0.0166        -0.109          0.119        0.491          -0.277        -0.202
                                       (0.127)        (0.131)       (0.145)         (0.126)      (0.180)        (0.155)       (0.138)

Hiring shock* Semi-peak                                                                          -0.737
* Above Median Land Per Capita                                                                  (0.299)
Sample                          Spillover   Spillover              Spillover       Spillover   Spillover   Spillover   Spillover




                                                                                                                                           LABOR RATIONING
Baseline controls                  Yes         Yes                    Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Recall window (days)                5           7                      7               7            7          5           7
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak     0.144      0.0451                 0.0438           0.597       0.115      0.0403      0.0407
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak      0.0946      0.0853                  0.110          0.0489       0.103       0.108      0.0961
Control mean: lean                0.723       0.711                  0.243           0.744       0.744       0.711       0.723
Control mean: semi-peak           0.522       0.506                  0.281           0.349       0.349       0.841       0.787
N                                 4675        6545                   3899            5838         5838       4251        5951
Level of observations          worker-days worker-days            worker-days     worker-days worker-days worker-days worker-days
Notes: Observations are from the spillover sample (workers who signed up for external jobs but were not offered employment). Self em-
ployment = hours worked in self-employment that day. Self employment: non-agri = hours worked in non-agricultural self-employment
that day. Self employment: agri = hours worked in agricultural self-employment that day. We restrict the sample to experimental rounds
with non-zero self-employment in control villages at endline in Cols. (1), (2), (6) and (7), non-zero non-agricultural self-employment
in control villages at endline in Col. (3), and non-zero agricultural self-employment in control villages at endline in Cols. (4)-(5).
Cols. (6) and (7) examine impacts two weeks after the end of the hiring shock. Controls include worker-level indicators for any self-
employment activities at baseline. Regressions include round (strata) FE. Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                           59
                      Table B.7. Self-Employment

                                         (1)            (2)            (3)
                                     Self empl:     Self empl:    Total Farm
                                      non-agri         agri          Labor
Hiring shock                          -0.0351        -0.0925         -1.940
                                       (0.008)       (0.038)        (0.726)

Hiring shock                                           0.172          1.971
* Above Median Land Per Capita                        (0.064)        (0.903)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak              0.00703          0.155          2.883
                                      (0.013)         (0.043)        (0.811)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak                         -0.228        -2.948




                                                                                  LABOR RATIONING
* Above Median Land Per Capita                  (0.073)       (1.037)
Sample                         All Potential All Potential All Potential
                                 Workers       Workers       Workers
Baseline controls                   Yes           Yes           Yes
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak     0.0314       0.00562        0.0234
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak       0.0125        0.0217         0.402
Control mean: lean                0.0303         0.151         3.408
Control mean: semi-peak           0.0589        0.0817         1.582
N                                  11662         17774          1928
Level of observations          worker-days worker-days      households
Notes: Observations are from all potential workers in the village with appro-
priate weights. Self employment: non-agri = 1{worker self-employed in non-
agriculture that day}. Self employment: agri = 1{worker self-employed in agri-
culture that day}. Total farm labor = total number of worker-days (own family
labor + hired labor) used on the farm over the past week. Controls include
worker-level indicators for any self-employment activities at baseline. Regres-
sions include round (strata) FE. Standard errors clustered at the village level
in parentheses.




                                                                                  60
                                    Table B.8. Impacts on Employers

                                          (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)                      (5)
                                   Act Done As Many Act Done As      Hire From Trouble Hiring              Worker
Panel A: No Controls                Times As I Like Early As I Like Outside Vill  (Days)                   Rating
Hiring shock                            0.0316          0.00824       0.00789     -0.0386                  -0.0105
                                        (0.013)         (0.023)       (0.027)     (0.070)                  (0.082)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak                -0.0497             -0.0548          0.0568         0.0444          0.173
                                        (0.017)             (0.039)          (0.031)        (0.083)       (0.115)
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak            0.101               0.145          0.000142         0.898         0.0472
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak             0.0108               0.0314          0.0159         0.0446         0.0801
Control mean: lean                       0.972               0.972           0.0758          0.190          3.639
Control mean: semi-peak                  0.987               0.962           0.0363          0.239          3.266
N                                         678                 678             1029           1029           1264
Level of observations                 emp-activity        emp-activity      employer       employer      worker-day




                                                                                                                        LABOR RATIONING
Panel B: With Controls
Hiring shock                             0.0247              -0.0131        0.00203         -0.0610
                                         (0.012)             (0.036)        (0.027)         (0.070)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak                -0.0487             -0.0427          0.0635         0.0854
                                        (0.017)             (0.048)          (0.031)        (0.084)
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak           0.0599               0.0819         0.000128         0.606
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak             0.0124               0.0313          0.0159         0.0469
Control mean: lean                       0.972               0.972           0.0758          0.190
Control mean: semi-peak                  0.987               0.962           0.0363          0.239
N                                         678                 678             1029           1029
Level of observations                 emp-activity        emp-activity      employer       employer
Notes: Observations in Cols. (1)-(4) are from a sample of employers surveyed in the village. Observations in Col.
(5) are from the spillover sample (workers who signed up for external jobs but were not offered employment). Ac-
tivity done as many times as I like = 1{employer reports being able to complete a particular activity as frequently
as he liked}. Activity done as early as I like = 1{employer reports being able to complete a particular activity as
early as he liked}. Hire from outside village = 1{employer hired from outside the village for any activity}. Trouble
hiring = number of days the employer reports having trouble hiring workers, in the past 10 days. Worker rating
= ability rating of the worker, averaged across all surveyed employers in the village. Panel A presents regression
results with no controls, while Panel B presents regression results with employer-level controls for which there is
imbalance. Regressions include round (strata) FEs. Standard errors are clustered at the village level in parentheses.




                                                                                                                        61
        Table B.9. Employment Spillovers: Heterogeneous Impacts by Ability

                                                 Dependent variable: Hired wage employment

                                                                High ability proxy
                                                      (1)              (2)                 (3)
                                                Employer Rating Employment Rate          Wages
Hiring shock                                        0.0847           0.0526              0.0628
                                                   (0.022)          (0.018)              (0.018)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak                              -0.103             -0.0662        -0.0780
                                                     (0.040)             (0.029)        (0.031)

High ability proxy                                   0.0246              0.0752          0.0521
                                                     (0.018)             (0.018)         (0.013)




                                                                                                    LABOR RATIONING
Hiring Shock* High ability proxy                    -0.00450             -0.0441        -0.00906
                                                     (0.030)             (0.030)         (0.025)

Semi-peak* High ability proxy                        -0.0139             0.0470          0.0644
                                                     (0.023)             (0.024)         (0.024)

Hiring shock* Semi-peak* High ability proxy          0.0309              0.0495         0.00975
                                                     (0.035)             (0.041)         (0.039)
Sample                                              Spillover           Spillover       Spillover
Baseline controls                                      No                  No              No
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak                         0.586               0.540           0.548
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak                          0.0334              0.0221          0.0253
Control mean: lean                                    0.134               0.145           0.145
Control mean: semi-peak                               0.228               0.216           0.216
N (worker-days)                                       6405                8906            8906
Notes: Observations are from the spillover sample (workers who signed up for external jobs
but were not offered employment). We use three different worker-level proxies for high ability:
standardized quality rating averaged across all survey employers in the village in Col.(1), stan-
dardized mean employment levels at baseline in Col. (2), and standardized mean wage levels at




                                                                                                    62
baseline in Col. (3). Regressions include round (strata) FEs. Standard errors are clustered at
the village level in parentheses.
                           Table B.10. Impacts on Male Household Members

                                       (1)            (2)         (3)      (4)         (5)
                                  Work in casual Work in casual Work on Work in        Self
                                  labor market   labor market own land HH business employment
Hiring shock                         0.0188         0.0287      -0.0342 -0.00263     -0.0364
                                     (0.013)        (0.012)     (0.017)  (0.005)     (0.017)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak               -0.0301          -0.0487       0.0433     -0.000350       0.0419
                                       (0.023)          (0.028)       (0.018)      (0.008)       (0.020)
Sample                                Spillover        Spillover     Spillover    Spillover     Spillover
Baseline controls                        Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak           0.544            0.423         0.151        0.680         0.602
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak            0.0184           0.0247       0.00618      0.00718        0.0104




                                                                                                              LABOR RATIONING
Control mean: lean                      0.119            0.146        0.0980       0.0137         0.111
Control mean: semi-peak                 0.169            0.218        0.0312       0.0151        0.0442
N (workers)                             1660             1296          1690         1750          1752
Notes: Observations are from male household members (above the age of 12) of workers in the spillover
sample (workers who signed up for external jobs but were not offered employment). Controls in Cols. (1)-
(2) include worker-level mean employment and wage levels at baseline. Controls in Cols. (3)-(5) include
indicators for any self-employment activities at baseline. In Col. (2), we restrict the sample to household
members who report participating in the casual labor market. Self-employment = 1{work on own land
or in household business}. Regressions include round (strata) FEs. Standard errors are clustered at the
village level in parentheses.




                                                                                                              63
                     Table B.11. Differential Impacts of NREGS by Labor Market Slack

                                                     (1)        (2)     (3)         (4)          (5)
                                                Public Works Casual Casual Days Casual Agri. Self-Empl.
                                                    Days      Wage    Worked       Days         Days
NREGA                                              0.0213     -0.618  0.0678     -0.00650      -0.206
                                                  (0.010)    (1.009)  (0.054)     (0.047)     (0.071)

NREGA x High Casual Employment                     0.00906       2.594      -0.0980         -0.121       0.0923
                                                   (0.013)      (1.052)     (0.059)        (0.061)       (0.080)
Control Mean                                       0.0121        72.00       1.071          0.652         4.738
Test: NREGA + NREGA x High Cas. Empl.              0.0132       0.0554       0.609         0.0308         0.152
Observations                                       353180        64634      353180         353180        329177




                                                                                                                     LABOR RATIONING
Notes: Observations are from prime-age individuals surveyed in rounds 61 and 64 of Schedule 10 of the National
Sample Survey (NSS), with sampling weights. Regressions include district and month-by-year fixed effects, as
well as a vector of controls including worker characteristics by round (gender, education, age), baseline agricul-
tural yields by round, and district-by-month baseline means of casual employment, wages, and self-employment.
Standard errors are clustered at the district level in parentheses.




                                                                                                                     64
                         Table B.12. Treatment Effects Using All Experimental Rounds

                                     (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)
                                  Log total Hired wage Hired wage     Self   Invol unempl Invol unempl
                                    wage    employment employment employment (traditional) (alternate)
Hiring shock                       -0.0181    0.0540     0.0101     -0.0331     -0.0339      -0.0625
                                   (0.019)    (0.018)    (0.022)    (0.019)     (0.027)      (0.026)

Hiring shock * Semi-peak       0.0673           -0.0681      -0.0551       -0.00737        0.0529         0.0793
                               (0.028)          (0.028)      (0.025)        (0.026)        (0.037)        (0.037)
Sample                        Spillover        Spillover   All Workers     Spillover      Spillover      Spillover
Baseline controls                Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Pval: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak 0.0189             0.526      0.000629        0.0263          0.453          0.523
SE: Shock + Shock*Semi-peak    0.0204           0.0221        0.0125        0.0178         0.0252         0.0262




                                                                                                                       LABOR RATIONING
Control mean: lean              5.500            0.145         0.135         0.139          0.482          0.580
Control mean: semi-peak         5.502            0.209        0.185          0.112          0.413          0.553
N (worker-days)                 1603             9466         22398          8941           9466           9466
Notes: This table presents regression results including two experimental rounds that were excluded from the main
analysis because we were not able to complete survey work (see Appendix C). Observations in Cols. (1)-(2) and
(4)-(6) are from the spillover sample (workers who signed up for external jobs but were not offered employment).
Observations in Col. (3) are from all potential workers in the village with appropriate weights. Controls in Cols.
(1)-(2) and (5)-(6) include worker-level mean employment and wage levels at baseline. Controls in Col. (3) include
worker-level and village-level mean employment and wage levels at baseline. Controls in Col. (4) include indicators
for any self-employment activities at baseline. Regressions include round (strata) FEs. Standard errors clustered at
the village level in parentheses.




                                                                                                                       65
                                              Table B.13. Employer Characteristics

                                                                         Lean                                   Semi-Peak
                                                           (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)            (5)     (6)
                                                     No hiring shock Difference   Pval   No hiring shock Difference   Pval
Landholdings (acres)                                      2.634         0.308    0.0947       2.631        -0.0506   0.645
                                                         (1.696)      (0.177)                (1.696)       (0.109)
HH members (age 12+)                                      4.199         0.178     0.167       4.254         0.265   0.0258
                                                         (1.508)      (0.124)                (1.508)       (0.114)
Fraction of randomly selected workers given a rating      0.725       -0.0151     0.702       0.791         0.0366   0.209
                                                         (0.250)      (0.039)                (0.250)       (0.029)
Fraction of randomly selected workers ever hired          0.257       0.00727     0.817       0.216         0.0116   0.473
                                                         (0.221)      (0.031)                (0.221)       (0.016)
Ever participate in casual labor market                   0.569       -0.0488     0.266       0.495      -0.000666   0.985




                                                                                                                                            LABOR RATIONING
                                                         (0.496)      (0.043)                (0.496)       (0.035)
Occupation: Self-emp (agri)                               0.611       -0.0208     0.123       0.620        -0.0176  0.00702
                                                         (0.489)      (0.013)                (0.489)       (0.006)
Occupation: Self-emp (non-agri)                          0.0616       -0.0191     0.316      0.0693       -0.00483   0.718
                                                         (0.241)      (0.019)                (0.241)       (0.013)
Occupation: Laborer                                       0.303       -0.0556     0.192       0.274        -0.0197   0.463
                                                         (0.461)      (0.041)                (0.461)       (0.026)
Social category: Scheduled caste/tribe                    0.332        -0.175   0.000572      0.281        -0.0300   0.444
                                                         (0.472)      (0.044)                (0.472)       (0.039)
Notes: Observations are from the employer survey. Cols. (1) and (4) present means and standard deviations of employer-level char-
acteristics in control villages in lean and semi-peak months respectively. Cols. (2) and (5) report coefficients from regressing the
covariate in each row on a dummy for treatment in lean and semi-peak months respectively, with round (strata) fixed effects and
standard errors clustered at the village level. Cols. (3) and (6) report corresponding p-values for the regression coefficients presented
in Cols. (2) and (5) respectively.




                                                                                                                                            66
                                           LABOR RATIONING                                              67

                         Appendix C. Implementation Protocols

Recruitment of study participants. Several days prior to the first day of work, the external
jobs are advertised in villages through flyers, village meetings, and door-to-door visits. First,
flyers containing basic information about the job opportunity (nature of work, duration,
hours per day, location, daily wage etc.) are distributed to all households. Next, a meeting
is held in a central location within the village. During this meeting, more information is given
to interested workers. For example, they are informed that the job opportunity is one-time
only and employment is not guaranteed -- the number of workers hired would depend on the
needs of local contractors, and job offers would be randomly assigned among those who sign
up using a lottery.45 Lastly, door-to-door visits are made to ensure that all households in the
village have received information about the external job opportunity. Male workers who are
interested in the job are encouraged to sign up at the village meeting or during door-to-door
visits. Workers who are under the age of 18 or above the age of 65 are ineligible.

We use a computer to randomize assignment of eligible sign-ups to one of three groups: (1)
workers who will be offered a job; (2) workers who might be offered a job (waitlist); and
(3) workers who will never be offered a job. We draw from the group 2 roster in the event
that a worker from group 1 opts out of the external job. Workers in group 3 constitutes our
spillover sample.

Description of external jobs. The external jobs take place in factory workshops within 15
kilometers of our study villages. Workers are employed full-time (5 days a week) for 2-4 weeks,
and they engage in low-skill manufacturing of products such as ropes, brooms, disposable
plates and floor mats. All output produced by workers is sold by partnering contractors, who
set production standards. Workers are paid a flat daily wage for attendance, in accordance
with the typical pay structure in the area. There are no strict production minimums imposed
on workers, though workers can be fired for excessive absences (more than three days in a
row) or disruptive behavior.

At any point in time, a total of approximately 30 workers are recruited into a worksite --
this comprises of workers from both treatment and control villages within an experimental
round. In experimental rounds where the number of recruited workers across both treatment
and control villages is less than 30, we hire additional workers from nearby villages until we
reach the capacity limit at the factory workshop.

More details on the external jobs can be found in Breza et al. (2018).
45We  advertise the jobs as "training contracts," indicating that workers will receive one-time training to
produce a low-skill manufacturing good during their employment period. This concept is familiar in this
context, and is viewed as a one-time opportunity since one would not receive training more than once. See
Breza et al. (2018) for further details.
                                          LABOR RATIONING                                     68

Worker surveys. We conduct surveys with all eligible workers who sign up. We also conduct
surveys with a random sample of potential workers in the village who do not sign up for the
job. For this sample, the enumerators follow a left-hand rule -- they start at the first house-
hold on the left as they enter the village, and approach every three households thereafter.
The survey is conducted with a prime-age male household member who is working in any
capacity -- this includes work in the casual labor market, self-employment or salaried work.
If a member of the household is part of the spillover sample, the household is skipped.

Timeline of worker surveys. We conduct three waves of surveys: (1) baseline surveys at the
start of the hiring shock; (2) endline surveys during the final two weeks of the hiring shock;
and (3) post-intervention surveys two weeks after the end of the hiring shock.46 Surveys are
conducted privately with workers at their residence. To compensate workers for their time
as well as to minimize survey attrition, workers are given a small gift upon completion of
the post-intervention survey.

A subset of baseline surveys were conducted immediately after the external jobs began.
Recall that in each of the surveys, workers are asked to describe their employment activity
separately for each day for the past 10 days. As such, part of the employment recall in those
surveys included days during which the external job had already commenced. We restrict
baseline data used in regressions to worker-days that occurred before the external jobs began.
As we document in the paper, our wage and employment effects are similar with or without
baseline controls.

Changes to worker survey instruments. In the first 9 experimental rounds, we collected recall
data for the past 14 days. We shortened this to 10 days for the next 9 rounds, and further
shortened this to 7 days for the remaining rounds.

As mentioned above, we began conducting the post-intervention worker survey in experimen-
tal round 3. For the first six rounds thereafter, the survey was conducted 1-2 months after
the end of the hiring shock. We shortened this to two weeks for the remaining experimental
rounds.

Employer surveys. In addition to worker surveys, we survey a subset of agricultural employers
in the village at endline (i.e. during the final two weeks of the hiring shock). Our enumerators
first consult a village resident to obtain a (partial) list of employers who hire agricultural
workers in each village. Using this listing, we generate a roster with a randomized ordering
of employers. Enumerators then conduct employer surveys following the order as stated in
the roster, with a stopping rule of 20 employer surveys per village. In some cases, there are
46We   added the post-intervention survey from experimental round 3 onwards.
                                      LABOR RATIONING                                         69

fewer than 20 listed employers per village, so the total number of surveys completed is less
than 20. The mean number of employer surveys completed per village is 18.

The employer survey includes a detailed hiring grid, in which employers describe each ac-
tivity for which they required labor in the past 30 days. This includes data on labor use
(number of workers, days worked, hiring location), cash wages and in-kind payments made
to hired workers for each activity, as well as whether the activity was completed as early
and as frequently as they would have liked. All regressions using the employer sample are
unweighted.

Changes to implementation protocols. In the last 11 experimental rounds, we conduct a
census of all households in our study villages prior to advertising the external job. Data
from this census exercise allows us to:

   (1) identify a random sample of potential workers in the village. We generate a roster
       consisting of prime-age males village residents who do not sign up for the job. We
       do not impose any condition on work status, as we did in earlier rounds.

   (2) identify a sample of agricultural employers in the village. We generate a roster
       consisting of the five largest employers in the village (based on the number of worker-
       days they report hiring for a paid wage in the most recent harvest season), and a
       random sampling of the remaining employers in the village.

This supersedes the protocol used to sample non-sign ups and agricultural employers outlined
above.

Implementation issues. We faced issues conducting end line worker surveys in two experi-
mental rounds and were only able to survey a small subset of intended participants. One
village previously had a negative experience with outsiders who promised gifts if the village
residents converted to a particular religion. As such, residents in this village got suspicious
(our standard survey protocol was to offer respondents a small gift upon completion of the
surveys) and refused to let our enumerators into the village to conduct surveys. In another
village, several village residents who were not part of our study sample did not want surveys
to be conducted in their village. While the respondents themselves did not have any issues
participating in the survey, the hostility from other residents in the village made it difficult
and potentially unsafe for our enumerators to enter the village. As such, we decided to halt
data collection in this village.

In Appendix Table B.12, we present regression results including the two experimental rounds,
discussed here, that were excluded from the main analysis because we were not able to
complete survey work. Our results are robust to the inclusion of these two rounds.
                                        LABOR RATIONING                                     70

                     Appendix D. Construction of Census Variables

We use village-level data on demographic and economic indicators from the 2011 Indian Pop-
ulation Census. This includes data on village size (population and number of households),
caste composition, literacy, as well as worker counts.

As described in the 2011 Census meta data,47 workers are defined as "all persons (irrespective
of age and sex) who participated in any economically productive activity for any length of
time during the reference period." The reference period corresponds to the one year preceding
the date of survey enumeration. Workers who "worked for more than 6 months in the
reference period" are referred to as main workers. Workers are further classified into four
categories:

   (1) agricultural laborers -- this refers to individuals who "work on another person's land
       for wages in money or kind or share. She or he has no risk in the cultivation, but
       merely works in another person's land for wages"

   (2) cultivators -- this refers to individuals who are "engaged in cultivation of land owned
       or held from Government or held from private persons or institutions for payments
       in money, kind or share"

   (3) workers in household industry -- household industry is defined as "an industry con-
       ducted by one or more members of the household at home or within the village in
       rural areas and only within the precincts of the house where the household lives in
       urban areas"

   (4) other workers -- this refers to workers other than those in categories (1)-(3). Exam-
       ples include work in the public sector, manufacturing, construction etc.

We construct several outcome variables using this data:

        ·   Male population share: male population/village population
        ·   Literacy rate: literate population/village population
        ·   Worker share: all workers/village population
        ·   Male worker share: male workers/all workers
        ·   Main worker share: main workers/all workers
        ·   Agricultural labor share: agricultural laborers/all workers
        ·   Cultivator share: cultivators/all workers
        ·   Non-farm self-employment share: workers in household industry/all workers
        ·   Other workers share: other workers/all workers
47The 2011 Census meta data is available at https://www.censusindia.gov.in/2011census/HLO/
Metadata_Census_2011.pdf.
                                      LABOR RATIONING                                       71

       Appendix E. Implied Aggregate Demand and Supply Elasticities

The nature of our shock allows us to back out both aggregate demand and supply elasticities
during semi-peak periods, if we are willing to assume competitive equilibrium. While this
is a strong assumption -- and one that is not required in our main analysis -- there are
few opportunities in the literature to measure these implied elasticities, so we include these
estimates here for completeness. Of course, as with all such analyses, the credibility of
these estimates relies on the extent to which one believes in the underlying assumption of
competitive equilibrium in semi-peak times.
                   Wage

                                                  ST
                                                       SC

                                        h - e
                  wT                  w
                                  w
                      C
                  w                   e
                                h




                                                            D
                                                                Employment
                                    ET EC

                            Figure A.8. Aggregate Elasticities

       Note: Figure illustrates how we can identify aggregate demand and supply
       elasticities during semi-peak months, under the assumption of competitive
       equilibrium. w and e denote the observed change in wages and employment
       respectively as a result of the hiring shock. The shock traces out the inverse
                                     e
       slope of the demand curve,     w
                                        . h denotes the size of the shift in aggregate
       supply. Given h, a simple geometric argument shows that the slope of the
                          w
       supply curve is h  -e
                              .

Appendix Figure A.8 shows how we can identify both the aggregate demand and supply
elasticities under this strong assumptions. We denote the observed change in wages between
treatment and control as w and the change in aggregate employment as e. Given that
our treatment shifted the supply curve inward, the shock traces out the (inverse) slope of the
                e
demand curve      w
                    . That supply shocks identify demand elasticities is well known. However,
using arguments similar to Zoutman et al. (2018), we can also back out an implied supply
elasticity as well. Because we know the exact shock size--how many workers were employed
                                            LABOR RATIONING                                                 72

in our external jobs and those workers' counterfactual employment rates--we can directly
measure the size of the shift in aggregate supply h.48 Given h, a simple geometric
                                                             w
argument shows that the inverse slope of the supply curve is h -e
                                                                  .

Incorporating the impacts of our experimental shocks into this framework, the implied aggre-
gate supply elasticity is 0.03, though clearly there is substantial noise around this estimate.
This very small supply elasticity is consistent with the development literature.49 The implied
aggregate demand elasticity is -4.16, a very large magnitude relative to the literature.50 If we
believe that the magnitude of this implied demand elasticity is "too large," then one of our
assumptions is likely unreasonable. First, under partially segmented markets, in semi-peak
periods, employers may substitute toward workers outside of the village, who typically com-
mand higher wages. This would bias our measure of the change in employment in semi-peak
times, leading to an overesimtate of the demand elasticity. Second, relaxing the assumption
of market clearing could also help to explain these large demand elasticity magnitudes. One
departure from market clearing that would yield an unbiased supply elasticity but distort
the implied demand elasticity is monopsony.51

In addition to the caveats about underlying assumptions, our estimates are measured with
considerable noise. We consequently view them as suggestive. More generally, we intend this
stylized exercise to be illustrative--demonstrating how knowing the exact shock size enables
one to recover both elasticities with one source of variation.




48Recall that our experimental job paid workers a premium. Therefore h is not equivalent to the fraction
of laborers who took our job in treatment versus control, but instead the fraction of days they would have
worked at the market wage in absence of the external job.
49For example, Goldberg (2016) measures a supply elasticity of 0.17 in rural Malawi.
50The demand elasticity of Imbert and Papp (2020), obtained from a structural model of the migration
response to NREGA, is an imprecisely estimated -0.22. Kaur (2019)'s estimate is -1.17.
51Under monopsony, employment levels are pinned down by the aggregate supply curve facing the employer.
However, changes in employment and wages do not trace out the demand curve. In fact, wages fall by less
and employment falls by more under monopsony versus market clearing (Appendix Figure A.2), leading to
an implied demand elasticity that is too large. This is consistent with the view of Muralidharan et al. (2020).
